* 1216907
* Collaborative Research: New Formulation and Algorithms for Fluid-Structure Interaction, with Application to Tumor Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Jianjun Paul Tian, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 130,000.00

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems play prominent roles in many
scientific and engineering fields, yet an accurate study of such problems
remains highly challenging due to the strong nonlinearity and multi-physics
involved. Current computational theory and methods for fluid-structure
interactions lack sufficient accuracy and realistic material representations,
and are limited to relatively simple structural configurations. The goal of this
project is to overcome such limitations by establishing a new computational
mathematical framework for accurate and efficient numerical investigation of
complex FSI problems, particularly for tumor growth modeling and simulation. The
PIs will derive new mathematical formulation that allows the study of general
FSI problems with sophisticated structural settings, develop efficient numerical
algorithms that ensure high accuracy in FSI computations, and apply the proposed
mathematical formulation and computational methods to the individual-cell-based
modeling and simulation of tumor growth. This proposal builds on the PIs? solid
background in computational and applied mathematics and significant work on
tumor modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will improve the
understanding of the nonlinear dynamics in highly complex FSI problems through a
combined mathematical and computational framework. Experimental measurements
will also be used for validating the numerical results. The success of this
project will not only provide a solid knowledge base for advancing the current
state of computational FSI study, but also enable important discoveries in the
fundamental mechanism of early tumor formation and development. The project
experiences and findings will strengthen the research collaboration and
curriculum development in computational mathematics and mathematical biology at
both Old Dominion University and the College of William and Mary. Due to the
close geographical proximity between the two schools, project impacts will be
maximized through convenient communication between faculty and students and
through joint programs between the two schools. Education and outreach
activities will involve graduate and undergraduate students in the theory,
methods and application of computational mathematics.