* 1216401
* Secondary education and public archeology as a tool for teaching science, literacy and interpersonal relations across demograhic boundaries
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Sattler, Tanana Chiefs Conference
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2015
* USD 238,628.00

Tanana Chiefs Conference (TCC) is a Native non-profit organization that is
actively engaged in a variety of educational and land management programs
through which it delivers federally funded government services to highly
disadvantaged indigenous Athabaskan tribes and individuals in Alaska. The
proposed project is an extension of a TCC developed innovative program that
increases educational outcomes for at-risk youth through the medium of
archaeological field research. The TCC approach combines student participation
in weeklong scientific expeditions with guided study in Alaskan wilderness
settings. By design, the field and learning situation are emotionally intense,
in a way that kindles individual commitment and nurture small-group social
solidarity. Also by design, TCC draws the student and instructor cohorts from a
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural demographic pool. In this way, students gather and
synthesize effective learning styles from a range of worldviews and behavioral
expectations. This approach also advances a second,TCC goal, the management of
cultural resources mandate under the National Historic Preservation Act through
archaeological research. Under TCCs present proposal, these goal related
activities will expand by offering more sessions each summer to secondary and
undergraduate students from a greater number of educational institutions in
Alaska.