* 1216373
* Magnetosphere - Ionosphere Coupling During Periods of Extreme Solar Wind Driving
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Calvin Robert Clauer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2017
* USD 301,668.00

The dynamics of the solar wind, magnetosphere and ionosphere system are driven
by the solar wind electric field. Under normal solar wind conditions the cross
polar cap potential (CPCP) difference scales with the solar wind electric field.
However under extreme solar wind conditions such as those occurring during
magnetic storms the CPCP becomes non-linear and saturates. This study will
primarily support a post-doctoral scholar at Virginia Polytechnic and State
University who will be taught about the operation of both coherent and
incoherent scatter ionospheric radars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
study are to investigate the causes of the saturation and to understand why the
northern and southern hemispheres behave differently. There have been two
classes of explanations for CPCP saturation. In one dayside region 1 field
aligned currents limit the magnetic reconnection rate for strong driving and in
the other an Alfvén wing is set up in which a portion of the electric field set
up by the solar wind is reflected at the ionosphere as the result of a
conductance mismatch between the Alfvénic conductance of the solar wind and the
Pedersen conductance of the ionosphere. The team proposes a third explanation
that ionospheric plasma instabilities lead to limitations on ionospheric
currents and that this feeds back into the magnetosphere. The research involves
using a hybrid simulation code and observations from SuperDARN and ISR radar in
the ionosphere, ACE solar wind observations and THEMIS data in the
magnetosphere.