* 1216385
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Microblades, Bifaces, and the Chindadn Complex: Reinvestigating the Healy Lake Archaeological Record, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Frank Goebel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2014
* USD 32,016.00

Beringian archaeology has long been dominated by questions surrounding the
meaning of variability in early prehistoric lithic assemblages. Microblade
technology, present on both sides of the Bering Land Bridge, would seem to
indicate a cultural continuity between the modern-day continents of Siberia and
North America. However, early assemblages in Beringia dating between 14,000 and
13,000 calendar years ago (cal BP) complicate this interpretation. With the
exception of Swan Point and possibly the Healy Lake Village site, the earliest
assemblages in Beringia do not contain microblades but instead are characterized
by small triangular, teardrop-shaped, or stemmed bifacial points; in Alaska
these are typically called Chindadn points. The key to our understanding of the
significance of these early bifacial-point assemblages may be found along the
shores of Healy Lake, unexplored since original surveys and excavations in
1967-1972. Imprecise recording of artifact and feature provenience in the early
excavations have long hindered interpretations of the site's record, because of
a somewhat compressed stratigraphic context, equivocal archaeological
associations, and contradictory radiocarbon dates. However, in recent years two
new research opportunities have emerged that could help elucidate the place of
Healy Lake in the prehistory of central Alaska. First, the collection and
archives related to J. Cook's original excavation are now available for study,
and, second, new field investigations by archaeologists from the Tanana Chiefs
Conference (TCC) at the nearby Linda's Point site on the north shore of the lake
have led to the discovery of a geological and cultural stratigraphic record
corresponding to that reported for the Village site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports the research of A. Younie, a Ph.D. candidate at Texas A&amp;M
University (TAMU), to conduct dissertation research that includes two separate
by closely related activities. First, with T. Gillispie (geoarchaeologist at
TCC), she will direct excavations at the Linda's Point site, and, second, under
the direction of T. Goebel (her Ph.D. advisor at TAMU), she will conduct
detailed analyses of both the new Linda's Point assemblage and the existing
Village site assemblage from Cook's early excavations. This research will be
conducted with three main research problems in mind: the significance of lithic
assemblage variability in early prehistory, the prehistoric settlement and
subsistence strategies in lakeshore and wetland settings, and the role of
education and community involvement in archaeological research. Goals of the
proposed project include: 1) to define the stratigraphic context of the Linda's
Point deposits; 2) to determine the sequence of cultural occupations at Healy
Lake; 3) to characterize the lithic assemblages in a technological framework; 4)
to assess site organization in response to changing environments; and 5) to
consider the results in the context of multivocality and local interests. These
goals will be reached specifically through fieldwork to define geological and
cultural stratigraphy, laboratory analysis for characterization of lithic
technological activities, spatial analyses for assessment of site organization,
and incorporation of community involvement into the archaeological research.