* 1216200
* Experimental manipulation of a keystone host to test indirect effects on Lyme Disease Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2013
* John Orrock, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2013
* USD 48,278.00

Lyme Disease is a zoonotic disease of increasing impact on human health.
Multiple mammalian hosts are responsible for tick success and disease
prevalence. Quantifying and predicting the outcomes of changing mammalian
communities on human disease risk has proven difficult as hosts may interact
directly and indirectly, and some may promote tick abundance while reducing
pathogen prevalence. Controlled studies of mammalian host communities are
extremely rare because of the difficulty of manipulating the abundance of
species at spatial scales large enough to capture relevant pathogen dynamics. To
address this gap, this project will initiate studies related to a large-scale
experimental manipulation of a key tick host, the white-tailed deer, to evaluate
how deer alter the risk of transmission of tick-borne pathogens. The State of
Wisconsin will erect 16 large enclosures at 4 locations in hardwood forests of
northern Wisconsin and will stock these pens with deer at different densities.
In this pre-intervention study, Ixodes scapularis ticks will be collected from
all 4 sites to assess abundance and samples will be archived for comparisons of
pathogens following the enclosure construction.

This project will have broader impacts through examining the threshold deer
density that supports high tick populations, thus contributing to
recommendations for wildlife management and disease control. Importantly, this
work also will have significant impacts through the training of graduate
students, as well as by providing many opportunities for undergraduates to
participate in interdisciplinary research.