* 1216957
* Collaborative Research:  Numerical methods for Shallow Water Equations and Related Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alexander Kurganov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The project is aimed at developing accurate, efficient, and robust numerical
methods for shallow water equations and related models, with particular
reference to problems that admit non-smooth (discontinuous) solutions and to
problems that involve highly disparate scales and therefore are difficult to
solve numerically. Shallow water and related models are widely used as a
mathematical framework to study water flows in rivers and coastal areas as well
as to investigate a variety of phenomena in atmospheric sciences and
oceanography. These models are systems of time-dependent partial differential
equations (PDEs) that are derived using physical properties such as conservation
of mass and momentum, and hydrostatic or barotropic approximations. The
principal part of the proposed research will be focused on the development of
new methods for solving problems involving complicated nonlinear wave phenomena,
problems with complex computational domains and moving interfaces. The resulting
methods, while based on high-order shock-capturing finite-volume schemes and
non-dissipative mesh-free particle methods, will incorporate special numerical
techniques such as numerical balancing between the terms that are balanced in
the original system of PDEs (development of well-balanced schemes), ensuring
positivity of all fluid layers (this is absolutely necessary for both accurate
description of dry and near dry states and enforcement of nonlinear stability),
accurate and efficient operator splitting, accurate and efficient interface
tracking, and others that will be in the focus of the proposed research project.

The proposed project will contribute significantly toward development of
computational methods for shallow water and related models. Special attention
will be paid to applications arising in oceanography and atmospheric sciences,
in which the Coriolis forces (due to the Earth's rotation), thermodynamics, and
turbulent effects have to be taken into account. The problems under study
include, among others, formation and propagation of atmospheric fronts and ocean
currents, propagation of tsunami waves and their on-shore arrival, as well as
propagation of pollutants in various environments. The numerical methods under
design will provide considerably more powerful tools for studying a variety of
internal and surface water waves, including tsunami and rogue waves. These
extreme waves, which arise both in deep and shallow water, have a significant
impact on the safety of people and infrastructure, and are responsible for
damage to ships, oil platforms, coastlines, and sea bottoms and for changes to
the biological environment. Thus, understanding the physics of these extreme
waves is an important task that may even contribute to saving lives.