* 1216920
* Novel Algorithms for Nonlinear Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Andreas Waechter, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 252,000.00

The two research objectives of this project concern the development, analysis,
and implementation of novel numerical methods for the solution of nonlinear
optimization problems. The first thrust addresses the design of nonlinear
programming (NLP) methods that can, in contrast to existing algorithms, reuse
the factorization of derivative matrices for the solution of closely related
problem instances. Such hot-started methods are expected to lead to significant
speedup of branch-and-bound algorithms for mixed-integer nonlinear optimization.
The second focus is the development of efficient parallel algorithms based on
Generalized Benders Decomposition for the solution of decomposable NLPs, as they
arise in design under uncertainty or two-stage stochastic optimization problems.
The emphasis lies in the fast computation of local solutions of nonconvex
problems, whereas existing approaches are restricted to convex instances or
limited to the much more time-consuming search for global
optima.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical optimization has become an indispensable
tool in many areas of industry, economy and science, answering questions such as
"what is the best way to design and operate this plant" or "how should the
electrical power grid be operated in order to be able to sustain failure of
network components." While powerful computational methods are available for the
optimization of systems that can be described by models that are either linear
or restricted to non-discrete decisions, the solution of problems that are both
nonlinear and discrete, as they frequently appear in practice, is often too
time-consuming with current technology. Therefore, the first part of the
proposed research project aims at significantly accelerating a crucial key
component in algorithms for nonlinear discrete optimization. The second research
objective of this project deals with the efficient exploitation of increasingly
pervasive parallel computing power for the optimization of problems that
consider many potential scenarios as a way of addressing the uncertainty of
future circumstances.