* 1216352
* CSR: Small: Simulation of Multicore Processors with One (or More) Fast Core(s) Using Wind River SIMICS
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John McDonald, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,999.00

The most important task for scientific computing is to plan the way forward from
the current era of multicore microprocessors implemented in deeply submicron
CMOS. This has to be done in such a way that performance improvements are
guaranteed. Otherwise the escalating costs of fabrication at the nanometer scale
will not be sustainable. Heterogeneous multiple core microprocessors face
several major problems, not the least of which is codified in Amdahl?s Law,
which shows that even relatively small amounts of serial or low-parallelism code
can limit the gains that are possible. It is clear that the ultimate way to
circumvent this dilemma is to greatly accelerate the serial code using a high
clock rate unit (HCRU) core using a ?beyond-CMOS? device approach. Past research
suggests that clock rates of 20-30 GHz are possible for many key components
using BiCMOS, but 3D technology is needed to mitigate memory wall problems. This
research explores a brand new 90nm IBM SiGe HBT (300GHz fT) BiCMOS process to
accomplish this goal while trading excess speed for 4X lower power. The strategy
will be to redesign certain critical components of a computer in this new
process to verify that the same high speed is obtained at a lower power. The
second thrust of the project is to verify by high-level simulation that the
execution of serial code at a high clock rate will in fact result in the
expected improvement in performance. This is to be conducted using the Wind
River SIMICS simulation package.