* 1216220
* Development of a Theoretical Basis for Modeling Disease Processes in Marine Invertebrates
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2016
* Dale Haidvogel, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,384,482.00

The general question of how epizootics are initiated and terminated in marine
invertebrate populations and how this process is supported by transmission
provides a basis for expanding the evaluation of marine disease outbreaks.
Addressing this question requires development of a theoretical framework for
disease transmission among invertebrates in marine systems. Such a framework
will contribute to the general advancement of the understanding of the Ecology
of Marine Infectious Diseases (EMID). This proposal outlines a combined
experimental and modeling effort that will provide a general theory for marine
invertebrate diseases. The model will be informed using Dermo disease, caused by
Perkinsus marinus, in Eastern oysters (Crassostrea virginica), as an
experimental system. However, the model will be applicable to all sessile or
nearly sessile species whose movement is restricted to small scales (e.g.
bivalves, gastropods, sea urchins, corals) and to a range of hydrodynamic
regimes from estuaries to lagoons to coral reef tracts. This project is
interdisciplinary and is integrated across several disciplines. The team has a
unique mixture of expertise in molluscan pathology and epizootiology, genetics,
and modeling of coastal and estuarine systems, disease processes and the genetic
milieu, as well as a long history of successful collaborative research. By
integrating our expertise across disciplines, this project promises to provide
novel insights into the disease transmission process for infectious diseases
that are poorly described by traditional susceptible-infected-resistant models
built upon contact rates. This deficiency in modeling disease transmission is
widespread across many taxa of sessile marine organisms. The project also
responds to the recommendations in EMID workshops for the development of general
frameworks for marine diseases that can be applied to specific systems and to
understanding the determinants of transmission of diseases and the spread of
pathogens by environmental factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
project will provide an important advancement in the theoretical basis for
modeling diseases and disease transmission in marine systems. This project will
contribute to the training of students and early career scientists in
disciplines of genetics, pathology, genomics, and population and circulation
modeling that is needed to solve many of the important problems associated with
fisheries and marine coastal systems. Project results will be disseminated
through scientific conferences, publication in the peer-review literature, and
websites. Project results will be used in ongoing outreach efforts through a
collaborative outreach program between the Department of STEM Education and the
Center for Coastal Physical Oceanography at Old Dominion University. Additional
outreach will be through the Partnership for the Delaware Estuary and the
Bayshore Discovery Project, organizations engaged in public outreach for
Delaware Bay.