* 1216045
* RI: Small: Efficient Bayesian Learning from Stochastic Gradients
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Max Welling, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The total volume of data was estimated to be 0.8 Zettabytes in 2009 (1 Zettabyte
= 1 trillion gigabytes) and predicted to grow to a staggering 35 Zettabytes in
2020, doubling every two years. Therefore, one of the primary challenges for
machine learning is to develop statistically principled methods that will scale
up to very large datasets. Moreover, we would like to (efficiently) learn highly
complex models without the worry of overfitting and with confidence levels on
our predictions. While Bayesian methods satisfy these latter desiderata, the
current state-of-the-art inference procedures based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) posterior sampling do not meet the "big-data"
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a new family of MCMC procedures that
typically requires only a few hundred data-cases per update. These "stochastic
gradient MCMC samplers" inherit the efficiencies of stochastic approximation
methods, but will asymptotically sample from the correct posterior distribution.
This endows this family of methods with an "anytime" property, namely that one
can sample cheaply from a rough approximation of the posterior but can obtain
more accurate samples in exchange for more computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
believe this new class of methods will for the first time unlock the full
strength of Bayesian methods for very large datasets. Due to their highly
practical nature, the techniques developed under this grant are likely to gain
widespread acceptance across a broad spectrum of academic disciplines as well as
in industry. To expedite the transfer process we will publish open source
software on our webpages and collaborate with a company (ID Analytics) to work
on realistic, large scale inference problems. Two students at the University of
California, Irvine (UCI) will be employed on this grant who will collaborate
with a number of students and postdocs in the UK (University of Oxford and
University of Bristol). UCI and UK students will also be exchanged for a few
weeks a year to cross-fertilize research and to gain international experience.
Research results from this grant will be integrated into artificial intelligence
and machine learning courses at UCI through class projects.