* 1216674
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Hybridized DG Methods for Acoustic and Electromagnetic Scattering
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Timothy Warburton, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 157,056.00

In this project, the investigator and his colleagues will develop, analyze, and
implement quasi-optimal adaptive hybridized Discontinuous Galerkin methods for
acoustic and electromagnetic scattering problems as described by the Helmholtz
equation and the time-harmonic Maxwell equation on bounded domains in two and
three dimensional domains using general local bases. These methods feature
traditional piecewise polynomial bases as well as special purpose wave elements,
and multilevel preconditioned iterative solvers on adaptively refined
simplicial, quadrilateral, and hexahedral meshes. The adaptive mesh refinement
is driven by residual-type a posteriori error estimators. In particular, the
team will prove convergence of the adaptive solution process as well as its
quasi-optimality in terms of the computational complexity with respect to a
properly specified approximation class. High quality software implementations
will be used to test the algorithms and inform the
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in the state of the art in numerical
methods for performing acoustic and electromagnetic simulations have potentially
high impact in several applications. As an example more accurate simulation of
acoustic wave propagation can be used to considerably enhance resolution of
medical ultra sound scans, and thus expand the reach of non-invasive
diagnostics. The emphasis of this project is the development of novel numerical
methods that compute provably accurate approximations of physical acoustics and
electromagnetics phenomena.