* 1216869
* Determining the Cyberinfrastructure Needs for Efficient Phenomics Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Tessa Durham Brooks, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 415,601.00

The University of Wisconsin is awarded a grant to conduct planning for an
institute to advance research in phenomics through the development of software
and high-throughput computational methods for capturing and analyzing data on
biological form and function. A major goal in biology research is to understand
how an organism?s complement of genes (the genome) contributes to the
appearance, growth, development, behavior, etc. of the organism (the phenotype).
Much phenotype information can be captured in digital images of organisms
undergoing growth and development at scales ranging from microscopic cells to
whole plants in crop fields. The rapidly growing realization of how effectively
image analysis can advance the study of genotype-to-phenotype relationships adds
some urgency to the need for improved computational methods. Currently, research
labs adopting this experimental approach are each creating their own custom
cyber infrastructures for collecting and analyzing images to achieve the
necessary degree of automation and throughput. This conceptualization project
will bring biologists and computer scientists together to investigate the cyber
infrastructure (CI) developments needed to facilitate image-based phenotype
research. The ideas to explore can be cast into general questions. How can the
computational aspects of phenotype research be made routine enough for a biology
research group to use without continuous support of a computer science staff? Do
different research contexts (e.g. primarily undergraduate or industrial
campuses) require different solutions? What can be done to increase the number
of research biologists naturally inclined and academically prepared to work at
the computation/math/biology interface where phenotype research resides?
Invited-participation workshops and open events at key conferences will be
conducted to generate informed debate. A Steering Committee consisting of
diversely experienced biologists and computer scientists headed by the PI and
assisted by staff will orchestrate the activities and synthesize the findings
into a public report that will include recommendations about how to create an
effective and easy-to-use cyberinfrastructure that would advance this important
area of biology research. Plant biology research will often be the example but
any field that generates and analyzes large, high-dimensional datasets, of which
stacks and layers of digital images are just one example, stands to benefit from
this project. Another aspect that gives this project a broad impact is the
emphasis on education and preparation of the next generation of biology
researchers. Biology students in general must become better prepared for work at
the biology/computation/math interface or even the very best CI will be utilized
by only a narrow portion of the research community that stands to benefit from
it.