* 1216613
* SHF: Small: Programming with Non-Coherent Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Sunil Prabhakar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

The preponderance of language design and program analysis efforts in the study
of multicore systems has implicitly assumed the presence of an underlying
coherent memory that ensures global visibility of updates performed on
processor-local caches. Because all threads witness a consistent view of data,
concurrency bugs manifest purely as a consequence of unintended non-determinism
introduced by scheduler-driven thread interleavings and inadequate
synchronization. As new architectural advances lead to multicore or manycore
platforms supporting hundreds of (potentially heterogenous) cores, automatically
enforcing memory coherence becomes an increasingly complex and expensive
proposition. Indeed, new architectural designs are likely to sacrifice local
coherence guarantees in exchange for a simple commodity-based scalable design,
equipped with a limited degree of global shared memory. Applications that target
such platforms must be carefully written not to make assumptions about the
consistency of the contents of memory locations accessed and modified locally.
In the absence of coherence, new techniques are needed to recover the
abstraction benefits that are now lost; these issues become exacerbated at
scale. The broader impacts of the proposal have obvious positive interaction
with industry efforts to promote multicore and manycore processor
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consider novel ways to map
consistency models expressed in the context of high-level managed languages onto
non-coherent architectural platforms. In doing so, it will consider new
programming models, abstractions, analyses, and implementations to enable (a)
avoidance of coherency enforcement whenever possible, (b) reduction of coherency
demands based on application logic, (c) specification of complex consistency
requirements that can be used to inform the implementation of specialized
software-based coherence protocols, and (d) integration of language-level memory
models with weakly-coherent architectures. The project will subsume formal,
rigorous development of different abstractions, analyses, and implementations
that enable the automatic construction of new protocol families that express
complex aggregates of communication and computation actions with sensible
consistency semantics even when executed on non-coherent platforms.