* 1216758
* III: Small: Advancing the Scientific Understanding of Bullying Through the Lens of Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Xiaojin Zhu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,866.00

Bullying has been recognized as a serious national health issue. Traditional
approaches to the scientific study of bullying are hindered by data acquisition.
For example, the standard approach has been to conduct personal surveys in
schools. Due to its relatively small sample size and low temporal resolution,
neither the true frequency of bullying over the population nor the evolution of
bullying roles can be satisfactorily studied. The traditional approaches are
also very labor intensive.

Social media has developed to the point where it contains enough signal about
bullying. This project develops novel machine learning models that automatically
monitor and analyze publicly available social media data to understand bullying.
These machine learning models reconstruct hidden bullying episodes from a
sequence of social media posts. They automatically determine who participated in
which bullying episode as what role. In addition, this project conducts human
studies on bullying in school and in social media in parallel, by collecting
self-report surveys by school-aged children and their social media posts
simultaneously. Such studies correlate the traditional psychological approach
and social media data on bullying. Taken together, the project will provide
significant new scientific data toward understanding, intervention, and helping
policy-making regarding bullying.