* 1217594
* STTR Phase I:  Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum for Learning, NSF11-561
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Mark Beaubien, Yankee Environmental Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will improve the
number of wireless communication signals that can be accommodated by the
electromagnetic spectrum. Used for mobile and internet communication, the
electromagnetic spectrum has become extremely crowded in recent times. In
addition to ever-increasing bandwidth demands from wireless handheld
communications devices, explosive growth in machine-to-machine, inter-device
wireless communications is exhausting spectrum resources, which can be resolved
only by near zero-sum allocation decisions made through a mixture of bidding and
politics. Society requires "new spectrum" but regulations are difficult to
enforce. The objective is to demonstrate a usable data link within an
atmospheric absorption line feature creating a self-limiting link distance,
allowing spectrum reuse. The opportunity is to pack more communications channels
within the same spectrum resource by transmitting within the molecular
absorption bands (principally of O2 and H2O). Particularly for short-range data
transmission within spectral regions where the atmosphere is strongly absorbing,
range limitations are automatically enforced by the laws of physics. This
technique will enable large numbers of wireless communications transmitters to
reuse spectrum outside the range exceeding the opacity of the atmosphere, hence
eliminating potential interference. Anticipated results are dramatic
improvements in channel carrying capacity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to increase the maximum number of
data links the atmosphere can accommodate at any given time. Because the
spectrum is a scarce natural resource, optimizing its use is a societal goal.
The motivation for operators of transmission devices to actually choose to self-
limit is that by doing so, they improve their signal-to-noise against a sea of
competing users at a lower cost than simply increasing power in an unattenuated
channel. The physics of molecular gaseous absorption within the atmosphere at
millimeter frequencies will enforce by law of nature what heretofore has
required monitoring and regulatory enforcement. In addition to improving the
efficiency of mobile phones and wireless internet commercial wireless
communications, spectrum reuse technology enhances sensor communications. Sensor
'clouds' will create myriad opportunities to enhance learning and scientific
investigation, such as enhancing understanding of behavior within active
hurricanes. Enhanced data link security is provided, as eavesdropping is
rendered impossible beyond the link range afforded by atmospheric opacity at
that frequency. Millimeter wave electronics have become sufficiently mature and
inexpensive to address a wide variety of industrial, scientific and consumer
device applications. Nearly all electronic wireless mobile devices and sensors
could benefit.