* 1217123
* A mixed finite element framework for Biot's consolidation model and its interface problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Son-Young Yi, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 263,569.00

This project aims to develop and analyze efficient and robust numerical methods
for linear poroelasticity. The theory of poroelasticity addresses the time-
dependent coupling between the deformation of porous materials and the fluid
flow inside. Modeling the mechanical behavior of fluid-saturated porous media is
of great importance in a wide range of science and engineering fields, including
reservoir engineering, soil mechanics, environmental engineering, material
science, and, more recently, biomechanical engineering. Due to the complicated
nature of the governing equations for poroelasticity, analytical solutions have
rarely been found; therefore, numerical simulations have played an important
role in poroelastic modeling. The PI addresses several important issues in
numerical methods for linear poroelasticity; (i) locking effects, (ii)
heterogeneity in material properties, and (iii) interaction of a deformable
porous medium with other free fluid or mechanical systems. It has been well-
known that standard Galerkin finite element methods produce unstable and
oscillatory numerical behavior of the fluid pressure, which is known as locking
in poroelasticity. Overcoming locking effects in poroelasticity has been a
subject of extensive research. Another challenge in numerical modeling of
poroelasticity is the effective treatment of interface conditions when
heterogeneity is present in porous materials or the poroelastic system is
interacting with other flow systems or mechanical systems. The main feature of
this proposed project is to develop a mixed finite element framework based on
coupling two mixed finite element methods for each of the flow and mechanics
problems so that they can efficiently handle the issues addressed above. Various
mixed finite element methods are developed and a-priori error estimates are
derived. Another important aspect of this project is to develop various coupling
techniques for the flow and mechanics problems. The PI investigates several
operator-splitting schemes, and analyzes their stability and convergence. The
numerical methods developed in this project are implemented and applied to
several benchmark problems to demonstrate their accuracy and efficiency.
Therefore, this research activity enhances the predictive computational
capabilities and understanding of the flow and transport processes in
poroelastic materials in various situations.

Developing efficient and robust numerical methods for poroelasticity and the
interaction of a poroelastic system with a free fluid or with other mechanical
systems has cross-disciplinary implications. For example, the development and
management of the nation's energy and natural resources, industrial processing
of turbine blades and inkjet printing, waste water treatment, modeling of soft
biological tissues such as arterial walls, and development of sound packages for
acoustic insulation using multilayered panels heavily rely on predictive
computational simulations. Therefore, this project greatly benefits both the
computational mathematics and engineering communities. A Ph.D. student is
trained to gain knowledge and practical skills in scientific computing and the
mathematical analysis of finite element methods in this project.