* 1217638
* Workshop on Research Challenges and Opportunities in Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Natasha Noy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 49,990.00

Modern information systems in every area of science and engineering rely
critically on some form of knowledge representation and inference. Established
fields such as Artificial Intelligence and Software Engineering as well as
emerging fields such as Semantic Web, Computational Biology, Software Agents,
Social Computing, Bioinformatics, Discovery Informatics, Cyberlearning and many
others both rely on and contribute to advances in knowledge representation.
Formal representations of knowledge and the associated inference mechanisms
provide the basis for encoding, sharing, analyzing, interpreting vast amounts of
data from disparate sources as well as deciding and acting upon information in
virtually every area of human endeavor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop aims
to bring together scientists from all areas of knowledge-representation research
and to discuss the new challenges and opportunities that this area faces in
addressing the explosion of data and knowledge, increased reliance of scientists
on computational data, its heterogeneity, and new modes of delivering, storing,
and representing knowledge. This radical shift in the amount of data, in the way
that scientists distribute, store, and aggregate this data, presents new
challenges for knowledge representation (KR). KR researchers must consider the
applicability of their methods for representation and reasoning on data and
knowledge at unprecedented complexity, quantity, and heterogeneity. The
distributed and open nature of the data-intensive science presents additional
challenges and opportunities in KR, with regard to provenance, security,
trustworthiness, and privacy. The increased adoption of Semantic Web
technologies and the rapid increase in the amounts of structured knowledge that
is becoming available on the Semantic Web presents additional challenges (e.g.,
need for coping with information with different degrees of reliability,
information that holds in different contexts, information that changes over
time, information that can be conflicting, information that represents beliefs
and opinions, etc. The increased use of KR methods in Computer Vision, Robotics,
Natural-Language Processing, Discovery Informatics, and others presents an
opportunity for fruitful interdisciplinary collaborations that could
dramatically alter the KR research landscape. As scientists, as well as
laypersons get accustomed to social mechanisms for creating and sharing data and
knowledge, it is incumbent upon the researchers in knowledge representation to
develop KR mechanisms that support collaborative creation, sharing, and use of
knowledge. Against this background, the workshop brings together a diverse group
of researchers and practitioners in KR and related areas to identify new KR
research challenges and opportunities presented by the recent developments in
the world wide web, social networks and social media, collaborative and data-
intensive e-science, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
workshop will identify new areas of research for the Information and the
Intelligent Systems at the intersection Knowledge Representation and Inference,
Information Integration and Informatics. Given the increasingly central role of
formal representations of knowledge and associated tools for inference in
virtually every domain of human endeavor, the identification of KR the results
of the workshop are likely to impact multiple disciplines. The workshop results,
including a report summarizing new KR research challenges and opportunities, as
well as publications by workshop participants will be broadly disseminated to
the larger scientific community.