* 1217153
* New Active-Set Methods for Optimization and Complementarity Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Daniel Robinson, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

The principal investigator and his student consider the design, analysis,
implementation, and validation of a new class of active-set algorithms for
solving large-scale optimization and complementarity problems. In the first part
of the project they introduce a new class of rapidly adapting active-set methods
in the context of solving large-scale convex quadratic problems. These
algorithms benefit if a good initial guess is available and allow for rapid
updates to the active-set, which are essential for handling large-scale
problems. Consequently, this algorithm not only solves stand-alone quadratic
programs, but may allow other methods, e.g., sequential quadratic programming
methods, to handle problems that are larger than is currently possible. In the
second part of the proposal, they introduce the concept of an acceleration
phase, which improves upon existing subspace phases. Subspace phases have been
used with great success to enhance basic algorithms for solving various
complementarity, variational inequality, quadratic, and nonlinear problems, as
well as applications in machine learning and compressed sensing. This success,
however, has masked a prevailing weakness: all iterates generated must remain in
the subspace. An acceleration phase has the added flexibility of selectively
enlarging the subspace, when deemed necessary. In the final part of the project,
they consider a new fast and robust active-set algorithm for solving
complementarity problems. Efficiency and reliability are acquired by (i)
utilizing a special property of the Newton-like direction that holds in this
setting to formulate an improved search procedure; and (ii) suggesting a simple
framework that allows for acceleration phases to be incorporated naturally.

The new active-set framework, convergence results, and freely available software
will have a large sphere of influence by aiding in solving challenging problems
arising in the design of large complex systems. In particular, they will serve
as useful tools for the future design and development of new highly-efficient
algorithms for solving large-scale real-world problems related to energy
transmission, trajectory optimization, optimal control, contact problems in
computational mechanics, regularized machine learning problems, and various
equilibrium problems associated with traffic flow, optimal design, and the
pricing of energy. For example, their work will help answer questions such as
"How can we plan for energy transmission infrastructure that accounts for
uncertainties such as the location and type of future energy generation,
technology, policy, and economic development?" The improved optimization tools
provided by the principal investigator and his student will aid regulators and
regional transmission organizations to develop more robust investment plans that
may save the consumers millions of dollars every year.