* 1217143
* HCC: Small: A Joint Action Approach to Understanding and Supporting Interpersonal Attention In Virtual Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jeremy Birnholtz, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2017
* USD 546,364.00

This project will develop a theoretical and practical framework for
understanding and supporting processes of interpersonal attention management in
virtual organizations of geographically distributed individuals. Research on
virtual organizations (VOs) - aggregations of individuals, facilities and
resources that span geographic and institutional boundaries - is critical
because VOs are an increasingly common work structure. They enable interaction
between individuals who might not otherwise work together, the sharing of scarce
resources, and allow novel ways of solving problems. Despite these advantages,
members of VOs often cannot work together as effectively as those who are
collocated. One reason for this is the difficulty of opportunistic, informal
interactions in VOs. These interactions are critical to troubleshooting and
coordination, as when co-workers ask quick questions or respond to others'
requests, exchange information about the task or environment, or make spur-of-
the-moment decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many virtual organizations
provide basic communication tools such as instant messaging or video
conferencing, members often cannot use these effectively because the tools lack
support for the subtlety and nuance of managing one's availability and attention
to others. As a result, many people only sporadically attend to messages from
collaborators, or may abandon technologies altogether. One problem limiting
research progress in this area is that prior work has not considered attention
management as a form of joint action in which both parties act in response to
each other. This research addresses this problem by developing a theoretical and
practical framework for understanding the joint and adaptive nature of attention
management. Through a combination of field and laboratory efforts, this work
addresses three issues: (1) What information do people seek, and what are they
willing to share as they jointly convey attention in today's VOs and distributed
collaborations? (2) How does the relationship between gathering and display
impact people's task performance, social relationships with others, their use of
awareness information, and their attitudes toward privacy and sharing? (3) How
do we integrate asynchronous and synchronous attention behaviors?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on research in the area of interpersonal
awareness and fostering interaction in geographically distributed groups. It
makes several contributions: (1) developing and testing a joint action framework
for attention management in VOs, (2) examining joint attention management in
synchronous and asynchronous activities, and (3) developing novel tools using
next-generation technologies to facilitate analysis of attention management,
such as eye and gesture tracking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will improve
our ability to support more natural and effective collaboration in virtual
organizations, which have been identified as critical to national
competitiveness and can improve interaction with aging, disabled and otherwise
isolated individuals. Computer-supported cooperative work and other forms of
computer-mediated communication can benefit. Results will be incorporated into
classroom learning activities, and work will be carried out by students from
multiple behavioral and technical disciplines, thus drawing a broader population
of students to the science and engineering disciplines.