* 1217506
* AF: Small: Bounded-Contention Coding for Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Nancy Lynch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Interference in wireless networks often prevents nodes from receiving messages
that are within transmission range. This is because communication occurs through
broadcast channels rather than point-to-point links -- a node that is close to
more than one transmitter receives a signal that is a mixture of the signals
originally transmitted. Avoiding collisions basically requires some type of
symmetry breaking among the nodes that want to transmit, to prevent them from
transmitting at the same time, and has been the subject of many important
studies.

This project will focus on wireless network scenarios in which the contention is
bounded and introduce a framework for coping with collisions rather than
avoiding them. It will consist of two main contributions. First, the PI will
introduce a new coding framework for additive networks called Bounded-Contention
Coding (BCC), which allows a receiver to uniquely decode colliding
transmissions, and the PI will devise efficient codes within this framework.
Second, the PI will design algorithms that use these codes for communicating in
wireless networks, in order to solve many fundamental distributed problems. The
PI will complement this study with corresponding lower bounds in order to
understand the limitations on communicating and computing in such an
environment. The PI will also consider several extensions and modifications of
the basic model, determine their impact on the algorithms, and propose new
solutions for problems in these models as well.

The results of this project can have impact on the design of real wireless
networks, in which bounded-contention scenarios are common. For example, in a
large-scale system of phones, only a few calls are typically active at one time.
Another example is when nodes in a wireless sensor network receive measurement
data from the environment periodically and send it to a central location in the
network. The times at which the sensor nodes transmit their measurements could
be scheduled in a way that bounds the number of concurrently active
transmissions. In both of these examples, although the contention is limited,
interference may still occur, implying the necessity to resolve colliding
transmissions. For examples such as these, our coding methods and algorithms can
lead to new, efficient implementations, and our lower bound results can lead to
a better understanding of the inherent limitations.