* 1217338
* AF:Small:Data Structures for Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Seth Pettie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 07/31/2016
* USD 499,861.00

Physical networks (such as communications networks and road networks) are
dynamic objects, prone to sudden failures, congestion, and malicious attacks.
Nonetheless, we must be able to compute basic functions of the current state of
these networks, i.e., as network components fail and recover, we need dynamic
algorithms and data structures to route along shortest paths and to calculate
distances, flow/cut capacities, and point-to-point connectivity. Currently
deployed systems typically deal with the problem of transient failures by
periodically recomputing from scratch all the network properties of interest.
Solutions of this type are insufficient in two ways. They are computationally
inefficient, the extent to which depends on the given network property, and they
do not respond to network component failures
dynamically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of this project are two-
fold. The first is to develop abstract representations of graphs and graph
properties, along the lines of cactus trees and Gomory-Hu trees. These graph
representations are useful in the design of efficient algorithms and data
structures, but are also of interest to the broader mathematics community. The
second is to develop data structures in the dynamic subgraph model and d-failure
model. These abstract models capture the situation found in many real world
applications: there is a fixed substrate network, which can be processed in
advance by possibly inefficient algorithms, which is subject to a sequence of
node/link failures and recoveries intermixed with queries. A pervasive theme of
the project is to determine what gains in efficiency can be had (in running
time, space consumption) by accepting approximate solutions, e.g., approximately
shortest routes or approximately minimum cuts that are guaranteed to be accurate
up to some fixed multiplicative or additive error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to its specific research goals, the aims of this project are to (i)
train undergraduate and graduate students in the design and rigorous analysis of
efficient data structures, and (ii) incorporate modern data structures into the
computer science curriculum by developing course materials appropriate to
students at&lt;br/&gt;the graduate or advanced undergraduate level.