* 1217761
* RI: Small: Agent-Assisted Trading in Real-World Auctions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Amy Greenwald, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 465,990.00

In many large economic markets, goods are sold through auctions. Examples
include eBay, wireless spectrum auctions, the New York Stock Exchange, and the
Dutch flower auctions. This project focuses on one particular real-world auction
domain: the Dutch flower auctions (DFA). The project will perform an in-depth
analysis of this domain both from the point of view of the bidders and from the
point of view of the auctioneers.

This project involves several component tasks. (1) Creation of a configurable
auction server, comprised of basic auction building blocks, like simultaneous
and sequential auctions, and sealed-bid, ascending, and descending auctions. (2)
Construction of an interactive DFA simulation using the configurable auction
server that is capable of handling decisions made by both human bidders and
autonomous agents; this simulation will model DFA bidder preferences, which will
be learned automatically using inverse reinforcement learning techniques from
historical data and manually by surveying and interviewing DFA experts. (3)
Creation of autonomous DFA bidding agents and comparison of their performance to
that of expert human DFA bidders using the interactive simulation. (4) Further
simulation of these agents to empirically find game-theoretic equilibria under
various settings of the auction parameters so that those parameters can be
optimized. The project will also develop a prototype of a mixed-initiative
system that can be used to assist DFA bidders.

Potential broader impacts of this research include increased knowledge and
understanding of how to design and implement artificially intelligent agents
that can effectively assist humans with their decision-making efforts,
particularly in information-rich and time-critical environments. Although this
project focuses on DFA-type auctions, methodologies developed here will transfer
to other domains that use auction mechanisms, such as automated bidding for
resource allocation in smart grids. Detailed focus on the DFA provides a
concrete starting point for the study of various auction-related topics, for
instance, how to build mixed-initiative decision support tools to improve the
quality of bidding practices, rigorous comparison of various auction mechanisms
and parameter choices, and advancing bidding agent design from a heuristic
approach to one that is theoretically grounded.

The project research team includes both graduate and undergraduate students
whose participation in this research will strengthen their understanding of the
various fields that are critical to the development of decision support systems
(e.g., autonomous agents, preference elicitation and representation, machine
learning, software engineering) and provide them experience collaborating across
disciplines, and working on a real-world application. In addition, there are
plans to develop introductory lessons on the general topic of autonomous bidding
agents for use in the Artemis project, a five week summer program in which
female rising ninth graders are exposed to the breadth of applications of
computer science, and are introduced to a variety of technologies underlying
computing.