* 1217981
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Pursuing High Performance on Clouds and Other Dynamically Heterogeneous Computing Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Arnold Rosenberg, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2016
* USD 315,513.00

Emerging technologies have led to revolutionary computing platforms such as
computing clouds and many genres of computing grids. These platforms promise to
make high-performance computing platforms accessible to the public. Realizing
this promise, though, requires one to cope with the platforms' dynamic
heterogeneity, i.e., the fact that their constituent computers' relative powers
and speeds can change at unpredictable times and in unpredictable ways; for
instance, shared computers may slow down or speed up significantly because of
unpredictable changes in workloads. The research of the PIs is developing a
transformative computing paradigm that will enable high-performance computing on
these platforms. The new paradigm replaces traditional schedulers' attempts to
accommodate the particulars of a computing platform---a goal that dynamic
heterogeneity confutes---by orchestrating a complex computation in a way that
honors the relevant details of the computation's inherent structure. In this
way, the paradigm increases opportunities for executing independent tasks in
parallel (i.e., simultaneously), thereby completing computations faster.
Preliminary assessments---via simulated competitions with common computation
schedulers---suggest that the new paradigm often completes computations faster
than competing strategies by double-digit percentages. The challenge is to
realize the paradigm in a computationally efficient manner, and the PIs are
pursuing a variety of avenues toward achieving such efficiency. Because of the
complexity of dynamically heterogeneous platforms, this goal requires advances
in the technology of both scheduling algorithms and simulation software. The PIs
are uniquely qualified to produce such advances because of their complementary
expertise in algorithms, applications, and systems.