* 1217606
* NeTS: Small: Design of an Efficient Backscatter Communication Stack for Sensor Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Deepak Ganesan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 06/30/2016
* USD 482,000.00

This proposal seeks to perform fundamental cross-disciplinary cross-layered
research into the design of a network stack for sensor devices that use
backscatter communication. Backscatter communication is particularly attractive
for single-hop sensor network deployments since communication is powered by the
reader, thereby resulting in tremendous reduction in power consumption compared
to devices with active radios (e.g. 802.15.4). Despite these benefits, protocols
designed for backscatter are ill-designed for sensor workloads. The existing
backscatter communication stack, EPC Gen 2, is optimized for
supporting&lt;br/&gt;large numbers of simple passive tags, that each need to
transfer a small amount of data (their unique identifier). While such a model
may be appropriate when RFIDs are deployed in retail stores, sensors require a
different model where there are a few or moderate number of tags which need to
transfer a significant amount of sensed data during contact events with a
reader.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposes outlines a fundamentally new
backscatter communication stack that is designed for next-generation sensors
that use passive rather than active radios. The stack will be build on an
extensive measurement-driven study of backscatter communication including an
understanding of channel quality metrics, link asymmetry, spatial and temporal
propagation, and harvesting characteristics. Based on this study, we will design
a network stack for backscatter communication that replaces the EPC Gen 2 stack
with novel methods for mobility detection, rate adaptation, channel selection,
bulk transfer, and energy management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research will
directly impact the design, development, and deployment of next-generation
sensor networks that can operate for longer durations or use smaller power
sources. This can directly translate into lower total operational costs by
lowering the overhead of replacing batteries. The research and teaching that
will flow from the project will impact students across the Five Colleges, of
which UMass Amherst is a part. The Five Colleges includes two all-women's
colleges, Smith and Mount Holyoke, whose students can enroll in courses taught
at UMass because of the consortium's cross-registration policy.