* 1217994
* NeTS: Small: Networking at Terahertz Frequencies
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Suresh Singh, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The demand for wireless bandwidth has been growing at a rapid pace every year
and is expected to continue. Estimates of annual growth in demand range from 71%
in Japan to over 117% in the U.S. Projecting this ahead a decade implies per-
user wireless bandwidth needs of tens of gigabits per second, which is at least
two orders of magnitude greater than what most users see
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications driving such a relentless thirst for
bandwidth are quite diverse. From a consumer standpoint, key drivers include the
evolution of applications such as ultra high-definition television while in the
business domain applications include networking hundreds of thousands of
computers together in data centers or delivering very high quality multimedia
for medical and other similar applications. This project seeks to exploit a
relatively unexplored part of the wireless spectrum to deliver data at rates of
terabits/sec. The spectrum in question is called the terahertz spectrum and
extends in frequency from 300 GHz to 3.1 THz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
challenges of delivering terabit data rates over the terahertz spectrum are many
and range from a limited understanding of communication at these frequencies to
utilizing the vast bandwidth available for establishing communication links to
understanding networking at these frequencies. This project will provide answers
to some of the larger open questions including channel characterization and
modulation for achieving terabit rates. Techniques used for high speed
communications today cannot be logically extrapolated to the terahertz band due
to the massive amount of bandwidth involved which constrains devices and has
complex unknown propagation properties. This project proposes an innovative way
of exploiting the terahertz bandwidth to manufacture pulses, each of which carry
large amounts of data. As a result, a terabit of information can be transmitted
per second while using a relatively slow clock and inexpensive devices. The
feasibility of this technique will be studied in a systematic way by first
performing detailed terahertz channel measurements followed by the development
of channel impulse response models at these frequencies. The measurements will
consider distances of up to the dimensions of a small room and will serve as
input to a terahertz simulator that will be built as part of this work. Using
the measurements in conjunction with detailed simulations, the project will
answer questions about the expected channel capacity when using these types of
pulses. In parallel with these studies, the project will experimentally
characterize pulse behavior over varying distances and environmental conditions.
The project thus seeks to fill in important holes in our understanding of
terahertz communications and will pave the way for future development of
terahertz communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
work ranges from fundamentally influencing research directions in wireless
communications to enabling the development of novel technologies for future
generation communications. Furthermore, the terahertz measurement database
developed as part of this project will be made public and will serve as a
valuable resource to the broader scientific community. The project will also
enhance the training of the future workforce via the development of new classes
and including students in hands on measurement. Finally, the outcome of this
work (terabit/sec data delivery) will ultimately influence the way information
is delivered in the home and in the workplace.