* 1217212
* III: HCC: Small: Effects of Automated Information Selection and Presentation in Online Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Emilee Rader, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 502,093.00

Socio-technical systems provide access to ever-increasing quantities of
information online. To help people cope with information overload, these systems
implement "algorithmic curation": automated selection of what content should be
displayed to users, what should be hidden, and how it should be presented.
Virtually every Internet user who reads online news, visits social media sites,
or uses a search engine has encountered algorithmic curation at some point,
probably without even realizing it. In a socio-technical system, user
contributions, social relationships and behavior, and features of the technology
are interdependent, and determine what the system is used for, how it is used,
and how it evolves over time. The goal of this research project is to
investigate the relationship between social behavior and algorithmic curation,
in order to better predict the effects of this pervasive practice on what we
read, contribute, and communicate about online.

This project uses a multi-method approach to identify ways in which social and
technical mechanisms influence individual users' information production and
consumption, and thereby shape system-level properties of the user population
and the corpus of contributions. Lab experiments investigate how social
processes, such as obeying social norms and altering communications for an
intended audience, are affected by different types of algorithmic curation.
Field studies augment the lab experiments, using technology interventions to
demonstrate how these changes play out for people in the real world over time,
and as algorithms change. At the system level, agent-based models connect
individual-level processes with system-level effects of algorithmic curation,
and large-scale data collection looks for signs of those effects on real
systems.

This project advances the current understanding of forces that shape information
access and use in an increasingly connected and automated environment. Results
will be used to provide guidance to system designers who create and manipulate
algorithms, in the form of design patterns that will support a systematic,
generalizable way of planning for effects of algorithmic curation at different
scales. The project Web site (http://bitlab.cas.msu.edu/curation) provides
information. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in the project will
become better problem solvers, and work effectively on collaborative
interdisciplinary projects.