* 1217503
* EAGER: CCF: SHF:  Mining the Execution History of a Software System to Infer the Safe Time for its Adaptation
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Sam Malek, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2014
* USD 80,000.00

As software engineers have developed new techniques to address the complexity
associated with the construction of modern-day software systems, an equally
pressing need has risen for mechanisms that automate and simplify the management
of those systems after they are deployed, i.e., during runtime. This has called
for the development of (self-)adaptive software systems, which are capable of
modifying their behavior at runtime to achieve certain functional or quality of
service objectives. The proposed research aims to develop an alternative
approach to engineering adaptive software that uses a data mining approach to
automatically derive models expressing probabilistic dependencies among the
components of a system. These types of models are then used to ensure changes in
the running software do not create inconsistencies that jeopardize the system?s
functionality. The hypothesis guiding this research is that by monitoring a
software system?s execution history (e.g., message exchange, method invocation)
for a sufficiently long period of time, it is possible to infer a relatively
accurate model of interactions and dependencies among the system?s components.
The proposed approach will be realized via a suite of integrated tools. The
research will be evaluated in both controlled laboratory setting, as well as
several real-world applications that are representative of the kinds of systems
that could benefit from this research.