* 1217409
* Workshop on Environmental and Extreme Multiphase Flows, Gainesville, FL, March 14 - 16, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* S. Balachandar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2013
* USD 20,672.00

1217409 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Balachandar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volcanic eruptions,
powder snow avalanches, turbidity currents, dust storms and bubble plumes are
diverse examples of environmental flows. But they share a lot of common physics.
Fundamentally all these flows are environmental examples of dispersed two-phase
turbulence. For example, both in turbidity currents and powder snow avalanches
the key common physics is in accurately capturing the competition between
deposition and resuspension from the bottom boundary. Similarly, entrainment of
ambient fluid is the process that plays a key role in the vertical development
of volcanic and bubbly plumes. Despite these commonalities, the progress of
mathematical models, closures and simulation techniques have gone on
independently. Especially, the recent rapid expansion of research enterprise has
greatly diminished the potential for cross fertilization of ideas. The purpose
of the workshop is to bring world-class experts from these different disciplines
and promote cross fertilization of ideas and methodologies. The workshop is held
at the University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, from March 14th to March 16th of
2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the workshop is to identify
key outstanding challenges that are common and thereby enable better
understanding, modeling and predictive simulations of a broad class of complex
environmental turbulent multiphase flow problems. The broader impact of the
workshop will be through wide dissemination of the workshop results and findings
through a dedicated website and also by publishing the key contributions as a
state of the art book.