* 1217685
* HCC: Small: Values of Information Technology for Progress: Three Case Studies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Phoebe Sengers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2016
* USD 497,401.00

This project will develop methods for using historical understanding of
technology to assess potential consequences of sociotechnical change and to
inspire new design practices. Information technology (IT) builds on a longer
history of technology tied to significant cultural shifts, commonly
conceptualized as technological innovations driving societal progress. This
research critically analyzes the idea of sociotechnical progress by asking: How
is it conceptualized? What practices, values, and stakeholders become
marginalized in the pursuit of progress, what are its consequences, and how can
currently marginalized factors inspire new forms of design? It uses these
questions to evaluate roles that IT has played in progress, and to envision and
design for new roles it could play.

This project answers these questions through three case studies that look at
societies on the global margin which have seized on technological progress as a
means for bettering their circumstances. The case studies look at (1) a past
attempt to rapidly transform from a subsistence, fishing-based to an
industrialized economy in rural Newfoundland; (2) the consequences of a similar
transformation in present Iceland, where pervasive adoption of information
technology has transformed the small-boat fishing industry; and (3) debates over
possible futures arising from the sudden and pervasive adoption of mobile phone
technology in Jamaica. These novel case studies provide a new lens through which
to understand the values embodied in information technology, its cultural
impact, and their implications for practices in the field of human-computer
interaction.

Methodologically, this work builds on design ethnography to demonstrate how
historical methods can enrich the ability of work in human-computer interaction
to address the broader cultural impacts of technology. By analyzing how the
consequences of modernization compare with hopes invested in technology as a
tool for progress, the project will provide evidence to support a more rigorous
debate about the impact of information technologies. By using this analysis to
generate new design insights, the project supports design practices that may
improve the implications of technology, especially as productivity tools and
means for advancing economic development.