* 1217023
* CIF: Small: Fast Rate-Efficient Codes for Data Compression and Transmission via Sparse Regression
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sekhar Tatikonda, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,498.00

Modern communication networks are constantly growing in size and sophistication.
New applications require these networks to be reliable, computationally
efficient, and have small latency. To meet these demands it is critical to have
low-complexity, rate-efficient codes for communication and compression. Since
Shannon's fundamental results, there has been a flurry of activity to design
capacity achieving, computationally efficient coding schemes. For the channel
coding problem, it was not until the early 1990s that capacity achieving codes
were implemented. Similarly, many good quantizer designs were developed for
lossy compression, but unfortunately none of these low-complexity codes provably
attain the rate-distortion bound. The divergence between information-theoretic
results and code construction is even more pronounced in network communication
problems. Despite a sharp characterization of information-theoretic limits for
several network models, the best practical codes for these problems fall short
of the capacity limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
development of computationally efficient codes for Gaussian sources and
channels. To this end we leverage recent advances in high-dimensional sparse
regression. These are the first low-complexity codes that provably attain the
information-theoretic limits codes for Gaussian sources and channels. The main
objectives of this research project are: (1) Determining the fundamental limits
of sparse regression codes in a variety of communication theoretic settings; (2)
Developing low-complexity encoding and decoding schemes for our sparse
regression codes. This part of the project draws on ideas from function
approximation and sparse signal recovery. The project also provides an
opportunity for training graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in the
disciplines of communication theory, data compression, statistics and networks.