* 1217997
* CIF: Small: Random key predistribution in wireless sensor networks -- The impact of partial visibility
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Armand Makowski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 413,066.00

With wireless sensor networks deployed in hostile environments, there is a need
for cryptographic protection to enable secure communications services.
Unfortunately, many approaches developed for general networking environments do
not take into account the unique features of such wireless networks. Starting
with the original scheme of Eschenauer and Gligor, random key predistribution
schemes have been proposed to address this challenge. Much of the work on these
schemes has been carried out under the full visibility assumption whereby sensor
nodes are all within communication range of each other. However, the question
remains whether randomized key predistribution schemes can indeed deliver the
needed security guarantees under wireless communication constraints. To explore
how this partial visibility affects two basic issues, namely secure connectivity
and resiliency, we study random graph models which are obtained by intersecting
two random graphs, namely a communication graph (to model the communications
constraints of the wireless medium) and a cryptographic graph (to capture the
given predistribution scheme). Our goal is to better understand performance
trade-offs and to develop guidelines for dimensioning available cryptographic,
communication and computing resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intersecting two
(or more) random graphs constitutes a modular approach for building graph models
of greater complexity. Generally speaking, the structural properties of the
random graph obtained by such intersection operations are determined by those of
the intersecting random graphs. Since some of the component random graphs have
been studied in the literature, existing results can be leveraged, and this
makes the modeling paradigm quite appealing for dealing with the multi-
dimensional applications encountered in wireless networking (and other areas).
Technically, many of the questions of interest are asymptotic in nature (with
the numbers of nodes becoming large). The project aims to make contributions on
three fronts: (i) Advance the study of random graphs in new directions through
probabilistic techniques; (ii) Develop a better understanding of new classes of
random graphs which thus far seem to have received little attention in the
literature; and (iii) Enhance one's understanding of security issues in some
large-scale wireless networking environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such issues
are inherent to the many critical infrastructures which are monitored by
wireless sensor networks, and random key predistribution techniques have a role
to play in making these environments more secure. Some of these ideas are likely
to be of use in less challenged wireless environments as well.