* 1217020
* Legal Mobilization of Enslaved Litigants: Ecclesiastical versus Civil Lawsuits
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Michelle McKinley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project is a comprehensive survey, indexing and analysis of archived
lawsuits brought by enslaved men and women in Lima, Peru between 1600-1700. The
court documents to be surveyed are manumission cases, appeals for family
unification, change of ownership petitions, and self-purchase lawsuits. The
objective is twofold: first: to identify legal arguments that were successful
for enslaved litigants given their condition of bondage and their negligible
social, economic and political power, and second: to identify legal forums which
were more favorable to slave claims, and the circumstances of occupation,
residence, gender, and caste that enabled slaves to use these forums. The
central hypothesis is that slave litigants' claims were often more successful in
ecclesiastical courts than they were in secular courts, because they were
brought within a religious and legal context that was deeply ambivalent about
the status of slaves as humans vis-Ã -vis their status as property.

Much of the debate in comparative slavery studies can be reduced to a central
argument about which legal system was more favorable to liberty. Civil law
systems created greater opportunities for manumission than the common law
tradition of chattel slavery. Slaves in the British Caribbean and the US South
hardly used the legal system to pursue their freedom at comparable rates to
Latin American slaves. This research will provide empirical data about outcomes
of slave litigation that can inform larger theoretical debates about the legal
agency of colonial Latin American enslaved litigants, the ambiguity of slaves'
legal personality, and the role of courts as protectors or detractors of
slaveholders' interests. This data in turn will assist humanist and social
science scholars in comparative slavery studies, by assessing the measurable
performance of courts in denying or approving slave claims, and will deepen our
understanding of the role of courts in times of social change more generally.