* 1217076
* SHF: Small: Efficient and Accurate Methodologies for Unifying the Layout, Device Simulation, and Process Simulation Worlds
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Due to the severely degraded short-channel behavior of MOSFETs, Intel and TSMC
have announced their switch to multi-gate FETs at the upcoming technology nodes.
Hardware experiments with multi-gate devices and larger circuits entail very
high cost and turnaround time. Thus, efficient predictive 3D-Technology CAD
(3D-TCAD) based process/device characterization methods for such
devices/circuits are urgently needed. A lack of such methods currently poses a
significant impediment to rapid progress in this area. Though 3D-TCAD based
exploration is essential for accurate predictive modeling, it is beset with
major challenges which makes it necessary to develop a seamless set of
methodologies/algorithms integrated with 3D-TCAD eco-systems for resolving
process, layout, and device level issues quickly. The main aim of the proposed
work is to develop efficient and accurate methodologies for unifying the layout,
2D/3D device simulation, and process simulation worlds, thereby, for the first
time, expanding the horizon of predictive modeling for multi-gate devices beyond
the many-device TCAD barrier, which is a major showstopper at lower technology
nodes. The project aims to develop a set of versatile methodologies for
synthesizing contiguous 2D/3D device-simulation-ready structures corresponding
to given layouts, without the need for repetitive and expensive 3D process
simulations on each layout. These methodologies are expected to yield several
orders of magnitude speedup in TCAD structure generation for large layouts, with
run-time reduction from days/weeks to a few hours per design and decreased
memory footprints. The project will also develop fast cache-extrapolate-update
techniques to alleviate the problem of obtaining convergence with iterative
linear solvers for both mixed-mode and contiguous 3D device
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodologies developed in this research
will break the many-device TCAD barrier and, by unifying layout with
process/device simulation, make accurate and efficient predictive 3D-TCAD
possible. The methodologies/tools that are developed will be disseminated
through the web, conferences and journals. The material will be included in a
course on Design with Nanotechnologies that the PI teaches at Princeton
University. Princeton has a tradition of undergraduate independent research.
Many senior students are expected to do their research project on this topic.
Female and minority students will be attracted to this research through
Princeton's Fellowship Program. Further outreach activities are also planned for
high-school students.