* 1217565
* STTR Phase I:  Security for Wireless Devices: Security Monitoring and Intrusion Detection in SDR and CR Using Power Fingerprinting
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* A.A. (Louis) Beex, Power Fingerprinting, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will
determine the technical and commercial feasibility of applying a technique
called Power Fingerprinting (PFP) to monitor the execution integrity of
software-defined and cognitive radio (SDR and CR) systems and detect malicious
intrusions. SDR and CR technologies are the foundation for enhanced access to
the radio spectrum, but they are inherently vulnerable to cyber attacks, which
increases interference risks and complicates regulatory compliance. PFP uses
side-channel information to assess the integrity of critical software modules
that, if disrupted, can impact spectral emission and information security. The
research objectives for Phase I include: 1) demonstrate the feasibility of
characterizing critical SDR/CR modules using PFP; 2) define PFP system
architecture to enhance SDR/CR security; 3) detect attacks to sections critical
for spectrum access; and 4) integrate PFP monitoring into SDR/CR regulatory
process. The research necessary to achieve these objectives will be performed
using open-source tools and libraries to implement dynamic spectrum access
approaches. At the end of Phase I, a blind-test demonstration of PFP detecting
execution violations will be provided and serve as the baseline to continue this
research into a Phase II project to provide a commercial
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes the development of an innovative mechanism to protect SDR and
CR systems and their enhanced spectrum access capabilities, mitigating
interference risks due to malicious attacks. This Phase I project will introduce
a new perspective to cyber security by treating it as a signal detection and
classification problem and introducing tangible quantitative metrics for
integrity and trust. SDR and CR are crucial to use the electromagnetic spectrum
more efficiently. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to effectively
secure these devices, as they will be communicating sensitive information and
supporting critical infrastructure, making them prime targets for cyber attacks.
Commercially, this research has dual application in the commercial and defense
wireless markets, particularly for resource-constrained and embedded platforms,
including smart phones and tactical communication devices. The proposed approach
has the potential to become a fundamental player in cyber-security by protecting
the nation?s infrastructure and promoting further development of the economic
base and employment. Furthermore, by allowing trustworthy deployment of SDR and
CR technology, this research will help unleash the significant commercial
opportunities that come with enhanced access to the radio spectrum.