* 1217821
* AF: Small: New Barriers in Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Rafael Pass, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

The security of cryptographic tasks is formally defined by precisely specifying
the physical assumptions regarding the attack model, and cryptographic protocols
are proven secure based on well-defined computational intractability
assumptions. Understanding what the minimal computational and physical
assumptions are for secure cryptographic protocols is of central importance to
this study which will address the following problems:&lt;br/&gt;1. New Barriers
for Computational Assumptions: There exists a large body of work on, so-called,
black-box separations aiming at elucidating when a cryptographic task cannot be
based on a particular computational assumption using certain black-box proof
techniques. However, many known constructions and proofs of security do not fall
into the framework of such techniques, and as such it is not clear to what
extent such separations represent a real barrier. One of the principal goals of
this proposal is to develop a framework for providing non-black-box separations
between cryptographic tasks and assumptions. &lt;br/&gt;2. New Barriers for
Physical Assumptions: Formal definitions of security make explicit assumptions
about how the adversary can access or modify information exchanged during a
cryptographic process. Traditionally, it is assumed that the attacker
participates in a single execution of a protocol, does not get to see the
internal state of honest parties, and does not get to tamper with the internal
state of honest parties. Recent work has focused on relaxing the first two
assumptions. Another principal goal of this proposal is to investigate to what
extent the third physical assumption regarding tampering may be
weakened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in this area could have broad
impacts on barriers not only in cryptography but also computational complexity
and secure systems. The research focusing on physical assumptions bears a
promise to have broader impacts on hardware design. The results of this work
will be widely disseminated via conferences, journals, workshops, and invited
talks, and incorporated into the PI graduate courses.