* 1217558
* STTR Phase I:  Test Methodology for MIMO Over the Air Testing in a Small Anechoic Chamber
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Fanny Mlinarsky, octoScope, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 164,998.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of using a small controlled environment for over-the-air (OTA)
testing and validation of multiple antenna radio systems for next generation
wireless networks. With the prevalence of multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
communications systems for next generation wireless networks, new test and
measurement solutions and standards will be required. Certification of next
generation devices is an expensive and time-consuming process. The challenge of
testing MIMO systems is the need to emulate real-life multipath environment with
signal components clustered around the receiver. This project has unique
intellectual merits in the research tasks that aim to reduce the size and
resources required to perform MIMO/OTA testing. The proposed research will
investigate methods of reducing the physical dimensions of an anechoic chamber
used for MIMO/OTA testing while still accurately emulating statistical
properties of the radio channel. Another unique merit of the proposed work is
investigation of techniques to increase the number of clusters in a small test
chamber. The outcome of this research will have a significant impact on the cost
of testing and validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be reduced cost of wireless
device certification, making broadband connectivity more affordable to a wider
population, including rural communities that currently have limited access to
the Internet. As the demand for wireless communications has increased, spectral
efficiency has become a key national interest. Further, the US White House has
launched a broadband initiative to increase access to high speed networking
throughout the country. One of the issues with bringing broadband to rural
communities is the cost of mandatory certification of wireless devices. The
feasibility of using small anechoic chambers for the test and certification of
new generation MIMO wireless devices can enable young companies to more
effectively compete with the established vendors. Smaller and more affordable
chambers also hold the promise of expanding the number of research facilities
and laboratories that can contribute their findings and thus facilitate the
deployment of new generation radio technology.