* 1217418
* Application-Specific Memory System Optimizations using Programmable Memory Controllers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Engin Ipek, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The off-chip memory subsystem is a significant performance and power bottleneck
in modern computer systems, necessitating a memory controller that can overcome
memory timing and resource constraints by carefully orchestrating data movement
between the processor and main memory. The goal of this project is to address
this need by enabling application-specific memory system optimizations using a
programmable main memory controller, thereby improving the performance, energy-
efficiency, and quality-of-service of future computer systems. To realize this
vision of programmable main memory controllers, the project addresses challenges
all the way from the hardware design of programmable processing units to the
firmware implementation of novel memory management algorithms. Automated machine
learning and search techniques are employed to quickly arrive at high-
performance control algorithms customized to different applications, and to
different phases of a single application. Application-specific memory management
algorithms ranging from address mapping, command scheduling, and DRAM power
management to error-correcting codes and memory compression are
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flexibility of the resulting application-
specific memory systems is expected to have a direct impact on the performance
and energy-efficiency of future computer systems, with tremendous positive
fallout to science, technology, and society as a whole. Architecture and
software innovations are disseminated to the broader research community through
published papers, as well as tutorials on programmable controllers and
application-specific memory controller algorithms at major conferences. The
educational component of the project involves (1) training both graduate and
undergraduate students in computer architecture, (2) a memory systems course
that integrates programmable memory controllers and next-generation memory
systems into the syllabus, and (3) a memory controller design experience for
undergraduates as part of the existing computer architecture curriculum.