* 1217279
* III: Small: Improving Information Retrieval by Analysis of Temporal Evidence in a Unified Model
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Miles Efron, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 408,765.00

Information retrieval (IR) systems are inherently temporal. Documents change,
indexes acquire new documents, and systems answer or "field" queries differently
over time. The vision of this project is to capitalize on this temporality to
improve the models used for predicting document relevance. The approach is based
on a novel probabilistic framework to allow temporal factors to improve IR
effectiveness. The framework situates temporality as a key factor in predicting
the document relevance. Initial work focuses on established text retrieval
settings, estimating document relevance to keyword queries. However, emerging
domains such as social media and volunteer-maintained knowledge bases have an
inherent temporality that demands new models. Thus, during the project, research
pursues problems of filtering and topic evolution. Methods developed in this
project will be experimentally evaluated using standard datasets. The project's
expected outcome includes improved models and algorithms for retrieving,
filtering, and organizing textual data that arrives incrementally over time.

The project will benefit society in two ways. IR systems play a key role in
people?s daily information use. This project will advance the public's ability
to negotiate an increasingly complex information landscape, because the expected
outcomes will improve search engine technology. Research results will be
disseminated primarily via academic conferences and journals. Work will also be
stored in an archival institutional repository, affording the public long-term
access to results. Progress and general information about the project will be
published on the project Web site (http://timer.lis.illinois.edu). The project
will provide research experience for students and will advance scientific
education. In addition, course materials will be developed to support on-line
teaching of information retrieval to non-technical students.