* 1217019
* I-Corps:  A New Approach to Silicon/Compound Semiconductor Integration
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2012
* Ioannis Kymissis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

A monolithically integrated LED array is being developed with applications in
the projection display industry and other non-display market areas such as
scanning, computational photography, and depth analysis. The team's process
begins with a compound semiconductor LED wafer upon which individual LED pixels
are lithographically patterned to create a display. Light is generated from each
individual LED pixel only where and when needed for the display. Both an active
and passive matrix version are under development, the active matrix version uses
laser crystallized polycrystalline silicon, whereas the passive matrix version
takes advantage of direct addressing and/or rectification in the LEDs. The final
calculated light path efficiency is approximately 75%, which represents a 5-10X
improvement over the efficiency in current commercial systems. The reduced parts
count allows for a smaller total system size, a smaller bill of materials, and a
dramatically-decreased system cost for both direct view and projection
microdisplays. This approach increases the brightness, decreases the cost, and
reduces the overall size of this class of displays, eliminating the obstacles
for mainstream adoption of this system in display and non-display markets.

This system has the potential to develop a picoprojector with a power
efficiency, brightness, cost, and form factor unavailable in incumbent systems.
In addition to applications in displays, picoprojectors with this efficiency,
brightness, and form factor can be used in a number of other applications
including depth imaging, in-situ guidance for medical procedures, and
computational photography. Commercialization of this device will impact all of
these areas and enable a range of new downstream applications. This approach
will also demonstrate the potential for commercial integration of compound
semiconductors with silicon using laser recrystallization. This approach also
has the potential to impact a range of other devices that currently use silicon
backplanes integrated with compound semiconductor devices, such as focal plane
imagers. These devices, which are primarily used in hyperspectral imagers today,
have a range of applications in the medical, military, earth science, and
metrology space and further development in this area has the potential to impact
these project areas as well.