* 1217644
* NeTS: Small: Mobile Power Management as a Network Primitive
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2015
* David Wetherall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2015
* USD 499,199.00

Battery power is a scarce resource on phones and is one of the main factors that
limit the deployment of rich new kinds of mobile applications. There is
presently no comprehensive solution to this power management problem, and
existing solutions are narrowly focused on specific applications or specific
device components. In this research, we will develop a system called PowerMedic
that makes device-wide energy decisions across applications. The approach is to
implement power management as a fundamental primitive. Much like other network
primitives such as send and receive, applications need only specify their
requirements; they no longer need to perform low-level energy optimizations.
PowerMedic takes into account the interactions between device components such as
network, CPU, screen, and sensors, to optimize power consumption, while
satisfying the application requirements. The runtime decisions to save power are
dynamic and driven by the user's application patterns, mobility, network
connectivity, and other environmental factors. For evaluation purposes, it is
expected that a user study will be conducted to gather mobile usage data. The
data can be used to build predictive models of user behavior, such as charging
patterns, to further improve the system.

This research is relevant to a broad segment of the population, as it is
projected that there will be 1 billion smartphones worldwide by 2013. PowerMedic
will enable a wide range of critical applications on phones, ranging from
healthcare applications to providing assistive technology for the disabled.
Today, these applications have limited success on phones because of the power
bottleneck. This research will also benefit the research community through the
release of the PowerMedic software and the user study data.