* 1217231
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Real-Time Unobtrusive Tracing in Multicore Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Martin Burtscher, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 188,960.00

Embedded computer systems have become essential to many aspects of our lives.
Cheaper, smaller, faster, more sophisticated, and more energy-efficient embedded
devices spur ever new applications. However, the growing complexity and shift to
multicores make programming and debugging these systems difficult. Traditional
debugging is time consuming and may interfere with program execution, causing
some bugs to become irreproducible and making it unusable in real-time
environments. Moreover, tracing a processor?s internal state during execution is
only feasible for short program segments and requires large on-chip buffers or
wide trace ports, either of which increases system cost and limits scalability.
This project is developing the next generation of trace compression methods and
infrastructure to make continuous, real-time, unobtrusive, and cost-effective
program, data, and bus tracing possible in embedded systems. The approach relies
on on-chip hardware to record the processor state and corresponding software
modules in the debugger. The novel insight is that a sequence of trace records
can be translated, without loss of information, into a much shorter sequence of
miss events using small hardware structures. The few remaining miss events are
then further compressed using highly-effective yet simple-to-implement encoding
schemes, yielding heretofore unseen compression ratios.

The new tracing and debugging infrastructure can help programmers find difficult
and intermittent software bugs faster, thus improving productivity. For example,
reducing debugging time by just one percent amounts to hundreds of millions of
dollars annually in saved salaries, with a concomitant reduction in software
cost and time to market. Moreover, higher quality software may eliminate errors
in medical, automotive, or mission-critical devices and thus save lives.