* 1217812
* CSR: Small: Collaborative: Pursuing High Performance on Clouds and Other Dynamically Heterogeneous Computing Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Michela Taufer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2015
* USD 192,487.00

Emerging technologies have led to revolutionary computing
platforms&lt;br/&gt;such as computing clouds and many genres of computing grids.
These&lt;br/&gt;platforms promise to make high-performance computing
platforms&lt;br/&gt;accessible to the public. Realizing this promise, though,
requires&lt;br/&gt;one to cope with the platforms' dynamic heterogeneity, i.e.,
the fact&lt;br/&gt;that their constituent computers' relative powers and speeds
can&lt;br/&gt;change at unpredictable times and in unpredictable ways; for
instance,&lt;br/&gt;shared computers may slow down or speed up significantly
because of&lt;br/&gt;unpredictable changes in workloads. The research of the PIs
is&lt;br/&gt;developing a transformative computing paradigm that will
enable&lt;br/&gt;high-performance computing on these platforms. The new
paradigm&lt;br/&gt;replaces traditional schedulers' attempts to accommodate
the&lt;br/&gt;particulars of a computing platform---a goal that
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity confutes---by orchestrating a complex
computation in a&lt;br/&gt;way that honors the relevant details of the
computation's inherent&lt;br/&gt;structure. In this way, the paradigm increases
opportunities for&lt;br/&gt;executing independent tasks in parallel (i.e.,
simultaneously),&lt;br/&gt;thereby completing computations faster. Preliminary
assessments---via&lt;br/&gt;simulated competitions with common computation
schedulers---suggest&lt;br/&gt;that the new paradigm often completes
computations faster than&lt;br/&gt;competing strategies by double-digit
percentages. The challenge is to&lt;br/&gt;realize the paradigm in a
computationally efficient manner, and the&lt;br/&gt;PIs are pursuing a variety
of avenues toward achieving such&lt;br/&gt;efficiency. Because of the complexity
of dynamically heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;platforms, this goal requires advances in
the technology of both&lt;br/&gt;scheduling algorithms and simulation software.
The PIs are uniquely&lt;br/&gt;qualified to produce such advances because of
their complementary&lt;br/&gt;expertise in algorithms, applications, and
systems.