* 1217260
* NeTS: Small: GOALI: Information Centric Networking on Wheels (IC NoW) - Architecture and Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Bhaskar Krishnamachari, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2016
* USD 349,997.00

Recent developments in the automotive industry point to a new emerging domain of
vehicular wireless networks, in which vehicles equipped with radios can
communicate a wide range of information to each other and the wider Internet,
including traffic and safety updates as well as infotainment content. The
primary goal of this project is to develop a hybrid network architecture for
such vehicular networks which combines both the existing cellular infrastructure
as well as new vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication capabilities. The
hypothesis is that such a hybrid network architecture will improve cost,
capacity and robustness, compared to either a purely centralized cellular-based
approach or a purely distributed V2V approach. Under a hybrid architecture, the
project aims to design information-centric protocols for information
dissemination, aggregation, and storage, that can exploit the spatio-temporally
localized nature of vehicular applications. Further, through mathematical
analysis, computer simulations, as well as experimental implementation on a
research fleet of vehicles, this project aims to evaluate the performance of
these protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be a unique academia-
industry collaborative project between researchers at the University of Southern
California and General Motors. While the focus will very much be on basic
research disseminated to the academic community through publications, the close
interaction with a prominent industry partner will enable the research to have a
strong impact on real-world vehicular networks. Material from this research
project will be incorporated into graduate courses at USC. The aimed-for advance
in information technology for the automotive domain could have significant
social impact by enabling improvements in traffic safety, efficiency, user
comfort and productivity.