* 1217109
* Geometry and Physics of String Compactifications
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* M. Ronen Plesser, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2016
* USD 320,999.00

Research in string theory in the past three decades has led to exciting new
insights in physics and mathematics. Considering string propagation in
nontrivial backgrounds produces physical interpretations for mathematical
structures in spacetime. The interplay between mathematical and physical
intuitions and techniques has enriched both fields. A notable example of this is
the discovery and the many applications of mirror symmetry. The research
described here will build on these results and on recent progress in both fields
to pursue these studies in new regimes. One aim is to improve our understanding
of the geometry and physics of heterotic string compactifications using a
variety of approaches. These models can describe universes similar to ours with
such features as nonabelian gauge symmetry and chiral matter content. In
addition an investigation of extremal transitions in M-theory compactifications
using insights from geometry and field theory will be carried out to learn about
the possible dynamics. This work is expected to lead to a better understanding
of the physics of string theory, as well as to insight into the mathematics of
CalabiYau spaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work will be done
in collaboration with physicists and mathematicians around the world, enhancing
interdisciplinary cooperation. Experience shows that such collaborations in this
field have been productive , as new physics insights and new results in pure
mathematics go hand-in-hand. The PI will also train graduate students and
involve undergraduate students in the research. He will also enhance his program
of outreach activities. This includes collaborations with local public schools
to enhance science teaching and generate enthusiasm for science in young people
by visits to the classroom by the PI and/or by students trained by the PI to
present specific curriculum materials developed in concert with the schools.
These curriculum materials are made broadly available for use elsewhere. The
regular public stargazing events conducted by the PI for the past decade will be
enhanced by including astrophotography capabilities.