* 1217017
* Seeking new paleotemperature proxies: Noble gases in evaporites
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Neil Sturchio, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 06/30/2014
* USD 39,101.00

Paleoclimate records provide essential constraints for models to predict complex
climate variability. However, paleotemperature proxies are scarce in warm, arid
regions of the Earth. Surface water equilibrated with the atmosphere at ambient
temperatures may be trapped as fluid inclusions in minerals forming evaporite
minerals under such conditions. As noble gas solubility in water is temperature-
dependent, this project will examine the potential of evaporites for noble gas-
based paleothermometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active salt farms and modern
halite provide relatively well-controlled open-air environments in which halite
precipitation occurs. These modern environments allow us to examine how short-
term temperature fluctuations are reflected in the noble gas temperatures of
fluid inclusions in halite, and thus to calibrate the proxy record. In this
project, the assembled research time will analyze noble gas concentrations of
fluid inclusions in halite that formed at known locations and during known
periods of time (i.e. known average temperature) in order to investigate how the
noble gas temperature relates to the local temperature record. A positive result
will lead to further studies for establishing this new paleotemperature proxy
and may have broad implications on climate modeling by providing temperature
records for dry regions over extended time periods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being able to predict climate change on our
planet is arguably of critical for humans on this planet, as climate can
directly affect important activities such as agriculture. In order to understand
climate in our modern world, it is very helpful to know about Earth?s climate
throughout the ancient past. Usually we learn about past climates via geological
records. However, geological materials that preserve records of ancient
temperature are scarce in warm, dry regions of the Earth, which makes it
difficult for us to determine the climate record for such
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support to explore a potentially
very useful method for examining climates of these regions by examining natural
salt samples. When these salt crystals form, tiny bubbles of liquid and gas are
trapped inside. These trapped bubbles are known as inclusions. It has been
established that concentrations of chemically inert (noble) gases in water and
brine depend upon temperature. Therefore, it is possible that the gas content of
the inclusions could be measured to determine ancient Earth
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To establish whether this method could really
be useful, the investigators plan to measure the gas concentrations in
inclusions of salt crystals formed under known conditions (mainly salt farms).
They will see if the temperatures derived from gas concentrations in these
modern salt crystal inclusions actually match or correspond to the local
temperature records. If the method proves to be successful way to measure
temperature, it will lead to further study on whether the method can be applied
to obtain paleotemperature estimates from ancient samples. Consequently such
work could enable better climate prediction for the modern world.