* 1217886
* III: Small: Parameter Inference and Parameter Advising in Computational Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* John Kececioglu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 512,575.00

Computational biology researchers often need to reconstruct an unobserved
phenomenon from available data, such as the unknown evolutionary tree for a set
of species, the unknown evolutionary alignment of related protein sequences, or
the unseen folded state of an RNA molecule. Finding the reconstruction is
usually modeled as an optimization problem, whose optimal solution is intended
to correspond to the correct reconstruction. A key ingredient in such a model is
the criterion that is being optimized, which is captured by the objective
function. This function often has many free parameters, and the choice of values
for these parameters critically affects whether the correct reconstruction is
actually an optimal solution. This project will build a general software system
that solves two complementary problems: (1) parameter inference, which learns
optimal values for the parameters of the objective function for classes of
inputs, given examples of correct reconstructions; and (2) parameter advising,
which recommends good values of the parameters for a specific input. Consider a
developer and a user of a software tool that solves a reconstruction problem:
parameter inference finds the best default values for the tool developer, while
parameter advising finds good specific values for the particular input being run
by the tool user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parameter inference will be tackled via a
recent algorithmic breakthrough in inverse parametric optimization. Given
examples of input-output pairs for a reconstruction problem, values for the
parameters of the objective function that make each output be an optimal
solution for its input can be found in polynomial time, as long as: (a) the
objective function is linear in the parameters, and (b) the reconstruction
problem is efficiently solvable when parameter values are fixed. Parameter
advising will be tackled by: (1) learning a polynomial that combines feature
functions into an estimator for the accuracy of a reconstruction, and (2)
selecting the parameter value from a set of choices that yields the
reconstruction of highest estimated accuracy. An optimal parameter set that
maximizes the average true accuracy of the advisor will be found by integer
linear programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general software system for
parameter inference and advising will be made freely available for researchers
as open source through the Internet. Outreach educational activities include
conducting a summer workshop for high school biology and mathematics teachers to
develop bioinformatics curriculum modules for their classrooms, and mentoring
economically disadvantaged and minority undergraduate students through the
McNair Scholars program. The tools developed by the project are poised to have
very broad impact throughout computer science, not just computational biology,
as the most widely-used optimization models, such as shortest paths, minimum
spanning trees, maximum matchings, and network flow, all have linear objective
functions, to which the parameter inference techniques apply.