* 1217428
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Adaptive and Autonomous Energy Management on a Sensor Network Using Aerial Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Basha, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

This research introduces novel recharging systems and algorithms to supplement
existing systems and lead to autonomous, sustainable energy management on sensor
networks. Applications such as bridge fault detection that rely on sensor
networks operating away from buildings often lack energy for long-term
monitoring. In these scenarios traditional recharging methods (e.g. solar
panels) are unavailable or cannot provide sufficient energy (e.g. at night). To
achieve this, the research has three key components. The first component
develops an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) to wirelessly recharge sensor nodes, a
localization system based on magnetic field intensity, and autonomous control
algorithms that optimize power transfer. Based on this system, the second part
develops online algorithms for UAV trajectory optimization in systems with
multiple UAVs as well as distributed algorithms that induce energy deficits in a
subset of nodes to enable efficient recharging. Finally, the third component
provides models and distributed algorithms to predict future energy recharging
and usage for sensor nodes.

This research impacts a range of societal, educational, and scientific topics.
This project addresses a critical national need of enabling regular monitoring
of bridge integrity through autonomous, energy efficient sensor network and
robot systems. Improving bridge fault detection is necessary given aging
infrastructure and limited local budgets for performing such work through
current manual visual inspection processes. Educationally, at the K-12 level,
this provides demos and workshops to enhance existing programs, encouraging
young students (especially women) to pursue STEM fields.