* 1217662
* CSR: Small: Towards a Co-Designed Latency-Centric On-Chip Communication Substrate
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Hui Wu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

As high-performance processor chips continue to integrate more components such
as general-purpose cores or special accelerator units, increasing demand for a
communication substrate with higher performance and better energy efficiency is
evident. Unfortunately, continued device scaling has exacerbated the fundamental
challenges facing on-chip metal wires, such as increased loss, delay,
dispersion, and cross-talk. Alternatives to the conventional communication
schemes are clearly imperative as technology progresses. Existing solutions for
off-chip interconnection such as packet-switching networks and optics are
finding their way into the on-chip environment. However, these solutions evolve
under a different set of constraints and goals in the off-chip environment and
are not automatically suitable in the on-chip environment. For instance, a
packet-switched interconnect provides scalable throughput, but at significant
communication latency and energy costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes
a multidisciplinary approach and explores the design of latency-centric
communication substrates based on novel wide-band, pulse-based communication
mechanisms and architectural support that dovetails the circuits. Early evidence
suggests there are significant potential benefits, including superior latency at
sufficiently high throughput and extremely low energy costs. &lt;br/&gt;The
success of this project can critically impact future microprocessor and other
complex system-on-chip design methodology. This project also contributes to the
training of students at the intersection of digital and analog circuit and
architecture design ? an important area for the future of the technology
industry.