* 1217048
* NeTS: Small: Toward Reducing Control Overheads in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Eytan Modiano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 01/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

This project develops a theory for understanding the requirements for control
overheads in wireless networks and mechanisms for reducing the amount of these
overheads. Network control mechanisms, such as scheduling, routing, and flow
control, ensure effective data transport in a communication network, but also
require the exchange of network state information, such as channel conditions
and queue-length information, which amounts to 'control overhead'. The project
investigates the tradeoffs between the rate of sending such control information,
and the ability to effectively control the network in terms of performance
metrics such as throughput, stability, delay and network utility. The project
takes a two-pronged approach: First, a rate-distortion framework is being
developed for understanding the impact of degraded network state information on
network performance. Second, mechanisms are being developed for reducing the
amount of control overhead and the impact of these mechanisms on network
performance is being investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a
fundamental understanding of the requirements for protocol overhead, which will
lead to more efficient network control policies, with reduced overheads. Such
improvements will have a significant impact on network performance, especially
in wireless networks, which experience large overheads due to protocol
inefficiencies. The results will be widely disseminated through publication in
conferences, journals and the web to help advance the wireless networking field.
The broader impacts include training of graduate and undergraduate students and
technology transfer to industry and government laboratories.