* 1217654
* NeTS: Small: The Design and Implementation of a Consolidated MiddleBox Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sylvia Ratnasamy, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Specialized network appliances or "middleboxes" are expensive and closed systems
with little/no hooks for extension; they come with custom management APIs and
are deployed as standalone devices with little cohesiveness in how the ensemble
of middleboxes is managed. These drawbacks put network infrastructure on a
trajectory of growing device sprawl with mounting capital and management costs.
This research introduces a new approach to building and managing middlebox
infrastructure. Instead of an ad-hoc clutter of specialized and standalone
boxes, the research develops a middlebox architecture in which software-centric
middlebox applications run consolidated on a shared hardware platform, managed
by a single, unified controller. This approach offers extensibility (since new
applications are deployed on existing hardware and integrated into a unified
management architecture) and yet efficiency (due to amortization of both
hardware and management overheads).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Modern
society's growing reliance on networked systems has been astounding. This growth
has not come easily however. Today's networks are highly complex systems and
middleboxes are a significant contributor to this complexity; even the experts
that build and run networks struggle to manage and diagnose their operation.
Spiraling costs related to the manageability and evolution of networks impacts
the networking industry and hence eventually the broader society that relies on
them. This research aims to ameliorate this trajectory through a simpler,
unified design for middlebox infrastructure.