* 1217811
* CSR--EHS: Small: Limited-information control of hybrid systems via reachable set propagation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Daniel Liberzon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 280,000.00

The theme of this project is control of hybrid systems based on limited (sampled
and quantized) information about their state. The project aims to bring
together, for the first time, two research topics: hybrid systems, and control
with limited information. The project will seek to develop a novel method for
propagating over-approximations of reachable sets for hybrid systems, and use it
to define and validate a control strategy based on sampled and quantized
measurements of the continuous state. This method will be combined with state-
of-the-art analysis tools for hybrid and switched systems, such as multiple
Lyapunov functions, average dwell-time switching, and input-to-state stability.

Hybrid systems are important for modeling and controlling the behavior of cyber-
physical systems, such as fly-by-wire aircraft and power grids. Hybrid systems
combine continuous dynamics and discrete transitions. This hybrid nature enables
one to capture many processes encountered in practice which switch between
different modes of operation. Controllers for such systems typically have
limited information about the system state, due to limitations of available
sensors and delays and losses in communication. A possible scenario is
controlling an autonomous robot which switches between the search mode and the
pursuit mode and, for security or implementation cost reasons, is connected to
the control center via a very low-power communication link. Educational and
outreach activities of the project include support of a graduate student,
integration of the research with graduate courses in hybrid systems and control,
workshops and short courses, and involvement of undergraduates in translating
theoretical developments into software tools.