* 1217206
* NeTS: Small: Anti-Jamming Techniques for Secure Communications in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Tongtong Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2018
* USD 380,000.00

Jamming attack is one of the most commonly used techniques for limiting the
effectiveness of an opponent's communication in wireless networks. Along with
the advent of user configurable intelligent devices, such as cognitive radios,
jamming is no longer limited to military related events, but has become an
urgent and serious threat to civilian communications as well. Motivated by this
observation, this project is devoted to the development of multi-layer anti-
jamming techniques for secure communications over wireless networks. First, we
introduce a systematic 2D model for cognitive jamming characterization,
detection and classification. We also introduce the concept of disguised
jamming, and point out that it can be much more harmful than the traditional
strong jamming. Second, we investigate efficient anti-jamming system design for
both point-to-point (one-hop) communications and multi-hop communications. For
one-hop communications, we enhance jamming resistance by incorporating advanced
cryptographic techniques into network-centric spectrum access control and the
physical layer transceiver design. For multi-hop communications, we develop
efficient and unconditionally secure cryptographic algorithms and protocols to
maximize routing diversity and routing anonymity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed highly efficient anti-jamming techniques lay a solid foundation for
real-time jamming detection and reliable information transmission under dynamic
jamming scenarios. It can greatly improve the efficiency and reliability of high
speed wireless services. This project also includes a significant education
component aimed at integrating frontier research with undergraduate and graduate
curricula. Research results will be presented at international conferences,
meetings and published in scientific journals.