* 1217177
* Collaborative Research: Reactive Instabilities, Colloids, and Interfacial Flows: Experiments, Modeling, and Numerics
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2016
* Andrew Belmonte, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The investigators and their colleagues study novel instabilities in fluids
driven by material complexity occurring only at interfaces. For instance, when
two reacting micellar liquids are brought into contact, the reaction may produce
a growing gel-like phase at the interface, which significantly stiffens the
boundary between the fluids. Another example arises from the presence of
nanoscale colloidal particles which accumulate at interfaces. Intercolloid
forces also endow the interface with stiffness, and may even jam the interface
at sufficiently high volume fraction. The goal of this proposal is to develop
comprehensive, physically appropriate models and simulations for these very
difficult problems. The highly nonlinear nature of these problems makes fast,
accurate and robust numerical methods essential to their study. The research
team plans to investigate the nonlinear dynamics of interfaces endowed with
complex physical properties and to develop strategies to control their pattern
forming abilities by (1) developing and applying state-of-the-art adaptive
numerical methods to large-scale computation; (2) performing analytical,
numerical and modeling studies of important constituent processes; and (3)
performing experiments to calibrate and validate the mathematical models, to
test the model predictions, and to help elucidate the underlying physical
processes.

Interfacial instabilities occur when driving forces compete with resistive
forces with a consequence being the formation of complex patterns. Examples
occur in diverse systems such as including filamentary microorganisms, growing
biofilms, smoldering flame fronts, and lava flows. The goal of this project is
to develop comprehensive, physically appropriate models and efficient numerical
methods for solving such problems. Experiments will be performed to validate the
models and test the model predictions, and to help elucidate the underlying
physical processes. The research will focus on flows with complex interfacial
physics such as reactions and nanoscale particles at interfaces. The research
activities will provide new integrated theoretical, numerical and experimental
results that can be used to (1) further explore these pattern forming systems
that are driven out of equilibrium; (2)develop guidelines for controlling the
evolving morphologies. While specific and novel applications are investigated
here, the new mathematical and adaptive numerical techniques are expected have
application beyond the present context. In addition, this project will provide
valuable interdisciplinary training opportunities for young researchers, and
outreach programs are planned for middle school and undergraduate students (Penn
State), high school students (UC Irvine) and undergraduate students (Ill. Inst.
Techn.).