* 1217454
* SHF: Small: Information Effects
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amr Sabry, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2016
* USD 275,319.00

Conventional models of computation abstract from the explicit flow of energy
(and hence information) in physical realizations of computational devices. The
benefits of such an abstract layer are self-evident, and yet it results in a
conceptual model of computing that is unsuitable for reasoning about entire
classes of applications including systems that aim to optimize the use of energy
or that aim to guarantee privacy and security of information in the presence of
arbitrary attackers. More fundamentally, the computational model becomes at odds
with the basic laws of physics which hinders the general ability to explore,
model, and understand nature's interactions, connections, complex relations, and
interdependencies. To remedy these problems, the research builds a model of
computation based on the physical principle of "conservation of information,"
uses it to expose information manipulation, and to reason about information-flow
security, privacy, and similar applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically,
the proposed model builds on the type isomorphisms and categorical structures
that underlie models of linear logic and quantum computing, and treats
information as a linear resource that can neither be erased nor duplicated. On
the theoretical side, the model is expected to unveil deeper and more elegant
symmetries of computation than have previously been reported. In particular, in
a computational model where information is conserved, it is natural to introduce
notions of information debts that are related to continuations. Such notions
could be useful to addressing long-standing theoretical problems related to the
duality of computation. With an eye towards applications, and hence with the aim
of reasoning about open systems which may erase and duplicate information
relative to their environment, the model is extended with a layer based on the
concept of arrows that allows explicit erasure and duplication of information in
a way that is tracked by the type system. By implementing this extended model in
a mainstream programming environment, it will become possible to reason about
new classes of applications that deal with information manipulation in a
systematic manner using the established tools of programming language theory.