* 1217648
* SHF: AF: Small: Collaborative Research:RESAR:  Robust, Efficient, Scalable, Autonomous Reliable Storage for the Cloud
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Ahmed Amer, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2015
* USD 109,986.00

With the growth of cloud computing and the changing manner in which individuals
and businesses interact with data, it is increasingly important to manage data
efficiently and reliably. The RESAR project tackles the problem of building
ever-larger data stores, and offers a novel approach to reducing the energy
impact of such increases in scale while allowing easier management and
adaptation of the system as it ages. In other words, RESAR offers a means to
gracefully adapt a storage system to offer increased reliability or performance
as demanded by the systems' age or administrator's requirements. This project
develops, studies, and optimizes reliable, energy-efficient storage needed in
modern data centers and large-scale data storage environments, and allows such
storage systems to gracefully increase its performance and reliability while
efficiently scaling to millions of storage devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
storage systems to be feasible and manageable at increasing scales, need to be
self-healing and self-optimizing, able to adapt to aging and new components
whilst dynamically recovering from inevitable component failures. Cloud
computing promises savings in staffing as the volume of work in a data center
would be distributed over fewer, but better trained staff. While the increasing
scale of such data centers offers greater opportunities for energy-saving
measures to become more effective, such scales rapidly increase fears of
individual components failing. This demands that such large scale storage
systems be arranged in such a way as to offer an ability to survive the failure
of multiple components, and to do so with minimal management
overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To survive the increasingly likely component
failures (brought about by the increasing numbers of components in ever-growing
data warehouses), storage systems typically employ some form of data replication
or redundancy scheme. This strategy not only protects data against loss, but
also allows faster access. Unfortunately, doubling or tripling the number of
storage devices (or entire data centers) comes at a considerable cost.
Alternatively, a site could use erasure correcting codes that provide protection
against device failures while only increasing hardware demands by a smaller
increment. But such erasure correcting schemes offer limited scalability and can
complicate the implementation and self-management of a system considerably. The
RESAR approach is to employ novel erasure codes that allow faster layout
restructuring, while offering increased scalability, and improved reliability
over competing schemes. RESAR allows for restructuring on the fly, and as such,
has the added benefit of being complementary to data relocation tasks necessary
for routine maintenance and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing
and data centers are taking hold as technologies with great promise for cheaper,
more flexible, and more energy-efficient information processing. RESAR enables
cheaper, more reliable, automated and more easily scaled storage systems. RESAR
offers a novel graph representation of a failure tolerance scheme that allows
the construction of flexible, dynamically reconfigurable, parity-based
redundancy schemes that are well-suited for cloud storage infrastructure. By
offering the benefits of more highly-convolved erasure coding schemes, whilst
remaining simple and efficient, RESAR offers a new path to self-organizing
large-scale storage systems. The resulting systems are more maintainable, easily
reconfigured for increasing levels of reliability on-demand, and more cost
effective. This efficiency further extends to reduced maintenance and energy
demands.