* 1217213
* CIF: Small: Understanding Complexity in Markovian Interaction Networks: Self-Organization, Functional Stability, Robustness, and Evolutionary Behavior
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* John Goutsias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2016
* USD 413,523.00

Many natural and man-made systems of interest to scientists and engineers are
composed of groups of individual elements interacting with each other, through
specific channels, to produce and regulate appropriate responses. Examples
include chemical reaction networks, cellular (signaling, transcriptional, and
metabolic) networks, pharmacokinetic networks, epidemiological networks,
ecological networks, social networks, neural networks, multi-agent networks,
etc. Understanding the fundamental properties and design principles of such
networks is an exciting and challenging research problem whose solution requires
development of new theoretical and computational approaches. To complicate
matters, the dynamics of most interaction networks are inherently nonlinear and
stochastic. A unifying approach is thus needed to concurrently encompass the
deterministic and stochastic aspects of networks that can lead to common
approaches and methods for the modeling and analysis of a diverse body of
interaction networks.

The main goal of this research is to develop a general theoretical and
computational approach for characterizing and analyzing complexity in nonlinear
interaction networks with Markovian dynamics. While complexity may be difficult
to characterize directly, this research rigorously pursues and quantifies the
prevalent hallmarks of complexity: self-organization, functional stability,
robustness, and evolutionary behavior. The investigators study a potential
energy landscape perspective that relates topographic features of the landscape
to these fundamental network properties. To achieve feasibility and
computational efficiency of the main goals of this effort, new tools are being
developed for computing the time evolution of the probability distribution of
the underlying stochastic population dynamics. Rigorous mathematical,
algorithmic, and computational approaches are then proposed for modeling the
emergent behavior and complexity of Markovian interaction networks as well as
for studying their functional stability and thermodynamic robustness by
probabilistic sensitivity analysis techniques.