* 1217996
* NeTS: Small: Merging Traffic for Energy Conservation in Enterprise &amp; Datacenter Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Suresh Singh, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2016
* USD 429,999.00

Energy consumed by computing and communication devices has become a significant
cost of&lt;br/&gt;conducting business today. Indeed, as we move to higher speed
networks and increase the&lt;br/&gt;deployment of the Internet to all corners of
the world, this cost is expected to grow dramatically.&lt;br/&gt;Major
contributors to the size and energy cost of the deployed infrastructure include
enterprise&lt;br/&gt;networks and data center networks. Enterprise networks are
deployed in the workplace and have&lt;br/&gt;been shown to be heavily under-
utilized with peak utilizations typically a fraction of
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;Similarly, data center networks have also been shown to be
very lightly loaded for significant&lt;br/&gt;lengths of time. In both these
cases, the energy consumed by the networking infrastructure is
very&lt;br/&gt;high, in relation to the actual data transmitted. The reasons for
this are twofold. First, network&lt;br/&gt;switches are designed to always run
at peak rates even in the absence of traffic and second, switch&lt;br/&gt;ports
map one-to-one to end systems even though these systems load the ports at a tiny
fraction of&lt;br/&gt;available capacity. The outcome of this research project
is a fundamental re-design of the network&lt;br/&gt;switch in a way that
preserves user experience but results in dramatic energy
savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key idea in this work is the development of a
hardware device called a merge network, which&lt;br/&gt;sits between the switch
and connected systems. Traffic coming into the switch is merged
together&lt;br/&gt;and fed to a smaller number of ports allowing either the
replacement of large port-density&lt;br/&gt;switches with smaller switches or
the powering off of large portions of the switch such as line&lt;br/&gt;cards
and memory banks. While the benefit of this idea is evident, the challenges in
realizing it&lt;br/&gt;are many. At the hardware level, the challenge is in
merging traffic with minimal energy cost and&lt;br/&gt;data loss. The approach
adopted in this project is to build the merge network using
analog&lt;br/&gt;components with a digital control for managing Layer 2 protocol
issues. Modern switches&lt;br/&gt;implement a suite of Layer 2 protocols that
expect a 1-1 mapping of switch ports to end-systems.&lt;br/&gt;By breaking this
mapping using a merge network, one effectively causes incorrect
protocol&lt;br/&gt;behavior. This issue is addressed by utilizing port
virtualization within each switch. Thus, the&lt;br/&gt;Layer 2 protocols remain
unaffected while the network sees tremendous reduction in
energy&lt;br/&gt;usage. The project uses prototyping, experimentation and
simulation to fully characterize this new&lt;br/&gt;switch architecture in
enterprise and data center networks. Experimental systems based on
Click&lt;br/&gt;Modular Router will be inserted into the College network to
measure the energy savings in real&lt;br/&gt;application as well as to
understand side effects of such a redesign on overall network
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Traffic statistics collected at a data center network and
the University-level enterprise network&lt;br/&gt;will be utilized in a
simulator to analyze protocol behavior at a larger scale. This project
is&lt;br/&gt;transformative in that it redesigns the basic building block of the
Internet resulting in dramatic&lt;br/&gt;energy
savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work ranges from
fundamentally redesigning the key component of&lt;br/&gt;the Internet (the
switch) to directly influencing the energy usage in the
communications&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure. The impact on industry is significant
in that the work here will influence the design&lt;br/&gt;of future high-speed
switches where the merge network is incorporated into the
architecture&lt;br/&gt;rather than as an external add on. Traffic statistics
collected during this project will be made&lt;br/&gt;available to the research
community and will thus provide a much-needed source of enterprise-
level&lt;br/&gt;traces. The research community will also benefit by the
implementation of IEEE 802.1&lt;br/&gt;protocols into the Click software base.
The project will enhance the training of the future&lt;br/&gt;workforce via the
development of a new class and including students in hands on
measurement&lt;br/&gt;and development of the experimental platform.