* 1217635
* HCC: Small: Haptic Realism versus Haptic Utility
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Allison Okamura, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 425,186.00

While numerous studies have focused on the design of novel controllers and
devices to enhance the user experience of teleoperated and virtual environments,
our general understanding of what makes a haptic interface acceptable to human
operators is limited. The addition of haptic feedback to a computer-mediated
task, such as training to perform a surgical procedure in a virtual environment
or teleoperating a robot to dispose of explosive ordnance, has been hypothesized
to improve the speed, accuracy, and precision of task performance. However, the
benefits of haptic feedback have been insufficient to motivate inclusion of
haptics in many mission-critical systems. Recent publications in the haptics
literature have shown confusing results regarding the role of haptic feedback,
such as haptic teleoperators that have high user acceptance and realism ratings
but do not have any effect on user performance, as well as haptic teleoperators
that are disliked by users yet lead to significant improvements in performance.
The PI's goal in this project is to identify the salient parameters of haptic
systems leading to haptic realism and haptic utility, their trade-offs, and -
hopefully - their complementary features that lead to haptic systems that are
realistic and useful, and therefore acceptable to human operators in high-risk
scenarios. She plans to approach this problem by examining manipulation and
exploration with bilateral teleoperators, where haptic feedback consists of
vibrotactile and kinesthetic feedback mediated by a tool. System parameters of
interest include feedback gain and frequency content, device mechanical
properties, and time delay. For each parameter, the PI will examine its effect
on realism and utility, specifically: how users subjectively rate realism and
their own performance, and objective measures and theoretical predictions of
user perception and performance. In addition, she will survey user acceptance
and measure affect, and compare these to measures of realism and utility. Based
on these results, she will design and test haptic feedback systems that should
maximize user acceptance. This framework will allow her to answer relevant
questions such as: What is the spectrum of cost-benefit ratios in bilateral
teleoperation, considering the role of device performance in defining the limits
of haptic realism and utility? How does the level of risk in a task affect user
acceptance of haptic interfaces? Can we design "haptic cartoons" analogous to
medical illustrations, which are not completely realistic but display the most
important haptic features in order to maximize task performance? And is there a
haptic "uncanny valley" in which slightly unrealistic haptic feedback is
particularly disturbing to operators?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Effective haptic feedback systems will improve human health and well being
through applications such as surgery and explosive ordnance disposal. This
project will provide the field of computer-mediated haptics with a theoretical
and experimental framework to describe the effects of system design choices on
user acceptance of tool-based haptic teleoperators. The framework will likely
apply to other forms of haptic display (such as sensory substitution and
spatially distributed tactile feedback) and in other haptic feedback scenarios
(e.g., medical training and the transfer of learning in simulation to real-world
tasks). Project outcomes will be disseminated through software and data made
publicly available on the PI's laboratory website, a conference workshop, and a
new course on haptic design. Outreach programs, public lab tours, and mentoring
of female and minority graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
students will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.