* 1217010
* Collaborative Research: Mercury in the Atmosphere Over the Eastern United States
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Daniel Jaffe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 984,559.00

This project comprises the first large-scale airborne experiment focused on
mercury over North America. The project has two primary objectives: 1) Constrain
emissions of mercury from major source regions in the eastern United States, 2)
Quantify the distribution and chemical transformations of mercury in the lower
troposphere. To address these goals the NSF/National Center for Atmsopheric
Research C-130 aircraft will be equipped with a suite of state-of-the-art
instrumentation to measure gaseous elemental mercury (GEM), gaseous oxidized
mercury (GOM), particle-bound Hg (pHg) and a suite of other compounds for air
mass characterization. Flight plans will be designed to study industrial mercury
sources over the Ohio River Valley, outflow of North American mercury to the
Atlantic, and the impact of convective precipitation on surface wet deposition
of mercury over the Southeast U.S. Operational planning will utilize regional
and global forecast models to optimize the use of flight time. The C-130
observations will be integrated and analyzed after the mission with several
chemical transport and Lagrangian models. These models will be used to examine
the consistency between observations and emission inventories, allow the
integration of ground-based observations with aircraft observations in a unified
framework, constrain source-receptor relationships, and test different
hypotheses about the chemical transformations and global cycling of mercury.

Human exposure to mercury is a significant health risk and a problem of national
and global significance. Project results will reduce the uncertainties
concerning source-receptor relationships and the relative contributions of
domestic, foreign and natural sources to the inventory of atmospheric mercury
over the eastern U.S. The research will involve a number of graduate and
undergraduate students from several different U.S. institutions and thus will
expose these students to working on high-level scientific problems of great
national significance. In addition to a core group of scientists from the U.S.,
mercury scientists from Canada, Italy, Germany and Russia will also collaborate
in the work, thus strengthening international scientific cooperation on global
environmental problems.