* 1217764
* CSR: Small: Accelerating Microprocessor Post-Silicon Diagnosis with Statistical Inference
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Valeria Bertacco, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 478,156.00

Finding bugs in modern complex microprocessors is a critical and daunting task
that must be deftly mastered to move designs from first silicon to launch.
Escaped bugs may lead to the demise of a digital silicon company. At the same
time, looking for design errors on first silicon prototypes lacks the
observability, controllability and repeatability afforded by pre-silicon
simulation frameworks. To complicate the process further, many of the bugs that
manifest in real silicon are the result of complex asynchronous interactions
and/or electrical anomalies that are often not easily or frequently repeatable.
Because of these challenges, debugging these "fleeting bugs" in early silicon is
a black art that can significantly impact design schedules if the debugging
process does not proceed smoothly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates solutions to support the efficient diagnosis of these most
challenging post-silicon validation bugs, those that manifest only occasionally.
These bugs may be functional, timing or electrical errors, or also missed
manufacturing defects. The approach entails placing lightweight instrumentation
on-chip to collect data during a prototype's test executions. The data is then
analyzed offline using statistical inference algorithms to quickly point
verification engineers to offending components. The research explores a range of
ideas to find the most promising instrumentation and algorithms for analysis.
The results of this research effort allow semiconductor companies to shorten
their time to market while delivering high quality products, with low incidence
of escaped bugs; in turn, the work benefits society in that it unlocks further
scaling and growth for the electronics industry.