* 1217027
* EXP: Implementing a Workflow Visualization System for Design-Based Research
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2018
* USD 536,999.00

This project is iteratively designing, beta-testing, implementing, and
evaluating a fully automated, sharable Workflow Visualization System (WVS) to
help researchers and educators preserve, organize, and analyze data captured
from multiple design iterations of complex cyberlearning research and
development (R&D) efforts. The team is augmenting a widely used learning
management system (Moodle), which has existing data collection algorithms, with
new tools that produce visual, multi-layered representations of two
complementary aspects of R&D efforts: (1) the design of complex educational
interventions, including information about variables such as tasks, resources
used, participant structures, and workspaces; and (2) the enacted
implementations of these interventions, including data about learners'
completion of tasks or acquisition of resources and learner-produced data. The
WVS is envisioned ultimately to support reflective teaching practice, sharing of
adaptable successful interventions, and design-based research (DBR). The project
team is also tackling significant problems regarding privacy and protecting the
rights of human subjects in research that involves data mining from online
sources. The intellectual merit of this project rests in the promise it offers
to enable the educational research community to better document the
implementation history of complex cyberlearning interventions, including their
contexts, rationale, iterations and outcomes. Current efforts, including the
foundational work on which this new project builds, rely on manual production of
representations of such rich data. But what this new project offers is a means
to automate this data visualization strategy by mining both design information
and student performance data from Moodle sites, making it widely available and
easy to use. The project is exercising its broader impact through its choice of
Moodle, one of the leading open-source learning management systems, that has
over fifty-thousand sites supporting approximately forty million users world-
wide. The WVS' open-source code also permits its use with other learning
management systems. Most importantly, the project has the potential to transform
how the broader learning sciences and indeed cyberlearning sciences communities
engage in their work, both as individual projects and as a network of projects,
through improved knowledge sharing and accelerated adoption of results and best
practices.