* 1217908
* NeTS: Small: Network Connectivity and Security for Cooperative Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John Shea, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2016
* USD 396,000.00

Systems of autonomous vehicles under cooperative control provide versatile
platforms for a variety of tasks including environmental monitoring, search and
rescue, intelligent transportation, and cooperative surveillance or attack.
Performing these tasks requires control or optimization of the system's
formation while maintaining network connectivity. Such systems are also
potential targets for attack, and so techniques to secure the communications and
control processes are important. In this project, techniques from computer
networks are coupled with controls techniques to reconfigure the physical
formation of a system of autonomous vehicles while maintaining network
connectivity by "routing" vehicles through the formation to new positions. This
approach is an enabling technology that also allows the network formation to be
optimized to increase the efficiency of networked communication. New approaches
to securing communication signals are coupled with the ability to transform the
physical formation of the system to provide new approaches to achieving
communication that is secure against eavesdroppers and robust to hostile
jamming. The results of this project will be new algorithms, protocols, and
controls techniques for formation control of systems of autonomous vehicles that
are more flexible, efficient, and secure than the techniques currently
available. These results will be widely applicable to future sensing/monitoring,
homeland security, and defense operations involving autonomous systems of
ground, air, surface, and underwater vehicles.