* 1217770
* AF: Small: Combinatorial Algorithms and Computational Complexity for DNA Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Ming-Yang Kao, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Self-assembly is a process by which simple objects connect with each other to
form complex structures under very little external control. Given that self-
assembly is very common in nature, it is almost certain that self-assembly
technologies will ultimately permit precise and efficient fabrications of
nanostructures. There are many kinds of self-assembly. This project chooses to
focus on algorithmic DNA self-assembly with the goal of understanding self-
assembly in general from programming (i.e., algorithmic) and mathematical
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithmic DNA self-assembly takes advantage
of the facts that the four bases of DNA (i.e., A, C, G, T) can be used to encode
information and that A binds with T and C binds with G. Small molecules
consisting of multiple DNA strands (i.e., more than double strands) have been
designed to act as four-sided building blocks (which are called tiles) for
algorithmic DNA self-assembly. Experimental work has demonstrated that these
building blocks can effectively perform computation as well as assemble
crystals. Some key aspects of the self-assembly process of such building blocks
have already been used to formulate a fundamental mathematical model called the
abstract tile assembly model. This model extends a mathematical theory of two-
dimensional tilling by adding a natural mechanism to grow a structure formed by
tiles. The model consists of a set of square tiles. The four sides of a tile are
each associated with a glue (which is implemented as a DNA strand). A special
tile in the tile set is designated as the initial seed structure. Self-assembly
proceeds by starting with the initial seed structure and then gluing copies of
tiles from the tile set one by one to the growing seed structure whenever the
total glue binding strength between a tile and the seed structure is no less
than a threshold (which is implemented as the temperature in the
tube).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the abstract tile assembly model, algorithmic
DNA self-assembly is both a form of nanotechnology and a model of computation.
As a computational model, algorithmic DNA self-assembly first encodes a computer
program and an input data set for a given computational problem into the glues
of DNA tiles. The tiles then bind with each other through DNA complementarity to
execute the program on the input data set to produce a DNA nanostructure, which
in turn encodes the desired output of the computational problem. As a
nanotechnology, the goal of algorithmic DNA self-assembly is to design glues to
program a set of tiles to assemble into the desired nanostructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate interconnected research
directions in algorithmic DNA self-assembly to explore new ways (1) to minimize
the cost of manufacturing the glues and tiles used to assemble a structure, (2)
to minimize the amount of time needed to assemble a structure as well as the
amount of defects in the assembled structure, and (3) to impose desirable
structural properties on the assembly process as well as on the assembled
structure. A common theme across these directions is to automate the design of
DNA self-assembly systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will continue the
efforts of the Principle Investigator (PI) to introduce this emerging
interdisciplinary field to the theoretical computer science community by
formulating research problems of interest to that community. With this project,
the PI will continue to recruit members of under-represented groups into this
field in particular and into computer science in general. The PI has introduced
and taught a course in this field in the past two years at the level of advanced
undergraduate students and first-year graduate students. This course attracted
two undergraduate students from outside computer science to decide to apply to
PhD programs in this field and a postdoctoral fellow in Chemistry to collaborate
with the PI and undergraduate summer research students. With this project, the
PI will continue to teach this course on a regular basis to attract students and
researchers into this emerging interdisciplinary computer science field.