* 1217200
* Multiscale Turbulent Reacting Flows and Data-Based Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Tarek Echekki, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This research project investigates a multiscale flame-embedding approach for the
computation of turbulent flames. The model is based on the coupling of large-
eddy simulation (LES) for the description of the flow and for flame tracking and
embedded 1D stochastic solutions of flamelets based on the one-dimensional
turbulence (ODT) model. Important features of the framework include the
upscaling of ODT solution to the LES, the downscaling of LES solutions to ODT,
and capturing of the flame front. The Lagrangian LES-ODT formulation requires
the tracking, spawning, and removal of ODT solutions as they are advected along
the flame. The formulation also requires a robust formulation for the filtering
of the density from the fine-grained solution of ODT to the LES along with the
filtering of transport and source terms for scalars used to track the flame in
LES. Wavelet-based methods will be investigated to establish consistency between
the LES and ODT velocity fields and their transport. An optimal parameterization
of the thermo-chemical scalars using principal component analysis will be used
to improve computational efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the prediction of physical processes occurring in the production of
energy through combustion. The work aims to develop next-generation modeling
tools that can potentially reduce the turn-around time for the design of
combustion systems through simulation and to investigate mechanisms to improve
combustion efficiency and reduce pollutants.