* 1217798
* III: Small: Provisioning for Autonomous Data Analysis and Scenario Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Val Tannen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

In business intelligence and data-driven science, users often wish to consider
various "what-if scenarios": hypothetical updates and query refinements.
Unfortunately current techniques do not support this type of exploration when
query answers have high latency, when data sources charge fees, or in mobile,
disconnected settings. This project considers how, given a particular set of
query aspects and updates, one can precompute a special data representation that
can be stored on a client machine and can be used to directly answer queries
under a variety of updates and what-if scenarios, without direct access to the
data sources. The project achieves this goal by developing "provisioned
representations" that capture a form of parameterized data instances, from which
complex queries (even with multiple levels of aggregation) can be answered. The
work develops: (1) the provisioned representation (PR) formalism, (2) means of
encoding and storing PRs, (3) a query system and query processing techniques for
PRs, (4) a "wizard" for generating PRs from parameterized scenarios, and (5)
interactive tools for exploring changes to data and queries over PRs. The work
will improve decision support systems and help enable "information foresight" -
the ability to provide, given a question, answers that include additional data
relevant to a user's interests. The project supports Ph.D. students, and also
develops a new course on networked information management for the University of
Pennsylvania's innovative Market and Social Systems Engineering undergraduate
degree program on networks and markets. Data and code will be disseminated
through public collaborative portals (GitHub, Google Code) and the project Web
site (https://dbappserv.cis.upenn.edu/home/?q=node/173).