* 1217301
* EXP: Deepening Conceptual Understanding with Hands-on, Augmented-Reality Experimentation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Kirsten Butcher, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 524,051.00

This project team, led by a learning scientist and a computer graphics and
augmented reality expert are working together to design a new kind of science
laboratory environment that uses augmented reality (AR) to make invisible
scientific phenomena visible and continuously reinforce the conceptual
principles at work during hands-on scientific experimentation. The envisioned
technology visually captures the what students see as they are physically
carrying out experiments, interactively processes the imagery to make key
aspects available for analysis and exploration, and, in real time, automatically
augments the imagery with visualizations that overlay visualizations of
scientific phenomena on the real-world phenomena students are experiencing,
allowing students to experience real-world phenomena and the conceptual models
that describe those phenomena simultaneously. The base technology is a camera-
equipped tablet. Initial content is on force, work, and motion. The
technological innovation includes, first, recognizing the components in a scene,
even when the lighting is bad and people and other objects occlude some of it,
and second, calculating the positions of the objects so that the virtual imagery
can be transformed to match the real-world positions. Foundations for the
innovation can be found in what is known about the affordances of integrating
multiple representations in reasoning and problem solving and the challenges and
difficulties in doing that. The aim is to overcome those challenges so that the
affordances of multiple representations, each of which can communicate different
things, can be taken advantage of by learners. Scientists do this regularly, and
a visceral understanding of how this is done by scientists is expected to help
students better understand what scientists do and what counts as evidence.
Research addresses how students' thinking processes and domain understanding are
influenced by the addition of augmented reality visualizations to their hands-on
scientific investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is broad agreement that
the current state of educational preparedness of students in STEM areas is
inadequate and that improvement in these areas is critical both for American
technological leadership and for an informed, policy-making citizenry. This
research works to improve science education with engaging tools that tackle one
of the most difficult science educational issues: deep conceptual understanding
applied to real-world situations. This project team applies an elegant
technological approach to an helping learners connect the abstract science
concepts they are learning about to the real world they live in. Computer vision
and augmented reality will be integrated and refined in a way that addresses the
needs of learners. The team will make the programs and curriculum freely and
broadly available via Web-based distribution and access.