* 1217464
* International Workshop on New Computationally-Enabled Theoretical Models to Support Health Behavior Change and Maintenance
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Donna Spruijt-Metz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 47,880.00

This workshop is organized to bring together leaders and scientists in a variety
of different disciplines with complementary expertise including experts in
behavior change theory, health and wellness systems, behavior measurement and
measurement technology, engineering, computer science, and various types of
"persuasive" interventions. The main objective of the workshop is to identify
challenges in using computing and networking and information technology in
support of behavioral change that would enable healthcare to be more proactive
and preventive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed workshop plans to address a
number of open fundamental issues at the intersection of networking, information
technology and behavior modification. The workshop is striving to identify the
fundamental barriers that currently hamper the use of networking and information
technology, how they can be used to mediate processes enabling behavioral
change, as well as new methods for the real-time assessment and modeling of
behavior, affective states, and the environments in which these behaviors occur.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactionary "sick-care" systems that fail to prevent
disease have become financially unsustainable. It is a global imperative that
healthcare is transformed to a preemptive model that advances health "up front."
The global burden of disease is tightly related to conditions that are
preventable and treatable through promoting changes in key human behaviors. The
ability to change behaviors on a population scale, in an economically feasible
way, is therefore likely to have a major impact on the cost of healthcare. In
addition, healthy behaviors are typically associated with better quality of life
and wellbeing.