* 1217991
* RI: Small: Sampling Based Feedback Motion Planners
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 369,206.00

This project, developing robust and computationally intelligent randomized
sampling based feedback motion planning techniques for constrained systems
operating under "process" and "sensing" uncertainty, addresses an important
research area for real-world systems. Such motion planning techniques are
valuable because the high computational burden of these problems makes the
solution of such problems intractable for anything but the simplest low
dimensional systems. In particular, one of the most fundamental requirement of
robots is that they operate in a safe, efficient and autonomous fashion in the
presence of such uncertainty. Thus, a principled set of computationally
intelligent techniques, with guaranteed performance, is required. This proposed
work will generalize the Probabilistic RoadMap technique (PRM) of robotic path
planning shall such that the roadmap construction incorporates both process and
sensing uncertainty. This will result in a computationally tractable solution
technique for a large class of constrained Markov Decision Problems (MDP) and
Partially Observed MDPs (POMDP), known as constrained stochastic shortest path
problems, along with guaranteed performance of the planners in terms of a
probability of success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The ability to
solve high dimensional constrained MDP and POMDP problems in a computationally
tractable fashion will have significant impact on multiple different robotic
applications including robotic operations in hazardous environments such as
disaster areas and battlefields, surgical robotics, prosthetics and unmanned
planetary exploration. The impact of such computationally intelligent solution
techniques cannot be overstated due to the ubiquitous nature of MDPs and POMDPs,
which are fundamental decision making problems inherent in myriad different
fields ranging from Engineering through Economics to Biology. The assimilation
of K-12/undergraduate/graduate students, with a focus on underrepresented
minorities, with high school teachers in projects related to the research,
through experiments and demonstrations related to the research at the annual
"TAMU Physics and Engineering fair", and the annual department "summer camp" for
high school students and their parents, will disseminate the results of the
project to a broad audience.