* 1217387
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Smartphone Enabled Social and Physical Compass System (SENSCOPS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Yingying Chen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 236,003.00

Smartphones equipped with powerful embedded sensors (e.g. accelerometers, GPS,
microphones, etc.) can be used to monitor multiple dimensions of human behaviors
including physical, mental, and social behaviors of wellbeing. In particular,
such enhanced capabilities in mobile devices enable people to better manage
their health. Existing mobile health applications mostly rely on manual data
entry which may not be sufficient for certain population e.g. seniors and
students with emotional behavioral disorders (EBD). This project aims to build a
multimodal sensing system which provides continuous and efficient monitoring of
users? activities using mobile phones and wearable sensors. Our system analyzes
and correlates different sensor streams to infer certain behaviors as well as
possible environmental factors that may trigger such behaviors. Furthermore, our
system provides non-intrusive peer assisted localization technique that allows
caregivers to track the whereabouts of monitored users. We also develop
efficient schemes to infer higher layer information e.g. activity levels of
monitored individuals; social relationships among monitored users. Additionally,
the communities extracted from a mobile phone enabled social network in our
system not only enable mobile healthcare systems but can also be exploited for
securing certain components of the system (e.g., coping with clone attacks). Our
system allows users to be monitored for their mental, cognitive, and physical
well-being and can potentially reduce the cost for special need education as a
result of increasing the productivity of teachers and caregivers.