* 1217271
* SHF: Small: A Practical Program Transformation Infrastructure for C in the Presence of Multiple Configurations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Munawar Hafiz, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 424,446.00

Over the last decade, the field of Software Engineering has seen a rapid and
widespread adoption of automated refactoring tools: tools that analyze the
source code under the direction of the programmer, and make systematic changes
to that program that improve its internal structure without affecting its
behavior. In the C programming language, which is one of the most popular
languages in use, there is only a limited portfolio of refactorings available,
with limited scalability and limited applicability to real-world programs. This
research will address the technical problems that make it difficult to build
automated refactoring tools (and other program transformation tools) for C: the
ability to "configure" C programs using preprocessor macros, the need to perform
sophisticated analyses in the presence of many such configurations, and the need
to analyze and transform C when it is mixed with other programming languages.
Solving these problems, and producing a tool that incorporates these solutions,
will provide much needed tool improvements for C
programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will culminate in a prototype
refactoring and program transformation tool for C that addresses the
aforementioned problems. Handling multiple preprocessor configurations will
involve the exploration of both a parsing algorithm and a program
representation: the parsing algorithm extends the LALR(1) algorithm to handle
preprocessor directives, while the program representation accommodates multiple
configurations in a single abstract syntax tree (AST). Semantic information
(from various static analyses) will be superimposed on the AST; however, this
will require extending the static analyses to handle the complications presented
by multiple preprocessor configurations. The tool will also allow for
transforming mixed-language C programs--in particular, C programs mixed with
Fortran or Yacc (two languages that are commonly combined with C). Handling
multiple languages may be treated as an extension of the multiple configurations
problem, where declarations in one language and definitions in a different
language are treated, at least conceptually, as different configurations. The
tool will be available under an open source license.