* 1217416
* AF: Small:  Randomness in Computation - New Directions and Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Zeev Dvir, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 12/31/2015
* USD 446,974.00

The overarching goal of this project is to improve our understanding of the
power of randomness in designing efficient algorithms, constructing graphs that
behave like "random" graphs, and in proving certain mathematical results. One of
the basic questions in randomness is that of obtaining "pure" random bits from
real-world sources of randomness. Procedures developed for this purpose are
called extractors and have found many applications, some of which are completely
unrelated to their original motivation. A recent line of research (by the PI and
others) has resulted in new techniques, especially algebraic, being introduced
to this area. This resulted in new constructions of extractors that go beyond
previous barriers. One of the main goals of this project is to further study
these techniques and obtain better constructions of extractors producing more
random bits of higher quality than known before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another
central question studied in this project is Polynomial Identity Testing (PIT) -
testing whether a given arithmetic expression is an identity or not. This can be
done efficiently using randomness but a deterministic algorithm is not known.
The importance of finding deterministic algorithms for this problem (or even to
special cases of it) is of major importance and attracted a lot of attention
(including work by the PI with co-authors). A third major goal of this project
is to obtain deterministic PIT algorithms for classes of circuits for which only
randomized algorithms are known. This is tightly related to proving new
computational hardness results, being a yet another target for this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at expanding our understanding
of randomness as a computational resource while developing new and
transformative mathematical techniques and concepts for attacking long-standing
problems in this area. Progress on could lead to new practically useful insights
into algorithms, coding theory and cryptography among others. The PI will be
involved in organizing seminars, reading groups and writing survey articles
aimed at disseminating knowledge gained during the proposed research to the
wider academic community. In addition, the PI will give public talks, including
to high school students, and those aimed at a non-technical audience.