* 1217530
* STTR Phase I:  Frequency Agile Reconfigurable WWAN/WPAN Radio Design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Arthur Davidson, Carley Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will model,
design, simulate, develop and transition to industrial partners the key elements
of Frequency Agile Reconfigurable Radios that incorporate both medium-data-rate
wireless wide area network (WWAN) radios and ultra-high-data-rate short-range
wireless personal area network (WPAN) radios. Demand for wireless data will soon
outstrip available RF spectrum. While limited new spectrum is available, the
complexity of wireless device RF front ends is already daunting and adding more
RF bands will just add more switches and more surface- acoustic-wave (SAW)
filters. In the near term, the Frequency agile aspect of the proposed work will
enable RF front ends that can cover the entire spectrum from 0.8GHz - 5GHz with
only 3 RF front ends. This research focuses on the design of tunable LC filters
coupled with adaptive cancelation of transmit tone leakage and the design of
high efficiency watt-level power amplifiers. Finally, the potential for peer-to-
peer ad-hoc wireless networking to provide auxiliary access to large data files
of common interest will be assessed; and, a short range 60GHz transceiver front
end will be designed such that the overall radio can be rapidly reconfigured to
operate between 0.8-5GHz or at 60GHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is that a frequency agile RF front
end architecture can dramatically improve the cost and performance of wireless
front ends by allowing a single transceiver and tunable RF Filter to cover any
frequency band within an entire octave of frequency. An early payoff for the
project will be the reduction in the number of RF switches and RF filters in the
front end of wireless devices, especially cellular phones. As the number of
distinct frequency bands that must be addressed by modern cell phones increases,
their cost increases and their RF performance decreases because the on/off
impedance ratio of available RF switches is small. The frequency agile RF front
end will improve the RF performance of cellular phones due to decreased RF
switch losses. This would simplify the government?s process to issue new
frequency bands without considering radio complexity. The long term commercial
potential for the project is its ability to dramatically reduce the data that
travels over the WWAN by facilitating high data rate ad-hoc networks between
mobile devices using a WPAN radio.