* 1217842
* International Conference on Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloys 2013; Boise, Idaho; June 2013 for 4 - 5 days
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Peter Mullner, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 02/28/2014
* USD 5,000.00

Ferromagnetic shape memory alloys are multifunctional materials that exhibit
coupling between magnetic and structural order, producing very large magnetic-
field-induced strains. The magnetic shape memory (MSM) effect arises through the
magnetic-field-induced motion of twin boundaries. Compared to other
technologies, MSM actuators offer several benefits. They are simple and reliable
to construct; they provide a stroke that is 100 times longer than piezoelectric
materials with a fast response time (0.1 ms); they generate a large work output,
offer high position accuracy and dynamic range, and consume little power. Recent
advances in the field of MSM alloys is the topic of the International Conference
on Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloys (ICFSMA'13) to be held during the 2nd or
3rd week of June, 2013, in Boise, ID. This is the Fourth International Symposium
on Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloys, the first of which was held in 2007.
ICFSMA has become the preeminent conference for international researchers in the
field of magnetic shape memory alloys. NSF funds will be used to offset the
expenses of graduate students, postdoctoral associates, junior faculty, and
selected invited speakers to attend the meeting. The funds will also be used to
publicize and promote the conference via a web page. This conference will
provide participants with an overview of MSM research from magneto-mechanics to
more recently discovered properties and phenomena in a variety of material
morphologies, including thin films, micro-systems, composites, foams and mats.
Magneto-caloric and baro-caloric effects will also be covered. The participants
will be expected to discuss the most current research in the field in order to
advance the uses of these multifunctional materials between potential academic
and industrial partners. Modeling and simulation, from the atomic to the
microscale to inform theory, structure, and magnetism, will be emphasized.
Interest among women will be especially encouraged in a field which is currently
dominated largely by male researchers.