* 1217563
* Development of Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Kinetic Transport Models and Control Problems with State Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 11/10/2011,07/31/2014
* Yingda Cheng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 73,276.00

The objective of this project is to develop and analyze novel discontinuous
Galerkin (DG) methods for solving partial differential equations arising from
various application areas. The DG method is a class of finite element methods
using completely discontinuous piecewise polynomial space for the numerical
solution and the test functions. Those robust, compact, locally conservative
methods can treat arbitrarily unstructured meshes and are ideal for hp-adaptive
strategies. The good properties of the scheme call for further research in areas
that are traditionally not solved by DG methods. In this grant proposal, the PI
plans to conduct research in the following directions: (1) a positivity-
preserving DG method for solving the kinetic equations, including the Boltzmann
equations and Vlasov equations, (2) application of the proposed method to solar
cell/semiconductor device simulations and plasma physics, (3) a novel DG solver
for the Hamilton-Jacobi equations and its applications in control problems with
state constraints. The proposed activity lies between algorithm development,
analysis and applications. Developing robust, high-order accurate, cost-
efficient numerical algorithms for kinetic models and control problem is very
challenging, not only because of the high dimensionality of such models, but
also because of the fact that a deep understanding of the underlying physics is
required. The eventual goal is to produce solvers that are computationally
efficient and suit the need for applications. The PI's work arises from the
computational demand of real world applications. Many ideas developed in this
proposal will have straightforward applications and impacts in semiconductor
device simulations, high-efficiency fuel cell modeling, control problems and
plasma physics. The PI actively interacts with students and faculty members in
mathematics, physics, electrical engineering and chemistry departments. In
addition, the PI will integrate the project with the training of graduate
students in order to communicate in a broader context.