* 1217906
* AF: Small: Applied and Theoretical Algorithm Problems in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Danny Chen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 02/28/2018
* USD 460,000.00

This project aims to study an array of important computational geometry problems
in several applied areas such as medicine, biology, biomedical imaging, and data
mining, and to develop new algorithmic solutions for these problems in
biomedical applications. In addition, the project also seeks to investigate a
set of fundamental theoretical geometric problems and to forge new geometric
computing techniques.

Emerging biomedical imaging technologies and modalities have been
revolutionizing the field of disease diagnosis and prognosis, pushing a paradigm
shift in diagnosis and prognosis study and practice from qualitative to
quantitative and from tissue/structure level to molecular/cellular level.
Molecular/cellular imaging holds the promise of transforming modern diagnosis
and prognosis, and offers numerous advantages over the traditional practice.
This project will apply geometric computing techniques and data mining methods
to develop new algorithms for vital cell identification and analysis problems in
microscopy images, such as computing and analyzing the architectural structures
of dendritic cells and other types of cells in multi-spectral microscopy images
of tumor-draining lymph nodes for prognosis of breast cancer, and detecting and
classifying cells in histology images of joint tissue for diagnosis of
rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases. Radiation therapy/surgery is
a major modality for modern cancer treatment. This project will design new
algorithms for an intriguing type of geometric motion planning problems that
seek a set of paths to cover target tumor regions under special constraints and
criteria. These problems arise in dynamic Gamma Knife radiosurgery and are at
the core of a novel radiosurgery approach for breast cancer treatment. Besides,
the project will develop new algorithmic techniques for solving a number of
theoretical problems that are among the most fundamental tasks in computational
geometry, such as computing optimal paths, visibility, Voronoi diagrams,
geodesic diameters and centers, geometric clustering, and shape approximation.
The research plan of the project includes a crucial component of algorithm
implementation, experimentation, evaluation, software development, and practical
applications. This research will integrate and enhance the power of computer
algorithms and modern biomedicine to solve critical applied and theoretical
problems in computational geometry and biomedical applications, and help improve
the quality of life in today's society.