* 1217247
* EXP: Collaborative Research: WeatherBlur
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Ruth Kermish-Allen, Island Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2014
* USD 604,127.00

The PIs are studying and refining use of infrastructure support for an online
learning community that engages local students, teachers, fishermen, and
scientists in rural communities in a non-hierarchical learning environment. The
team is testing the efficacy of and refining an online platform that supports
inquiry in the context of place-based education. They are investigating how
these different populations learn together with each other and seek to determine
what influences their understanding of STEM concepts and dialogues, and they are
working towards a pedagogy that combines the best elements of each population's
needs and potential contributions so that a true learning community can develop.
The technological innovation is an infrastructure for community learning.
Research looks at information diffusion, emergent communication networks,
learning among each of the communities, and participation, with the aim of
understanding affordances and challenges that must be addressed in making such
learning opportunities work effectively for all. The effort will be carried out
in a variety of locales -- six in Maine and two in coastal Alaska. Each of these
is rural and in many ways disconnected, and each is experiencing shifts in
weather and climate that are affecting the local ecosystems and livelihoods of
residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The endeavor looks at the ways technology can be
used to foster sophisticated learning and access to resources that is otherwise
unavailable in these detached and often impoverished communities. The project
aims to show how to bring science home to a community, using its issues and
resources to make science relevant, hopefully leading to renewed interest in
science among older residents and interest and understanding among students and
teachers. Over the long term, PIs are seeking to develop a model for place-based
non-hierarchical learning communities that might be put to use in a variety of
places, each with its own community issues and resources. Several populations of
learners are addressed: school children (K-8), who can learn about science in
the context of enterprises going on around them in the community; fishermen, who
contribute their experiences and wisdom but may not know the science behind what
they experience; other community members with similar roles; parents; and
teachers. Added in will be scientists, who may or may not come from the same
community, who comment on the data collection and analysis and interpretations
being done by the community. Scientists, too, will be learners, as they will
need to learn how to communicate well with the target populations.