* 1217963
* CIF: SMALL: Circles of Trust: An Axiomatic Construction of Clustering in Asymmetric Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Alejandro Ribeiro, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 07/31/2016
* USD 305,215.00

This project develops an axiomatic theory of hierarchical clustering for
asymmetric networks as is typical of trust propagation. Say, for example, that
Miranda trusts Billy who trusts Ariel who trusts Miranda, but there has not been
enough interactions in the opposite direction to establish trust. When these
three people meet, shall they trust each other? The answer to this question is
equivalent to the determination of whether Miranda, Billy, and Ariel are part of
the same cluster: their circle of trust. The axioms of value, influence, and
transformation are postulated. The Axiom of Value says that in a two-node
network the nodes cluster at resolution equal to the maximum dissimilarity
between them. The Axiom of Influence says that no clusters are formed at
resolutions that do not allow bidirectional paths to be formed. The Axiom of
Transformation states that if we consider a network and reduce all pairwise
dissimilarities, the level at which two nodes become part of the same cluster is
not larger than the level at which they were clustered together in the original
network. Generic properties of any method that satisfies these axioms are
explored and specific methods that abide by these axioms are derived. To enrich
the axiomatic exploration of asymmetric clustering an application thrust and
three theory thrusts are pursued. The application thrust explores the formation
of circles of trust in social networks and the design of protocols to establish
trust in technological networks. The theory thrusts will study alternative
axiomatic formulations, stability of asymmetric hierarchical clustering
algorithms, and the determination of algorithms to compute hierarchical
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational agenda is integrated into the
Market and Social Systems Engineering (MKSE) program at the University of
Pennsylvania. The MKSE program is an undergraduate course of study that fully
integrates the disciplines needed to design and analyze the complex networks
that are reshaping our society. Given the importance of trust in these networks
the research undertaken in the context of this project is incorporated into
classes in the MKSE program. The excitement an idea like the formalization of
trust propagation generates is further exploited to draw attention to the MKSE
and Systems Engineering programs from the wider academic community. These ideas
are part of a long term effort on the part of the PI to contribute to the
closing of the excitement, challenge, and discipline gaps.&lt;br/&gt;