* 1217182
* I-Corps:  Microparticle Formulations to Combat Unintended Infections
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Horst von Recum, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Although the team's lab and others have demonstrated the capacity to use
molecular affinities to control the rate of release of drugs, these observations
have not been translated to commercial or clinical successes. The novelty of
this work is that at the completion of the proposed research the concept of
affinity-based delivery will be closer to commercial reality as it will address
some of the barriers to customer acceptance, such as separating the delivery
technology from the implanted device. This work will be transformative in
assisting future researchers in tuning drug delivery rates to those much slower
than currently available. Primarily this will be toward delivery of antibiotics,
but the team is poised toward application in other delivery areas. The proposed
research also has relevance to pharmaceutics and pharmacology, chemistry and
biomaterials.

Every year there are about 21 million acute surgical wounds, 500,000 burns with
100,000 requiring hospitalization, 6 million chronic wounds and 1.5 million
diabetic foot ulcers. In spite of the many advances in wound care products, the
impact of infections and related complications just in burn patients result in
12,000 deaths and an $11billion impact upon the US healthcare system annually.
The novel film of the team's drug delivery polymer will reduce wound infections
and provide hospitals with an alternative that will lower costs and decrease
patient suffering. In addition to directly addressing the significant problem of
infections, the team's film CD solution will be able to multiplex other
therapeutics such as growth factors and other critical molecules in a sustained
tunable delivery system. Films incorporating therapeutics will have applications
in orthopedics, cardiovascular and oral indications. Currently there are no
similar products so film CD-therapeutics will be first in class.