* 1217738
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Graphene Circuits for Analog, Mixed-Signal, and RF Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Kartik Mohanram, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Graphene transistors are widely considered exciting candidates for analog,
mixed-signal, and radio frequency systems in high-frequency applications. This
collaborative research project is aimed at the design, development, and
demonstration of monolithically integrated graphene circuits for radio frequency
and analog mixed-signal systems. It will add to the core knowledge of the
principles of circuit design based on ambipolar graphene field-effect
transistors, with an emphasis on amplifiers, phase detectors, and comparators -
three promising candidate solutions for practical radio frequency applications.
Through closely coordinated theoretical, computational, and experimental
efforts, it will be demonstrated that such graphene circuits can not only reduce
the complexity of the electronic circuits, but also realize larger bandwidth,
higher frequency, and lower power consumption than state-of-the-art circuits
implemented with conventional semiconductor materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this project includes technical advances required to harness
the early science of graphene transistors into practical solutions for radio
frequency applications. The graphene circuits to be designed and demonstrated in
this project can be used in consumer electronics and communication gadgets such
as smart-phones as well as in radars and wireless sensors. The unique material
properties of graphene combined with the innovative circuit designs that exploit
these properties are expected to lead to major increase in the performance of
the radio frequency devices as well as a reduction in their weight and power
consumption. Another core outcome of this project with broad technological
impact will be an integrated test-bed and web-based resources to facilitate
research in graphene electronics. Through collaborations with a broad range of
academic, industry, and government investigators, this collaborative effort will
strengthen ties between the device, circuit, and radio frequency communities,
and accelerate convergence to key design parameters essential for the large
scale integration and application of graphene electronics. The project plan will
help in educating undergraduate and graduate students in technical disciplines
in both participating universities. The project will produce a positive impact
on educating students underrepresented in science and engineering via their
early involvement in the practically relevant computational and experimental
research.