* 1217100
* EXP: SiMSAM: Bridging Student, Scientific, and Mathematical Models with Expressive Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Michelle Wilkerson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 546,353.00

The purpose of this project is to shed light on two important questions in
science education and cyberlearning: (1) How can we study and support the ways
in which students learn to use simulation and data analysis technologies as
tools of scientific discourse? (2) What is the pedagogical potential of such an
approach? The project explores the feasibility of a novel web-based modeling
environment, SiMSAM, that will allow students in grades 5-8 to easily produce
dynamic Stop-Action Motion animations that illustrate scientific events using
everyday materials (e.g., construction paper, cotton balls, drawing, etc.) with
which they are already familiar; analogous computer simulations using a novel
visual interface that allows them to import and "give instructions" to images
from their original animations; collect, analyze, and graph data generated by
their simulations; and share, trade, and test their creations. Students use
SiMSAM to explore kinetic molecular phenomena by completing activities that
invite them to represent "unseen" events involving air pressure, sound
propagation, and evaporation. Analysis focuses on new forms of learning afforded
by the tool (especially the adoption of simulation and data analysis as tools of
scientific discourse) and identifying potential shifts in students' reasoning
about causal mechanism in the modeled phenomena, their adoption of kinetic
molecular theory as a conceptual model, and their understanding of the nature of
scientific models in STEM disciplines. The project integrates contemporary
learning theory regarding the value of students' productive resources for
reasoning about scientific and mathematical topics, model-based approaches in
science and mathematics education, and the importance of computational
simulation as a pedagogical and professional tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will prototype new technologies that will allow middle-school students
to learn science through scientific modeling, an approach with potential for
promoting deep understanding of the mechanisms underlying phenomena in the
world. The software, called SimSAM, allows students to create animations and
simulations of phenomena related to molecular kinetics - an important content
area across grades K-16. The technology uses cross-platform, web-based
technologies that do not require a special device or download and will thus be
easily usable in schools without the need to download specialized software
applications. The project's products will include curriculum materials for
promoting learning the particle theory of matter and software that can
eventually become a robust toolkit for students to engage with a wide variety of
dynamic scientific phenomena across the science curriculum.