* 1217053
* Collaborative Research: Sparse spectral-tau methods for binary neutron star initial data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,10/31/2015
* Richard Price, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 10/31/2015
* USD 78,927.00

Binary neutron star inspiral is the most certain source of gravitational waves
detectable by Earth-based observatories like the US LIGO project, and
simulations of such binaries should facilitate eventual detections. These
simulations require initial conditions: solutions to the initial value problem
of general relativity for the coupled gravity-matter system. The conformal thin
sandwich method is an excellent approach for solving the initial value problem;
however, although not an intrinsic assumption of the method, in practice the
approach has assumed conformal flatness (as have other valuable approaches).
Conformal flatness yields unphysical junk radiation. By numerically constructing
helically symmetric solutions to the Einstein equations, the PI will extract
initial data (or conformal thin sandwich trial data) which does not rely on
conformal flatness, and therefore contains the correct initial gravitational
wave content. The mixed PDEs arising from the helical reduction of the Einstein
equations (or their approximation in the post-Minkowski formalism) will be
solved with innovative techniques: sparse modal spectral-tau methods with new
preconditioning strategies. In part, these strategies may rely on randomized
algorithms for the interpolative decomposition. Spectral methods deliver superb
accuracy for smooth problems(neutron star spacetimes are smooth almost
everywhere), and sparsity affords a fast matrix-vector multiply when using a
Krylov-subspace method to iteratively solve a linear system. Whereas the
preconditioning of nodal (collocation) spectral methods is well studied, less is
known about modal preconditioning. Our techniques have been successfully applied
to models of the binary neutron star problem. Moreover, the problem's physical
structure has already been explored with different, but limited, techniques.

This project is to combine two sets of techniques (each already developed) and
further develop the first set (spectral-tau methods), in order to obtain new
results for a leading problem in gravitational wave physics. The PI will develop
these mathematical methods by applying them to the specific neutron star problem
described above. This strategy of specificity is often used in the development
of techniques, which then prove to be more general. Because the scientific
problem is of great interest, much is known about it, and results therefore
exist withwhich comparisons can be made. These comparisons facilitate the
development of mathematical algorithms. Conversely, new mathematical methods
deliver more and/or better solutions which enhances scientific understanding.