* 1217699
* SHF: Small: Towards Regulatory Compliance Software Engineering with UCON_LEGAL
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Ana Anton, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Software engineers need improved tools and methods for translating complex legal
regulations into workable information technology systems. Compliance with legal
requirements is an essential element in trustworthy systems. The research
proposed herein will advance the cutting edge for creating more accurate,
efficient, and reliable RCSE (Regulatory Compliance Software Engineering),
resulting in compliant software systems. System specifications typically
concentrate on system-level entities, whereas legal discussions emphasize
fundamental rights and obligations discursively. This work bridges three
cultures of scholarship and research: software specification, law, and access
control. By empowering software developers and policy makers to better
understand regulatory texts and the access controls specified within these
texts, current and future software systems will be better aligned with the law.

There are three main expected results of this work: (1) Framework, methodology
and heuristics to identify UCONLEGAL components in legal texts; (2) extended TLA
(Temporal Logic of Actions) rules from UCONABC and mapping of predicates,
actions, states, variables and obligations between UCONLEGAL and UCONABC; (3)
validated and extended role-based access controls to meet healthcare and
financial legal requirements through further development of UCONLEGAL. The
impacts of this work are expected to be far reaching; law and regulations govern
the collection, use, transfer and removal of information from software systems
in many sectors of society, and this research explicitly calls for models and
theories for analyzing and reasoning about security and privacy in a regulatory
and legal context.