* 1217890
* AF: Small:Efficient Data Management Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Samir Khuller, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2016
* USD 358,000.00

Within the last decade, with the growth of video on-demand applications and the
explosion of data collected via sensors and other devices, computation over
massive data sets is becoming the ubiquitous norm. This development calls for a
deeper understanding of several issues specific to such contexts. The first
issue is one of data placement; when data is located more closely to the demand,
the need for network resources is reduced. The second issue pertains to energy
minimization: how can one develop algorithmic methods to make data processing
more efficient? Both of these issues lead to a host of interesting questions in
the vein of scheduling and facility location type problems. In an effort to
address these issues, this project focuses on the development of algorithms that
manage data storage for processing, with energy efficiency as the primary
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the prior scheduling literature
assumes a job-centric perspective -- algorithms are developed to optimize
tardiness, completion time, makespan, etc. In contrast, this work is motivated
by a system-centric view in which utilizing resources in an "efficient'' way is
of the utmost priority, subject to individual jobs being completed in a
"satisfactory'' manner. Such efficiencies are primarily manifested in the form
of the energy cost incurred by the system. These problems are particularly
eminent in the context of large scale storage devices and data centers. The main
focus is on data of all types, ranging from multimedia data stored on a
collection of disks to data collected and stored in a distributed storage
system. The amount of data to be stored and efficiently accessed is increasing
at an unsustainable rate. The costs for managing this data are expected in turn
to grow significantly. The main question is how can one develop scheduling
algorithms to manage this data effectively and
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data centers are fast becoming integral to
society and have transformed everything from social networking to human
communication to scientific collaboration, computation, and data exchange. This
research will lead to increased efficiencies in this critical infrastructure.
The project will train graduate students in conducting research both at
universities and through internships at industrial research labs during the
summer. Extensive mentoring and involvement of undergraduate students and women
is expected. Over the last few years, the PI has developed a new course on
"Science behind Computing'' and is working on a book for this course, the
primary purpose of which is to educate the general public about important
scientific concepts related to computing in the 21st century.