* 1217524
* STTR Phase I:  Robust Emergency Data (RED) Link
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Hans Schantz, Q-Track Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 141,261.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to
implement a Robust Emergency Data (RED) Link. Recent breakthroughs in wireless
communication collectively referred to as multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
technology exploit multiple "dimensions" in space, frequency, time, antenna
polarization, and antenna radiation patterns to create parallel or multiplexed
channels. This project aims to investigate an aspect of MIMO: exploiting near-
field components in the reactive-field region close to transmitting antennas.
This project explores novel near-field MIMO to exploit low-frequency RF spectrum
as a medium for short-range, robust, bidirectional wireless communication links.
Long-wavelength (&gt; 300m) low-frequency (&lt;1 MHz) signals tend to be more
penetrating, more multipath resistant, and more robust in cluttered environments
than conventional short wavelength high-frequency links. The proposed technique
provides a novel bandwidth-enhanced MIMO communication method and a robust
diversity communication method which will be virtually free from severe fading.
The anticipated result is a RED Link capable of supporting two-way voice and
telemetry even in high multipath environments. Operating within FCC Part 15
constraints, the system will function out to ranges of 50m or
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes enhancing understanding of near-field wireless systems, as well
as uses spanning multiple emergency communications applications. Approximately
100 firefighters die in the line of duty each year. Improved communications
systems could save some of these lives. Every year, workers die in hazardous
environments, like mines and chemical plants because rescuers are unable to
contact or locate them. Similarly, about 10% of American casualties in combat
are caused by "friendly" fire. A system that can provide robust communications
for warfighters, particularly in urban combat, could prevent some of these
casualties. Finally, near-field communications (NFC) is an emerging RF
technology with the potential to revolutionize short-range, high-security data
links. The proposed effort could dramatically improve the capacity of these
wireless links