* 1217765
* CGV: Small: Measurement-based Editing of Reflectance Properties in Photographs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Pieter Peers, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 498,498.00

This project endeavors to answer the fundamental research question whether it is
possible to alter the appearance of specific reflectance properties in a
photograph of a scene by only partially characterizing the appearance of the
scene via measurements. Specifically, the research team investigates novel
appearance editing techniques that minimize the modeling effort, while
maintaining maximum editing flexibility and at the same time impose minimal
restrictions on the scene, while guaranteeing a physically plausible editing
result. A common application of appearance modeling is to digitally clone a
real-world scene, then change some scene properties, and finally revisualize the
scene. Despite the enormous advances in appearance modeling, it still requires
significant effort and expertise to create a digital clone of a physical scene.
The effort needed to make the desired alterations to the scene often pales in
comparison to the required appearance modeling effort. This project focuses on
three reflectance phenomena suited for measurement-based editing: translucency,
surface albedo, and surface reflectance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program has a far-reaching impact beyond computer graphics. It has the potential
to impact product development and pre-visualization, virtual reconstruction of
archaeological artifacts, forensics, virtual cosmetics, fine-arts and
entertainment, and other applications that require the visualization of an
object/subject with altered reflectance conditions. Besides supporting the
traditional research roles of graduate students, undergraduate education is
enhanced by hands-on research experience and the incorporation of research
results into existing courses.