* 1217929
* HCC: Small: New Infrastructure Concepts for Robust Handling of Inputs with Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Scott Hudson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2016
* USD 535,119.00

The conventional software currently used to handle input in nearly all modern
graphical user interfaces (GUIs) is effective and highly evolved. This has the
advantages of promoting reuse rather than reinvention of interaction techniques,
and making it easy to create GUis, even for those with limited programming
ability. However, these successful software abstractions assume the inputs
reported to the system accurately reflect the actions of the user - that input
is certain rather than uncertain. Unfortunately, this does not hold for some of
the most interesting new input technologies including naturalistic inputs such
as free space gestures (e.g., as sensed by the Kinect depth camera), pen input
(including handwriting, gestures, and free hand drawing), touch input, sensors
for context, and voice input. Some of these new technologies contain inherent
uncertainty, such as when a finger touch area (that the user cannot see) is much
larger than the pixels of a display. Others make use of recognizers for input
and typically produce estimates of what might have occurred. Since conventional
methods of input handling have no way to manage uncertainty in input, many of
them force uncertainty to be resolved before input processing even starts. For
example, the location of input from a touch screen may be represented as certain
using a single point (its centroid). But when uncertainty information is thrown
away, interfaces can quickly become brittle; small recognition errors can derail
the interaction and destroy the user experience. As a result, these new and very
promising forms of input have often proven difficult to use to their full
potential. The PI's goal in this project is to overcome this problem by creating
a redesigned input-handling infrastructure, which will robustly model, and make
use of, inputs with uncertainty. It will do this by treating all input, and all
UI actions stemming from that input, on a probabilistic basis, entertaining
multiple possible interpretations of input (and all its consequences over time),
along with estimates of the likelihood of each interpretation. As a result, when
decisions need to be made and irreversible actions undertaken, systems will have
a sound basis for choosing among interpretations. Rather than starting with
completely new input concepts, the PI's approach is to extend conventional input
abstractions with support for uncertainty. Normally, a single certain input
event is dispatched to a single interactor, which interprets its meaning to
track its own interactive state and eventually request actions. Now, each of
these parts of the input process will be done probabilistically. An estimated
probability distribution will be tracked over input alternatives that might have
occurred, interactors which might have received that input, states that
interactors might be in, and actions that interactors might request as a result.
These probability distributions can then be used to make informed decisions
about when, whether, and which actions to actually undertake. To hide the
complexity of maintaining each of these distributions over time from the UI
programmer, the PI will employ a Monte Carlo representation of a probability
distribution (i.e., a weighted set of samples each indicating the probability of
one definite value). Crucially, this representation will allow the code to
simply execute traditional (certain) input processing steps multiple times -
once for each sample in the relevant probability distribution(s). This hides
nearly all the complexity associated with uncertainty, and allows programmers to
use their current conceptual models, and even code nearly identical to their
current practices, for most aspects of input
handling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Project outcomes will radically
change the ease with which readily available new input technologies can be
incorporated into interactive systems, and thus will have wide impact in
expanding our ability to build and deploy interfaces with new forms of input. As
part of this research, the PI will develop working solutions for both graphical
user interfaces and context-aware applications. He will also create and widely
distribute a full teaching toolkit which embodies these concepts (where the term
"teaching" is used in the same spirit that Pascal was a teaching programming
language - it used good concepts and the best practices of the time; it was
conceptually clean, yet suitable for real work). This teaching toolkit will be
integrated into educational activities at the PI's institution, and curricular
modules will be developed which should allow this to be carried to other
universities.