* 1217218
* Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for Simulating Complex Coastal Watersheds and Floodplains
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ethan Kubatko, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 135,000.00

Accurate and efficient computational modeling of rainfall flooding events
presents significant challenges. These challenges are primarily due to the
complex topology of coastal watersheds and floodplains, and in particular urban
environments, which include numerous features relevant to flooding such as
small-scale drainage channels, piping networks, etc, that receive stormwater
from both the landfall of storm surge and runoff/overland flow due to rainfall.
The primary objective of this project is improve the predictive capability of
coastal hydrodynamic models for flooding in complex coastal watersheds and
floodplains using a novel multi-physics modeling paradigm. An adaptive multi-
physics/multi-dimensional modeling approach will be investigated that can
adaptively switch between various models in order to simultaneously optimize
physical correctness and computational efficiency. The development of such an
approach, along with the supporting concepts and numerical tools that will make
its application to full-scale problems possible, is the main goal of the
proposed research. This work will be explored in the context of discontinuous
Galerkin methods, building and expanding on the PIs' extensive work in the area
of shallow water modeling using high-order discontinuous Galerkin
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent storm events, for example Hurricane Irene,
which led to extensive flooding along much of the U.S. East Coast, have
demonstrated the severe vulnerability of coastal lowlands and watersheds to
storm surge combined with torrential rainfall. These types of disasters
highlight the rising importance of effective emergency management and hazard
mitigation, and the need for advanced, physics-based models to better understand
their impacts. The potential for future storms with destructive flooding in low-
lying coastal areas due to inland storm surge combined with torrential rainfall
is high. Observations show an increase in hurricane intensity in the North
Atlantic since the 1970s and research suggests continued increases in storm
intensity and significant potential for heavy rainfall in many regions. The
devastating flooding related to these events, along with predicted rapid coastal
development, will result in greater coastal risk in the future and poses serious
challenges to physical infrastructure, water quality, and sustainability of
coastal communities. The research under this project will have a significant
impact on the development of the next generation of coastal hydrodynamic models.
Additional impacts resulting from the proposed activity include 1) a better
scientific understanding and ability to predict the complex flooding scenarios
due to combined storm surge propagation and torrential rainfall/runoff events,
which can lead to more informed decision-making and emergency management
planning. that will help protect the coastal population and infrastructure; 2)
the education and training of graduate students and other researchers through
courses, seminars, workshops and direct involvement in the research. The project
will expose the students to multi-discplinary collaboration in computational
mathematics, civil engineering, hydrology, and coastal ocean science; and 3) the
transfer of technology and findings to federal agencies such as the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
various state and local agencies, coastal industries, and other academic
institutions.