* 1217553
* SHF: Small: Redesigning Manycore Computer Architecture for the Mega-core Data Center
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* David Wentzlaff, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Trends in computing have favored moving computation into centralized locations,
called data centers. This centralization is occurring because the aggregation of
computing allows better amortization of personnel managing the computers,
economies of scale in computing equipment purchasing, and improved economies of
scale in power delivery, buildings, and cooling. Coupled with these benefits,
companies that run large data centers have begun leasing spare computational
capacity to smaller companies, thereby enabling small companies to experience
the benefits of high quality and high availability computing. Small companies
can leverage these resources to have explosive growth on the Internet without
the need to deploy data centers of their own. Current data centers commonly use
commodity computer chips designed for desktop and laptop computers. This
research, in contrast, explores how to optimize computer chips specifically for
the data center. In addition, this research examines how the computer chip
itself can be modified to enable more efficient sharing of resources between
different customers of large data center providers and how computer chip
architecture can be modified to support new economic models such as leasing of
computer resources. This work is important because it will decrease the cost of
creating large data centers, enable better transparency in billing for
computational resources in large-scale shared data centers, and allow data
centers to be more energy efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research attacks
several of the key challenges in building manycore processors optimized for
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Cloud computing systems. This work breaks
down arbitrary boundaries between cores in a manycore system by allowing
resources from one processor core to be utilized by another processor core. This
can enable the hardware resources provided to a particular virtual machine to be
matched to the needs of that particular virtual machine. In addition, this work
is investigating how to optimize cache hierarchies for thousands of independent
data and instruction streams to enable more efficient memory hierarchies, and
this work is characterizing how different architectural resources are utilized
when shared between multiple Cloud-specific applications.