* 1217240
* Collaborative Research: Developing the Cyberinfrastructure for a National Archaeological Site Database
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Eric Kansa, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 141,829.00

With National Science Foundation support, a team of university, public, and
private sector researchers will develop protocols to integrate archaeological
information from large areas of North America into a unified database, and make
these capabilities available to a wide variety of scholarly, resource
management, and public audiences. The primary team consists of Dr. David G.
Anderson and Mr. Stephen Yerka of the University of Tennessee, Dr. Eric Kansa of
Open Context &amp; the UC Berkeley School of Information, Dr. Sarah Whitcher
Kansa of the Alexandria Archive Institute, and Dr. Joshua Wells of Indiana
University South Bend. Researchers and land managers at a number of state and
federal agencies, public and private universities, and private companies will
assist in this effort, both by providing information and evaluating how it may
be best used for research and management purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts
to collect and compile archaeological data have a long history, and information
about archaeological sites and collections is maintained by every state and
territory. Only rarely, however, have these data been compiled and examined at
large geographic scales, especially those crosscutting state lines, and never to
the extent and for the research and management purposes proposed in this
project. Data from some 15 to 20 states (&gt;half a million sites) east of the
Mississippi will be integrated using an informatics framework that promotes
extensions and reuse by government personnel in state and federal agencies, and
domestic and international researchers. Linkage of site file and other datasets
will facilitate studies of past human adaptation spanning large areas, and lead
to greater collaboration between archaeologists and scientists in other
disciplines. As examples, the linkage of archaeological data at broad new scales
will permit, for the first time, the exploration of exciting new research
topics, such as how the human populations in North America responded to climate
change, population growth, and/or anthropogenic environmental issues over the
past 13,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of output online in
the form of maps and data tables (at significantly reduced spatial resolution,
to protect sensitive locations) will enhance public awareness, education, and
appreciation for scientific research in general and archaeology in particular.
The demonstration that primary archaeological data can be integrated and used to
address fundamental questions at such scales will stimulate similar efforts
worldwide. Finally, by creating translating routines rather than dictating
procedures, this project will foster archaeological cooperation through
cyberinfrastructure with a high ratio of benefits to costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help to achieve NSF goals for research
and education. It will foster novel networking and data integration among
multiple partners, as well as research and educational activities across
multiple disciplines and geopolitical boundaries. The project will fund graduate
and undergraduate students, and will assist their training in critical
information management skills for the 21st century. The project addresses head-
on a major challenge facing research communities worldwide: how to link
disconnected and incompatible data systems in such a way that the combined data
are useful for important scientific research.