* 1217375
* AF: Small: Foundational Research in Communication Complexity and Its Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amit Chakrabarti, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 440,000.00

Communication complexity is the study of computational problems where the input
is split amongst multiple locations, described as parties playing a
communication game. These parties must communicate with one another according to
a protocol to solve the problem of interest, while minimizing the amount of
communication (number of bits exchanged). Besides its intrinsic motivation
(enhanced by the coming "cloud computing" era), communication complexity derives
its importance from its implications in all sorts of other areas of theoretical
computer science, even ones that do not directly involve communication; examples
are circuit complexity, data streaming, query complexity, property testing, and
game theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the PI and his students will
investigate a number of concrete communication games, attempting not just to
establish new bounds on specific problems, but also to broaden the foundations
of the field through new techniques and paradigms. Results and ideas thus
discovered will be applied to some of the areas mentioned above, with a
particular focus on data stream algorithms. Some representative research goals
are as follows. &lt;br/&gt;(1) Developing the theory of Merlin-Arthur
communication, with a view towards applications to data stream algorithms that
interact with a powerful but untrusted helper. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Deepening our
understanding of a number of graph streaming problems, either through new
communication lower bounds or improved algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Relating the
recent technique of information complexity to older established techniques for
analyzing communication complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader imapcts of
the award include the training of up to two graduate students who may work on
any aspect of communication complexity or its applications, and the design and
teaching of a new graduate-level course on communication protocols and
complexity. Results obtained will be disseminated at international conferences,
targeted workshops and seminars at other institutions.