* 1217751
* CIF: Small: Beyond Sparsity - Exploiting Saliency in Compressive and Adaptive Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Jarvis Haupt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2016
* USD 308,951.00

The presence of salient features or anomalous behavior is a characteristic
shared in many modern application domains. For example, an anomalous region in
an MRI image could indicate the presence of a tumor or lesion; accurately
locating conspicuous features in perhaps very high-dimensional images is a
critical step in automated surveillance; and identification of anomalies in
network traffic is a crucial step in detecting various attacks. Each of these
applications is illustrative of an underlying theme, where subsets of data or
image sub-regions are deemed interesting based on their relationship with (or,
more precisely, their deviation from) typical behavior exhibited by the bulk of
the data. In this sense, saliency can be understood as a natural generalization
of the notion of sparsity, but one that is intrinsic to the data
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in compressive and adaptive
sensing have demonstrated that tremendous improvements in sensing resource
efficiency can be realized when inferring high-dimensional data or objects that
possess simple, low-dimensional representations. This research develops new
theory and methods extending resource-efficient compressive and adaptive sensing
techniques, which exploit sparsity as a model for data parsimony, to procedures
that exploit saliency as a low-dimensional model for certain high-dimensional
data. In particular, this effort (1) advances the current state-of-the-art
theory and methods in compressive and adaptive sensing by developing a novel set
of efficient saliency-based sensing methods, (2) demonstrates the robustness of
these methods to uncertainties and noise, (3) integrates these new developments
into the curriculum at the University of Minnesota, and (4) leverages emerging
mobile device technologies as a novel vehicle for demonstrating and broadly
disseminating the results of this effort to potentially new and diverse
audiences.