* 1217007
* Workshop:   STEM Outreach, Fostering Interactions between Educators from Local Colleges/Universities and K-12 Schools; April 21 San Diego, CA &amp; April 20 - Boston, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Peter Kennelly, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 70,450.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology's outreach initiative named Hands-on Outreach to Promote Engagement in
Science (HOPES) will promote and facilitate the establishment of partnerships
between biochemistry and molecular biology faculty and science teachers from
K-12 schools. The HOPES project will provide support for the creation and
implementation of hands-on science learning activities. The workshop
participants will be provided with the opportunity to meet potential
collaborators and apply for funding that will support the purchase of materials
for use in the K-12 classrooms. The workshop will be summarized into three
parts, with each one having a specific goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;HOPES initiative began in 2011 and resulted in 44 proposals of
new or developing partnerships between college/university faculty and K-12
teachers. In addition, the workshops have the potential to impact science
learning for many students who may not have the opportunity to experience
quality instruction and experiences in STEM fields. The workshop's target
audience is K-12 science classrooms with a high percentage of underrepresented
minority students. The activities that develop from these workshops and seed
grants will have a significant impact on science interest of students from
underrepresented groups.