* 1217637
* STTR Phase I:  Photonics Enabled Extreme Bandwidth Wireless Communications Spectrum Manager
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Kristian Merkel, S2 Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to use and
adapt a photonics based extreme bandwidth RF and Microwave spectrum analyzer as
a real-time spectral manager for wireless communication systems. The approach is
enabled by a spatial-spectral holographic based spectrum analyzer developed by
the STTR team that can have instantaneous processing bandwidth of 40 GHz or
greater while retaining with high spectral resolution and low latency (&lt;&lt;1
ms) output. This sensor hardware will be applied to wideband, real-time spectral
management of wireless communications for operation in environments with new
spectral access regulatory models. When combined with low latency digital
processing, using specialized digital signal processing hardware such as field
programmable gate arrays and appropriate databases and software, the system will
allow continuous and simultaneous monitoring of all common wireless
communication bands for rapid distribution of channel occupancy data. Project
activities include: identifying the physical measurements and spectral
signatures needed for wideband spectrum management, implementing specialized
computer based algorithms to extract this information for real-time management,
and investigating advanced spatial-spectral optical signal processing
architectures to automatically recognize wireless signal characteristics such as
modulation formats that are beyond the current power spectrum measurement
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes uses in commercial wireless communication systems, RF test and
measurement, defense signal intelligence and communications, regulatory spectrum
management, and navigation and geo-location applications. The first commercial
impact is to enable dynamic identification and allocation of unused spectral
resources in real time, in order to maximize the efficiency and increase the
capacity of wireless networks. The large bandwidth and frequency scalability of
the spatial-spectral sensor technology could assist the growth of emerging radio
communication technologies in existing bands, and in emerging bands such as
E-band. Additionally, this technology could assist governmental spectrum
regulatory compliance enforcement, which could help to lead to changes in
spectrum allocation policy. Increased wireless capacity will help to enhance
access to broadband internet access, including to poor or rural areas, where the
capital costs of implementing physical infrastructure like fiber optic lines is
cost prohibitive (evidenced by the developing world's use of cellular phones
over landlines). Beyond communications, RF monitoring has several applications
ranging from electronic defense, to navigation and geo-location.