* 1217480
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effects of Early Colonialism on Indigenous Households of the Middle Fraser Canyon Region, British Columbia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Anna Prentiss, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 28,200.00

Using archaeological evidence that includes stone tools, animal and plant
remains, and household architecture, Lisa Michelle Smith will examine cultural
impacts of European colonization on indigenous peoples of the Middle Fraser
Canyon in British Columbia during the period of ca. 150-500 before present. This
work will be conducted under the direction of Dr. Anna Prentiss as part of Ms.
Smith's dissertation research. Middle Fraser Canyon villages peaked in size and
social complexity by ca. 1100-1200 before present, after which time they were
abandoned for 500-600 years and then reoccupied in the centuries just prior to
the coming of Europeans to the region. Ethnographers of the early 20th century
working in the Middle Fraser area describe a complex hunting and gathering
society with social class distinctions, private ownership of property and
resources, and extensive trade networks controlled by elites. However it is not
clear whether these cultural characteristics developed uniquely during the early
contact period or if they are a holdover from the time pre-dating 1000 years
ago. This proposed research seeks to address this problem by conducting
archaeological investigations of households at the S7i7stkn (Little Pit House)
and Bridge River sites, two housepit villages located within close proximity of
each other, situated on narrow terraces in the Bridge River valley. A single
house from each site will be excavated, each with prehistoric and historic
occupations. Ms. Smith's research will address in particular the role European
contact may have played in the development of complex socioeconomic and
political structures of indigenous households during the critical, yet under
researched, early colonial period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the effects of
colonialism on Mid-Fraser households are widely unknown, archaeological research
of social complexity during the late prehistoric period, prior to 1200 years
before present, continues to be informed by ethnographic data. This proposed
research will provide opportunity to reconstruct characteristics of the
political and socioeconomic structures associated with population influx and
development of the fur trade economy, allowing for more fine-grained
understanding of social complexity during the late prehistoric and historic
periods. More broadly this work will enhance understanding of hunter-gatherer
households and evolutionary processes associated with emergent social
complexity. It will investigate the role of individual decision making and the
effects it had on creating social ranking, regional trade networks, and the
development of privately owned property. This work will also add to discussions
of the viability of using ethnographic literature as a tool for directly
interpreting archaeological data from the deeper prehistoric
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Prentiss has had a twenty-year collaborative
relationship with local Mid-Fraser communities. This project will be a
continuation of that program, offering educational benefits to First Nations
students through training in archaeological excavation techniques. This will
allow them to directly engage with their heritage and contribute to creating
narratives of their past. University of Montana students will also take part in
this research allowing them to engage in the local community, participating in
activities such as a Lillooet language program, educational talks, and award
winning Xwisten heritage tours. This will inform discussions on how to build
strong relationships between archaeologists and native people and help create a
new generation of archaeologists that understand the value of collaborative
research. Additionally, this work will add to the body of literature regarding
complex hunter-gatherer and colonial studies and educate the general public
about First Nations history and culture.