* 1217444
* STTR Phase I:  Autonomous Cognitive Radios for Smart Communications for First Responders
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Kamil Agi, K&A Wireless, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,946.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a cognitive radio system to provide reliable wireless communications to first
responders. The ability to effectively use wireless is critical in emergency
incident management and has been a major issue since 9/11 - with
"interoperability" being the key phrase. The technology proposed is to develop a
cognitive communication system capable of adapting its mode of operation
autonomously according to the perceived needs of current situations to improve
the reliability of current technologies. The main capabilities of the proposed
system will be to: (1) operate autonomously and in multiple modes, (2) optimize
the system resources according to the current situation and user requirements,
(3) minimize interference to other communication systems in the area, and (4)
facilitate interoperability with existing and future communication systems. The
objectives are to develop a system architecture for the proposed autonomous
cognitive radio system, design and develop the cognitive engine for the proposed
system and develop the proof-of-concept hardware of the proposed system. These
objectives will address the main feasibility challenges
outlined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to transform current research efforts under the term of cognitive
radio into a unified research effort, based on a top-level system approach, with
clear future technology objectives. The approach will take the next steps to
help realize a cognitive and reconfigurable multi-service/standard and multi-
band operation, as well as enhanced wireless spectrum and power efficiency.
Furthermore, the proposed effort will reduce the hardware complexity, the number
of components, and provide a system at a lower cost in comparison to existing
technologies today. The commercialization effort will be focused on delivering
the autonomous cognitive technology to the first responder community, where
there is an identifiable need for reliable wireless data, wireless voice and
wireless video communications, especially in cluttered urban environments where
the RF environment is overdrawn, spectrum is at a premium and is, RF-wise,
extreme, at best. Finally, as part of the training of undergraduate and graduate
students throughout this effort, the findings of this project will be made
available to research and educational institutional to enable broader range of
future applications and innovations.