* 1217317
* EXP: Educating Teens to Understand Personal Health (GET-UP)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Cynthia Ching, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 550,000.00

This team is creating a new kind of video-game, one that incorporates the
changing characteristics of the person playing the game into the game play
itself. This provides game players (learners) with an alternate perspective on
their own capabilities and the effects and impacts of their choices and
behaviors. In this case, the game is aimed at children learning about health and
nutrition, and learners (adolescents and pre-adolescents) wear a wrist band that
captures personal-health data (e.g., heart rate, breathing) and incorporates
that data into the capabilities of the game player within the game. Game design
and game play are based on literatures on game design (especially for promoting
learning), embodied cognition, identity development, and effecting behavior
change. Research focuses on how learning, identity, and changes in real-life
behavior unfold over time and what it is about the game that is influencing or
driving those changes.

The U.S. experiences one of the highest rates of chronic disease in the world,
and health during childhood is a critical predictor of disease onset in later
adulthood. Technological innovations that can help children understand the
effects of their nutrition and behavior choices on health and that provide
information at times when children are interested in seeking that information
have potential to play a role in promoting good habits. This project is aiming
to create a video game that will be engaging enough to stimulate curiosity and
understanding of personal health status and of the effects of personal choices
on personal health. Ultimately, the goal is to learn more about how to instill
healthy habits early in life. While this project is aimed at promoting habits
that will lead to good health, what is learned from the investigation will have
potential to affect not only public health but also more basic understanding of
how habits develop, how to promote habit development, and how to design engaging
video games as vehicles for promoting the kind of learning that results in
behavior change.