* 1217006
* Collab. Research: Instability analysis of the split-step method on spatially-varying  backgrounds, with applications to optical telecommunications and Bose-Einstein condensation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Taras Lakoba, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 181,836.00

The operator-splitting, or split-step, method (SSM) is widely used to
numerically solve time-dependent partial differential equations arising in
diverse applications, from hydrodynamics to quantum mechanics. To minimize the
computational time, one needs to select the time step as large as possible. On
the other hand, the upper bound on the time step is often set by the requirement
that the numerical scheme be stable. The von Neumann analysis is used to obtain
such upper bounds for model problems where the coefficients are constant.
However, solutions of practically interesting equations are typically not
constant in space. To justify the use of the von Neumann analysis for such
problems, one often approximates non-constant coefficients by constant ones.
However, for the SSM, this approach fails. Recently, we proposed an alternative
approach to analyze the instability of the SSM when this method is used to
simulate a solution close to the soliton (i.e., a bell-shaped solution) of the
nonlinear Schroedinger equation. In this project, we will extend that analysis
to more practically relevant settings that involve two applications: fiber
optical telecommunications and Bose?Einstein condensates. This will provide an
understanding of the development of the numerical instability in problems with
essentially non-constant coefficients. We will then use this information to
propose modifications of the SSM with relaxed stability requirements. Clearly,
this will reduce the computational time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a systematic approach to studying a fundamental property "stability" of
a widely used numerical method, the SSM. A numerical method must be stable in
order to accurately model the physical process of interest. The current approach
to the stability analysis consists in approximating the simulated processes by
some constant values. We will not use this approximation, as we have
demonstrated that it leads to incorrect predictions regarding the performance of
the SSM. Our alternative approach will rely on a combination of techniques from
numerical analysis and the theory of linear differential equations. It will
provide an understanding of the performance limitations of the SSM. This, in
turn, will allow us to propose more efficient and reliable modifications of this
numerical method. The applications considered in this project will directly
impact the modeling of fiber-optic communication systems and low-temperature
atomic condensates. However, our approach will affect other applications of the
SSM, which include environmental modeling, hydrology, heat conduction, and
reacting flows. Moreover, the approach can be extended to related numerical
methods, which are used in other applications such as the modeling of the
interaction among molecules and chemical species through reactions and random
motion (diffusion).