* 1217385
* CSR: Small: Fault-Tolerant Distributed Software Transactional Memory: Theory, Protocols, and Java Package
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Binoy Ravindran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2016
* USD 416,000.00

The project is to develop protocols, mechanisms, and a Java implementation of
fault-tolerant distributed transactional memory (DTM). DTM promises to alleviate
the programmability, scalability, and performance challenges of lock-based
distributed concurrency control. Fault-tolerance is essential to DTM to cope
with node/network failures, and object replication is central toward achieving
this. Replication protocols must be scalable and ensure transactional
correctness and progress properties. The expected outcome is a novel replicated
DTM framework, whose key idea is to split transactions into two independent
phases with orthogonal responsibilities: 1) regular read/write phases, which
quickly look-up and fetch latest copies of required objects without concurrency
control, and 2) a request-commit phase, which does (distributed) concurrency
control. The project investigates the use of quorum-based replication protocols,
which maintain transactional metadata in read/write quorums, and do scalable
concurrency control by exploiting the quorum intersection property. The
replicated DTM framework and protocols are implemented in the open-source HyFlow
DTM Java package (hyflow.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fault tolerant DTM has
potential to improve both reliability and performance of a broad range of
advanced distributed computing applications, including defense systems. The
project has plans to transitioning this technology (techniques and HyFlow
implementation) to a production system of the US Department of Defense, to
leverage the benefits of fault-tolerant DTM. This is a direct potential economic
and social benefit of the research. Additionally, the project's results are
being incorporated into a graduate course at Virginia Tech that includes
students at Blacksburg, VA, scientists and engineers at US Naval Surface Warfare
Center Dahlgren Division (NSWCDD), VA through Virginia Tech's graduate outreach
program at NSWCDD, and students in the Middle East and North Africa through
Virginia Tech's VT-MENA program at Egypt.