* 1217223
* Beyond the Method of Regularized Stokeslets
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ricardo Cortez, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 120,000.00

The Method of Regularized Stokeslets is a numerical technique for the efficient
computation of the motion of immersed elastic filaments or boundaries in
incompressible Stokes flow. The method is based on desingularizing the
expression for the fluid velocity resulting from forces applied on surfaces,
curves or even scattered points. The main idea is to follow the derivation of
the fundamental solution of the Stokes equations but replacing the delta
function with a smooth approximation. The motivation for developing regularized
Stokeslets is twofold: (1) when forces are distributed over a surface in three
dimensions, the singular Stokeslet is integrable but numerical methods often
have difficulty computing accurately the flow at fluid points very near the
surface since the integrals have very spiky kernels (known as nearly-singular).
Regularizing the kernels provides a stable computational technique; (2) the
Stokes equations have more singular solutions derived from differentiating the
Stokeslet (Stokes doublets, dipoles, stresslets, rotlets, etc.). Their higher
singularity makes the integration over surfaces divergent but regularization
methods provide a way to use these elements in computations. The proposed work
extends the popular method of regularized Stokeslets in several ways. It
advances the theory of regularization methods, broadly defined to include the
systematic derivation of higher-order elements for the computationally efficient
modeling of swarms of microorganisms. The convergence of the method in the case
of solid bodies moving in the fluid is addressed based on error analysis and
corrections to the velocity field to improve the convergence rate. The theory
also includes desired properties that the blobs must satisfy in order to attain
the theoretical accuracy in computations, and to provide families of blobs that
satisfy these properties. The theory of regularized Stokeslets is expanded to
apply to other fluid models, such as the Brinkman equations for porous media and
models of channels with permeable walls. The work extends the methods for
applications with periodic boundary conditions in one, two or three coordinate
directions. The further advancement of the theory provides a richer and more
complete set of tools for modeling small-scale flows driven by forces,
microorganism motility, flows around particles near surfaces and more.

This project combines the development of new mathematical theory and
computational methods to devise more accurate and more efficient ways of
simulating the fluid motion around microorganisms and cilia. The project will
improve and extend a popular computational technique, called the method of
regularized Stokeslets, which has been very useful in many applications in areas
of biological fluid flows. Its uses include the removal of unwanted biofilms,
microfiltration as a method for removing particulate matter, understanding the
motion and behavior of bacterial flagella, understanding the forces required by
self-propelled microswimmers, analyzing sperm motility and other issues related
to human reproduction. The popularity of the method is due to its usefulness in
a wide variety of applications and to the relative ease of implementation
compared to other methods. However, the method of regularized Stokeslets can be
improved in many ways by adding new components that will expand its
applicability, by performing mathematical analyses that will shed light on new
ways of implementing the model, and by assessing new computational methods that
reach the results either more accurately or faster or both.