* 1217581
* The First Arkansas Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Conference, April 17-18, 2012, Winthrop Rockefeller Institute, Morrilton, Arkansas
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Sha Jin, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 02/28/2013
* USD 12,000.00

1217581&lt;br/&gt;Jin, Sha&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human stem cells, including
adult, embryonic, and induced pluripotent stem cells, have the potential for
revolutionizing disease treatment. It is expected that many incurable diseases
such as diabetes, cancer, Alzheimer?s diseases, etc. can be eventually cured
using stem cells. Because of this tremendous potential, huge efforts are being
made worldwide to develop new technologies to bring stem cell therapy to
patients. In attempt to build a statewide network for promoting stem cell
research and identifying key challenges in the field, biomedical engineers in
the state have been working with physicians and clinical scientists at the
medical school and the National Center for Toxicological Research (NCTR) to
organize a statewide stem cell conference, which will be held between April
17-18th, 2012 at the Petit Jean Winthrop Rockefeller Institute, Arkansas. The
meeting is designed to bring the unique expertise of both junior and senior
investigators together in the pursuit of innovative ideas for creating new stem
cell technologies. The goal of the meeting is to foster stem cell research and
initiate collaborative research between engineers and physicians across the
state. The meeting will increase the awareness of stem cell research in the
state and generate support from the public as well as the state and federal
governments to promote stem cell research. This model, if successful, will
provide an example for others to follow. The meeting will focus on a number of
distinctive areas that are highly interrelated. These areas include stem cell
therapy, tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, stem cell biology of obesity
and diabetes, cancer stem cells, nanotechnologies, stem cell toxicology, and
regulatory issues. The meeting will provide a range of opportunities for
students and young investigators to learn about stem cell
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nationwide, Arkansas ranks 41st in the number
of high tech jobs. The State has adopted many innovative ways to allow more
people access to higher education and advanced training. The University of
Arkansas, the only comprehensive graduate research university in the state, has
been working toward strengthening Arkansas? educational base. This statewide
stem cell conference will be one of the milestones toward reinforcing stem cell
research and education programs in the state. The conference will gather stem
cell researchers and educators in Arkansas to discuss the mechanisms of
collaboration and identify key challenges in the field. One of the outcomes of
the meeting will be the formation of a statewide stem cell coalition, which will
eventually evolve into a Stem Cell Consortium, which will promote stem cell
research and education programs in the state and nation. The meeting aims at
increasing public awareness of stem cell research and calls for more investments
on stem cell research from the state legislatures and federal government. A
number of top scientists in the field will be invited to the conference. The
meeting will include both oral and poster presentations covering stem cell
engineering and cell-based therapy, tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine, stem cell biology of obesity and diabetes, and stem cell toxicology
and regulatory issues. Students and young investigators will be offered a range
of opportunities to interact with senior investigators who will serve as role
models for them. Students will be extensively exposed to stem cell research
throughout the meeting. The meeting will also attract honors undergraduate
students. They will have an eye-opening experience in a multidisciplinary stem
cell and regenerative medicine research environment. The meeting proceedings
will be disseminated through internet and meeting reports generated from the
meeting. It is expected that stem cell research will remarkably boost both
education and research programs, not only in the field of stem cell research but
also in other areas, which will impact both the state and the nation.