* 1217978
* NeTS: Small: Design and Provisioning of Low-Carbon Optical Datacenter Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Charles Martel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 366,000.00

This project focuses on the issues of network design, provisioning, and traffic
engineering for dynamic backbone and metropolitan access networks needed to
support a "follow the wind/sun" computing paradigm for green cloud computing.
This paradigm is based on the observation that it is more energy efficient to
move data and computations to a site with local green energy than it is to
connect green energy sources to a power grid and then transmit the green power
to distant data centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study network
design and traffic engineering when placement of the elements generating the
traffic load is a possible degree of freedom. The sub-problems include 1)
placement of data centers to both be close to green energy and aware of existing
network deployment, 2) network capacity planning and rate capacity assignment
for networks where data centers may be dynamically powered up/down based on
energy availability, 3) routing of user service requests to data centers based
on network considerations and estimates of green energy
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore and quantify better use of green-renewable energy by data-centers, a
significant consumer of electric power. The project will produce insights that
assist industry in the future design, placement and operation of green data
centers. The PIs will train undergraduate (via the REU program) and graduate
students in the interdisciplinary area of energy management. As part of the
training the PIs will hold highly-interactive weekly meetings in which students
actively learn from each other.