* 1217446
* Ship Operations 2012- R/V Endeavor
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Thomas Glennon, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2019
* USD 12,862,267.00

This award will support the URI Graduate School of Oceanography Marine Office in
its ongoing efforts to operate R/V Endeavor in support of our nations
oceanographic science community for CY 2012. R/V Endeavor has had a 35-year
record of efficient, safe, and flexible ship operations combined with a
commitment to invest in the future. This is a five-year cooperative agreement,
and funding for each year of the agreement will be negotiated and is dependent
on the number of days at sea in support of NSF-funded research. R/V Endeavor
operates as a UNOLS ship, adhering to the UNOLS safety standards, and NSF
inspections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical merit,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2012 R/V Endeavor will take four NSF sponsored research
programs to sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These peer-reviewed projects supported by
operations on R/V Endeavor in 2012 have been rigorously evaluated for scientific
and intellectual merit as an integral part of the NSF grant review and award
process. The competitive nature of the award granting process ensures a very
high level of intellectual merit. Knowledge gained and the discoveries made by
the research programs supported by R/V Endeavor will enhance understanding of
the oceans and address a broad range of important scientific questions. The goal
of this proposal is to provide funding support to safely and productively
operate and maintain R/V Endeavor in 2012 and to ensure it is maintained to
support its planned life-cycle. This support is an essential prerequisite for
safe and successful scientific missions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boarder Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;The State of Rhode Island-supported RI Endeavor Program provides
Rhode Islanders with direct access to the scientific research and educational
capabilities of RV Endeavor. As part of the RI Endeavor Program, educators are
provided &lt;br/&gt;The Rhode Island Teacher At Sea (RITAS) Program, designed by
the Office of Marine Programs (OMP), establishes sustainable partnerships among
ocean scientists, researchers and teachers who live and teach in Rhode Island.
Teachers selected for the RITAS Program will become part of a scientific
research team conducting ocean science research while cruising aboard the RV
Endeavor. &amp;#8232;&amp;#8232;All K-12 educators of Science, Technology, Art,
Math, English and History are invited to apply. There is no application
deadline. &lt;br/&gt;GSO is unique in the breadth, success, and national and
international reputation of its public service and outreach programs. Four
groups at the Narragansett Bay Campus are actively engaged in concerted public
service and outreach efforts: the Coastal Institute (CI), Coastal Resources
Center (CRC), Office of Marine Programs (OMP), and Rhode Island Sea Grant
(RISG).