* 1217867
* AF:CIF:Small:Computational structural biology: Reconstruction and understanding for heterogeneous biological macro molecular complexes based on electron microscopy images
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Peter Doerschuk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 487,724.00

Macro molecular complexes that act as nano-scale machines provide the function
of biological systems. Understanding the geometry and functioning of the complex
as a machine, for instance, how do the various parts move relative to each
other, is a central goal of biology. Cryo electron microscopy provides one noisy
image of each of many (e.g., 100,000) instances of the complex. The objective of
this research is to compute a statistical description of the machine from the
images and then compute a mechanical model of the machine from the statistical
description. Understanding how existing complexes function is central to
engineering changes in their function. Achieving changes would have broad
impact, for instance, in cancer treatment (inhibiting complexes that pro- tect
tumor cells by pumping chemotherapy drugs out of tumor cells) and in improving
the efficiency of complexes involved in the production of biofuels. Further
impacts include the training of two Ph.D. students who will come from a diverse
pool of students.

The complex in question will be described as a weighted sum of basis functions
with random Gaussian weights. A maximum likelihood estimator is used to estimate
the mean and covariance of the weights. The estimator is computed by an expecta-
tion maximization algorithm which requires substantial computation due to the
unknown projection directions of the images. A "spring and mass" mechanical
model in thermodynamic equilibrium predicts the mean and covariance. By
comparing the predictions of the mechanical model to the estimated mean and
covariance by Kullback-Leibler divergence, the parameters in the mechanical
model are estimated.