* 1217281
* III: Small: Topical Positioning System (TPS) for Informed Reading of Web Pages
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* James Allan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,752.00

This work addresses the challenge of increasing the critical literacy of people
looking for information on the Web, including information regarding healthcare,
policy, or any other broadly discussed topic. The proposed research on Topical
Positioning System "TPS" drives the vision of developing a browser tool that
shows a person whether the web page in front of them discusses a provocative
topic, whether the material is presented in a heavily biased way, whether it
represents an outlier (fringe) idea, and how its discussion of issues relates to
the broader context and to information presented in "familiar" sources. This
research applies and extends text analysis and comparison techniques to this
problem. It uses statistical language modeling, topic modeling, machine
learning, and link analysis techniques to represent Web pages and clusters of
Web pages. It requires both off-line pre-processing to organize web-scale
collections and on-line, query-time fine-tuning of the organization for
presentation in a TPS browser add-on.

This research will be the foundation of class projects as well as graduate
student research, exposing a large number of students to issues of web-based
search and critical evaluation of information. More importantly, however, this
work has the potential to impact many people, helping them make more informed
choices in response to what they read on the Web and elsewhere. The results of
this project will be published in peer-reviewed venues and listed at the project
Web site (http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/research/tps). A freely available TPS browser
add-on will be available at this Web site.