* 1217215
* EXP: Collaborative Research: A System of Animation Gestures for Effective Teaching Avatars
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Nicoletta Adamo-Villani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 315,000.00

This project addresses the challenge of making avatars used in tutoring systems
and other learning technologies more engaging and more effective learning
guides. One focus is on making the movements of an avatar more lifelike; a
second focus is on understanding how to effectively integrate gestures
indicating friendliness with gestures used for promoting concept learning.
Design of avatar gestures draws on the literature on the roles of gesturing in
communication, the literature on grounded and embodied cognition, and the
literature on mathematics. The focus of this Cyberlearning: Transforming
Education Exploration proposal is on designing avatar gestures for promoting
learning of mathematical equivalence. Analysis of the effects of those gestures
and extraction of preliminary guidelines for gesture design will lay the
groundwork for extending gesturing capabilities of avatars across disciplinary
content areas. Research focuses on how to automatically animate an avatar with
life-like qualities and the conditions under which adding gestures to a teaching
avatar promotes engagement and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Avatars are used
extensively in learning technologies to guide learners' actions and to provide
advice. But learners can be put off by avatars that are emotionless, and avatars
technology does not yet combine gesturing and "talking" in the way good tutors
and teachers do as they are trying to help learners learn difficult concepts.
This project addresses both of those issues -- giving avatars enough personality
so that learners will engage with them more readily and willingly and giving
avatars the capability of gesturing in ways that are congruent with the concepts
they are expressing. There are a variety of challenges in addressing these
issues, some technical, some social, and some cognitive. The project team is
addressing all three types of issues, working towards design principles for
avatars that move and engage more naturally and that can gesture as people do
when explaining difficult content. Enhancing the interactions between computers
and people in ways that promote both sustained engagement and learning will
improve the effectiveness of intelligent tutoring systems and other learning
technologies across disciplines and across the ages of learners.