* 1217272
* I-Corps:  Peptide-Enabled Dental Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2012
* Mehmet Sarikaya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to commercialize an engineered peptide, ADP5, that rapidly
catalyzes remineralization of the teeth. This peptide and its derivatives are
envisioned to be the active ingredients in a broad-range of dental products that
will drastically improve dental care. ADP5 was derived through biocombinatorial
selection using peptide libraries and then tailored via bioinformatic design
using naturally occurring biomineralization proteins in mineralized dental
tissues. Existing products in dental care are either inadequate in restoring the
mineral loss, the basis of major dental health problems, or only mask the side
effects caused by the loss of mineral, such as hypersensitivity. Based on the
I-Corps' team's previous interdisciplinary research, involving molecular
biology, periodontics, bioinformatics, and materials science, designing a
peptide that is capable of reversing and repairing demineralized tooth surfaces
has now been proven possible.

In spite of widespread use of fluoride in public water supplies, dental caries
and hypersensitive teeth remain a prevalent health care problem in both the
aging population as well as in children exposed to high sugar diets. If
successful, the widespread use of biomineralization peptides could prevent and
treat early stage dental caries and, in addition, can be used on hypersensitive
teeth to promote remineralization, thus repairing areas where the nerves are
exposed via open dental tubules. The team's ultimate goal, through this I-Corps
program, is to develop a commercialization plan for a viable start-up company
for dental health products. Through the I-Cops curriculum, the team aims first
to identify commercially-viable product lines in dental care, develop a network
of commercial partners (in product development as well as licensing), and get
trained on the commercialization concepts (e.g., identifying potential customers
such as dental clinics and consumer product companies; establishing a network of
interactions; and developing a business plan canvas for the formation of a
startup company.