* 1217058
* CIF: Small: Decoding Error-Correcting Codes using Large-Scale Decomposition Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Robert Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 424,062.00

This research draws upon techniques from large-scale optimization to develop new
decoding algorithms for error-correcting codes. Initial results yield a scalable
decoding algorithm for linear programming decoding that runs as fast as state-
of-the-art decoders, has a simple schedule, robust convergence guarantees, and
achieves better empirical performance than standard decoding algorithms when the
signal-to-noise ratio is high. The decoding algorithm will have a transformative
effect on the types of codes used in high-reliability applications including
storage, optical networks, and microprocessor architectures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop further results, analyzing in
detail algorithmic behavior in the "error floor regime" where the signal-to-
noise ratio is high. It will examine the algorithmic robustness to the specifics
of hardware implementation, and investigate other applications in coding such as
high-density, non-binary, and rank-metric codes. The PIs will extend the
algorithmic methods to applications beyond decoding error-correcting codes,
investigating large-scale data processing applications in graphical models and
statistical estimation. The research thrusts of the project are well suited for
incorporation into the PIs' courses in digital communication, optimization, and
information processing for "big data" problems more broadly.