* 1217196
* I-Corps:  Ultra-lubricating and Hemocompatible Nanocomposite Coatings for Surgical Devices
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2012
* Eric Loth, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The last decade has seen a rapid expansion of new minimally-invasive treatments,
for instance in structural heart repair, where certain market needs are not well
addressed. For example, controlled delivery of bulky devices from small bore
endovascular catheter-based delivery systems can be a challenge. Teflon surface
modification exists in the marketplace today, but shortcomings of this approach
related to performance and price present significant market needs. This project
is investigating the ability of bionanocomposite coatings developed to produce
comparable transformative lubricity and biocompatibility performance in bio-
medical conditions as already seen in fundamental lab experiments. This class of
high performing nanocomposites has not previously been successfully implemented
in such applications, mainly due to insufficient mechanical durability. This
long-standing hurdle has recently been overcome by the team.

This innovation effort will enhance scientific and technological understanding
by paving the way for transferring superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic
materials out of the lab and into the bio-medical field. Stemming from
discussions with potential partners, the transformative improvements in
lubricity and hemocompatibility are believed to be ideally suited to
endovascular delivery catheters (for improved lubricity) and stents (for
improved hemocompatibility). The 50-90% reductions in liquid friction gleaned
from the fundamental research, combined with the recent mechanical durability
achievements should allow for disruptive enhancements in lubricious coatings to
improve access, deliverability, and predictable deployment of such medical
devices. These coatings could vastly reduce side effects, accelerate natural
healing processes, and may even improve hemocompatibility. With the proposed
I-Corps project, it is also planned to grow the small entrepreneurship program
at UVA by involving undergraduate students and expanding the facilities in
creating a high-profile effort to transition a potentially disruptive technology
out of a university lab and into the market and grow the local innovation and
entrepreneurial ecosystem.