* 1217501
* SHF: Small: Capitalizing on First-Class SQL Support in the Ur/Web Programming Language
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Adam Chlipala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The World Wide Web has become one of the most popular platforms for deploying
rich software applications, and most Web applications include interfaces to
persistent databases, many implemented with the SQL language. Mainstream
programming techniques provide programmers with little help in construction of
correct database interface code. As a result, many Web applications include
serious security vulnerabilities that allow attackers to read others' private
data, or even delete or corrupt it. Furthermore, programmers expend substantial
effort reimplementing similar functionality for each new application and its new
data model. This project studies programming tool support that can help solve
both of these problems, based on a programming language and compiler that in a
sense "understand" SQL database access.

A connecting thread in the project's technical approach is real-world
application of computer theorem proving technology. The programming language,
Ur/Web, is based on dependent type theory, a language paradigm pioneered by
interactive mathematical theorem proving tools. In the Web application context,
type theory provides a unified framework for enforcing key program properties,
such as invulnerability to code injection attacks and other common security
problems. On top of this is built support for metaprogramming, or programs that
generate programs, where the key security properties ought to be guaranteed for
any code outputs of a metaprogram. One major thrust of the project is using
metaprogramming to reify coding patterns as reusable libraries, dramatically
reducing time and effort needed to construct a new application. The other major
thrust is static program analysis, where symbolic execution and automated
theorem proving are used to verify formally that Web applications conform to
declarative security policies, covering information flow and access control.
Metaprogramming will support component-based construction with module-local
reasoning, while the static analysis ensures global consistency of programs from
a security perspective.