* 1217801
* Design and Analysis of Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* John Stufken, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides participant support costs for the conference Design and
Analysis of Experiments 2012 (DAE 2012) at the University of Georgia from
October 17, 2012 to October 20, 2012. The conference features leading
researchers of international repute, promising new researchers, and graduate
students actively pursuing research in the area of design and analysis of
experiments. Participants represent academia, industry and government, and the
conference offers a forum for interaction, discussion, and exchange of ideas on
novel research in this area. Special sessions and activities to facilitate
mentoring of junior researchers are an important focus of the conference. Themes
of DAE 2012 include computer experiments, designs in marketing and business,
designs in the pharmaceutical industry, algorithms for finding efficient
designs, fractional factorial designs, designs for generalized linear models,
designs for nonlinear models, designs for correlated data, and design
robustness. The award provides partial support for approximately 40
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design and analysis of experiments are
indispensable in the scientific process. Experiments are an integral part of the
discovery process in virtually all scientific disciplines and in engineering and
manufacturing. Rapid developments have taken place in research on design and
analysis of experiments, both in more traditional areas of application and,
especially, in entirely new areas of application. This conference, DAE 2012,
helps the advancement of cutting edge research in design and analysis of
experiments by bringing together senior and junior researchers from academia,
industry and government. DAE 2012 prepares future researchers in design and
analysis of experiments through extensive mentoring activities that stimulate
interactions between senior and junior participants. The conference makes
significant efforts to broaden the participation of under-represented groups.
Indirectly, by virtue of the fact that design and analysis of experiments play
critical roles in the process of discovery and improvement in science,
engineering and manufacturing, activities at the conference have an enormous
impact on society. The conference website address is
http://www.stat.uga.edu/dae2012.