* 1217093
* EXP: Mobile, Movement, and Math
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John Black, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 549,854.00

The project team is integrating the stories, characters, math content, and
research of New York's public television station's (WNET), Cyberchase multimedia
project with Teachers' College's research on embodied cognition theory and
gesture-base simulation games to create two mobile application prototypes to be
used in studies focused on learning with technology that takes embodied
cognition theory into account in the context of story narrative. The content
focus of the research and development is fractions, a topic that is a major
stumbling block for children in the target age group of 8-11, yet lays a crucial
foundation for later success in mathematics, science, and related fields.
Grounded theory suggests that our cognition is grounded in the physical world we
live in and the ways our bodies are able to move and perceive. According to this
theory, there are three steps involved in learning something in a grounded way
-- having embodied experiences (ones where our bodies take part), learning to
imagine that embodied experience, and practicing imagining the experience with
symbolic materials. The physical movements do not have to be big ones; simply
moving a finger across an expanse to designate numerical magnitude has been
shown to help with understanding of magnitude, for example. What is important is
that the gestures should be conceptually congruent with knowledge being learned.
Research addresses the conditions under which gesture-based math practice (here,
in the context of the math games) promotes better math learning and the
interactions between gesture and story line that are effective in promoting
sustained engagement and content learning. The project's research and design
context tests a basic design framework that integrates the promises of new
technology, embodied cognition theory, and well-loved story narratives and has
potential to be applicable to the the teaching of other mathematics concepts
and, more broadly, to a variety of STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on fraction learning, a stumbling block for many elementary
schoolers. The team is applying what is known about the relationship between
body movement and learning to develop engaging apps for smartphones and tablets
with touch screens that allow youngsters (ages 8 to 11) to experience
mathematical concepts through their gestures and that give them practice
applying the mathematics they are learning in a variety of situations. Use of
the apps is embedded in discussion and play in the context of a well-loved
television series called Cyberchase (developed by New York's WNET) that promotes
mathematics learning. Research is investigating the conditions under which use
of gesture promotes mathematics learning and effective ways of integrating
mathematics practice, reflection, and story telling so that children will better
understand and be able to use fractions. Answers to research questions is
expected to be applicable in other areas of mathematics and across STEM
disciplines.