* 1217989
* AF:Small:Markets, Allocations and Dynamics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Cole, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 413,106.00

The need for resource allocation is pervasive. Often, it involves participants
with conflicting interests. Markets and auctions both serve to produce desirable
outcomes despite such conflicting interests, and yet other mechanisms are used
when money cannot be exchanged (e.g. in kidney exchanges). An important goal is
to find stable outcomes, outcomes with which individual participants are content
in the sense that they cannot improve the outcome; these outcomes are called
equilibria.

For existing settings, such as economic markets and widely used mechanisms (e.g.
Internet routing protocols or the Generalized Second Price auction used by major
search engines), one wants to understand how well the existing mechanisms work.
Specifically (i) In what settings are there equilibrium outcomes? (ii) Can they
(or near-equilibria) be found? (iii) Are the equilibrium outcomes plausible,
i.e. does it seem reasonable that they will be reached due to the interactions
induced by the mechanism? This research will focus on matching markets and the
housing market in particular.

In other settings, where there are no existing mechanisms or the costs of
introducing new mechanisms are not prohibitive, one can seek to design
mechanisms that produce desirable outcomes. This research will focus on the
allocation of divisible goods (i.e. goods that can be split into many parts).

The standard modeling of matching markets, such as the housing market, assumes
buyers have sharp budget limits. Unfortunately, when this assumption holds there
may be no equilibrium solution. Instead, this research will consider a natural
soft budget limit based on residual wealth, a setting where equilibria are
guaranteed. The main issue is whether equilibria in this setting are predictors
of outcomes. Necessary conditions, which will be investigated, are that the
equilibria can be computed efficiently, that approximate equilibria are close to
the actual equilibria, and that these approximate equilibria could arise as a
result of the actions of buyers and sellers.

With regard to mechanism design, as is standard, this research will seek
truthful mechanisms, mechanisms which give participants no incentive for
strategizing. In other words, participants will achieve their best outcomes by
making honest declarations (e.g. of their valuations for different possible
allocations). In general, it is not possible to allocate all the resources using
truthful mechanisms. Instead, this research aims to understand the quality of
the solutions produced by under-allocating yet truthful mechanisms. In
particular, this research intends to study the class of proportionally fair
mechanisms, mechanisms which were first introduced in the context of internet
routing.