* 1217434
* SHF: Small: Parallel Pattern Driven Adaptive Manycore Computer Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Thomas Conte, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,002.00

The past decade has redefined the path of computer design in all aspects of
computing. Whether the application is high-performance or general-purpose
processors, the push is for improved performance through parallelism in the face
of device constraints, bandwidth constraints, and power constraints. Area on
chip is now "virtually free," while power and bandwidth are precious
commodities. Recent research has proposed many approaches to tackling this
problem, including heterogeneous architectures, specialized function units,
reconfigurable cores and 3D-integration. However, this decade, computer
designers must work within the design constraints wherein not all of the chip
can be turned on simultaneously. Computer designers must find a way to classify
programs by their architectural needs, and find the best configurations for each
classification. This need, combined with the increased diversity in parallel
algorithms, presents a challenge: finding "shapes" of computation that are
meaningful both to the programmer and architect. It also presents the challenge
of designing architectures for each computational classification.

This project will tackle this important problem by detecting algorithmic level
parallel programming patterns, exploring a classification system using these
patterns, and proposing computer features that are beneficial for each pattern.
We will design a pattern-based dynamic architecture that includes pattern-
specific hardware optimizations that are in turn enabled only when needed. For
detection, we will investigate both programmer supplied inference detection as
well as online dynamic detection.

This activity will promote teaching, training, and learning. It will be a goal
of this project to involve the participation of underrepresented groups both
through REU activities and through the selection of the graduate student
involved in this project. The results of this research will be disseminated
broadly via high-profile conference proceedings, scientific journals and via the
Internet. Since we believe strongly that parallel patterns will drive computer
design in the future, we propose developing PatternBench, a benchmark suite that
encapsulates the space of all possible parallel patterns. Our plan is to make
this benchmark suite available to aid in dissemination of this research. The
broader impact to society of this work is to make future computers more power-
efficient and to allow for continued performance scaling in the new era.