* 1217507
* Student Support 2012 IEEE International Conference on Ultra-Wideband,  ICUWB2012  to be held in Syracuse, NY, September 17-20, 2012.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2012,10/31/2012
* Mahmoud EL Sabbagh, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 10/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Student Support 2012 IEEE International Conference on Ultra-
Wideband,&lt;br/&gt;ICUWB2012&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse University is
cosponsoring and hosting the 2012 IEEE International Conference
on&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-Wideband (ICUWB2012). The conference will be accepting full-
student papers and posters about&lt;br/&gt;student Research in Progress.
Syracuse University, as the cosponsor and host, is planning to
support&lt;br/&gt;designated student presenters. This proposal is written to
request Student Travel/Support Grant to fund&lt;br/&gt;those students who will
present their research papers at the ICUWB2012 in Syracuse, NY, September
17?&lt;br/&gt;20, 2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This
conference provides a forum for the latest UWB systems, technologies and
applications in both&lt;br/&gt;microwave and millimeter wave bands. Wide scale
commercial and defense applications are available&lt;br/&gt;using UWB
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;ICUWB 2012 will
present contributions and developments in the UWB field covering a broad range
of&lt;br/&gt;topics through oral and poster sessions, workshops/tutorials,
exhibitions. In this conference, there are two&lt;br/&gt;venues for students to
present their work: (1) regular paper and (2) student progress-in-
research&lt;br/&gt;colloquium. Students who are currently pursuing their degree
and have research they would like to share&lt;br/&gt;may participate in the
Student Program by presenting incomplete research, currently underway.
Research&lt;br/&gt;projects which are not complete, research proposals and
conceptual or theoretical proposals are all&lt;br/&gt;welcome topics. Audience
members will participate by providing the author with feedback and
questions&lt;br/&gt;pertaining to the ongoing research. This experience will
encourage further development and refinement of&lt;br/&gt;the student's
research-in-progress and give presenting students the opportunity to network
with&lt;br/&gt;researchers and professionals in the field of ultra-wideband
technology. Presence of these experts will&lt;br/&gt;give the students chance
for one-to-one interaction, discussion, and guidance. Moreover, supporting
the&lt;br/&gt;projects of students related to UWB research and development will
contribute to the future of UWB&lt;br/&gt;technology.