* 1217475
* STTR Phase I:  Enhanced Spectral Efficiency through Adaptive Utilization of Fragmented Spectrum
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Luzhou Xu, Integrated Adaptive Applications, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims at
addressing the challenging issue of spectrum scarcity for high throughput
wireless communication systems by developing an innovative cognitive radio (CR)
communication system capable of operating within a fragmented spectral band. Due
to the proliferation of wireless communication systems, it is becoming ever more
difficult to secure large contiguous bands of electromagnetic spectrum which are
typically required by these products. To tackle this issue, innovative training
and spreading waveform synthesis technologies, a state-of-the-art frequency
domain channel estimation technique, and a frequency-domain equalization method
will be developed and applied. These technologies will first be implemented in
software, where their performance will be rigorously evaluated. Then, the
techniques are to be migrated to a Universal Software Radio Platform (USRP) for
hardware testing and evaluation. This disciplined approach of first developing
and validating the software prior to hardware implementation will aid in
ensuring that the project is successful. Upon successful completion of the
project, the state-of-the-art in wireless communications will be advanced in
fragmented spectrum exploitation, and the proposed system will have been
successfully demonstrated in hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact /
commercial potential of this project is to dramatically improve the efficiency
with which precious electromagnetic spectrum is utilized. Indeed, the approaches
taken in the proposed project are capable of establishing and maintaining a
reliable, high-throughput communication link in a fractured spectral
environment. A major application for this technology is in a device operating
within the recently established television white bands. This television white
band application is a member of the wireless and mobile internet technology
area. Products operating in these bands have been envisioned to serve a vital
role in providing broadband access to customers living in rural areas. With over
eighteen million Americans living in remote parts of the country with no access
to high speed internet connectivity, technologies capable of establishing said
connectivity are both socially beneficial, and commercially viable. Upon
successful completion of the project, the cognitive radio technologies developed
and implemented will fill a vital need in the television whitespace band
application.