* 1217572
* NeTS: Small: Information Dissemination in Vehicular Networks for Reducing Traffic Congestion
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* David Du, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop solutions to reduce congestion problem in
urban area. Each vehicle will be equipped with GPS and dedicated short-range
communications (DSRC) capability in the near future. In congested urban areas,
Road Side Units (RSUs) and Relay Nodes (RNs) are deployed. Each vehicle entering
these areas will report its trajectory (i.e., a selective path to a destination)
based on GPS to a Control Center via an RSU. RSUs can monitor the vehicles
passing by and assist the data delivery between Control Center and vehicle or
vehicle to RSUs. The Control Center will be responsible for deciding how to
smooth the traffic based on the current traffic load by adjusting the
trajectories of some vehicles or sending warning message to vehicles in certain
areas. This project is to investigate the feasibility and three associated
research issues of such an infrastructure. The research issues to be addressed
are 1) How to cost effectively deploy the minimum numbers of RSUs and RNs in a
given roadmap to guarantee the delay and performance of data dissemination in
such an infrastructure? 2) How to effectively deliver data from vehicles to RSU
and from RSU to vehicles? 3) How to disseminate traffic related warning messages
to vehicles that may be affected by a given traffic incidence in a timely and
effective manner? This project is expected to advance the understanding of
vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure communications to a higher
level. Moreover, this project has a substantial impact to the society. Not only
can the commute of each person be shortened, but also the total energy saving
and its associated environmental impact can be huge.