* 1217515
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Ontology based Perceptual Organization of Audio-Video Events using Pattern Theory
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anuj Srivastava, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 255,648.00

It is natural that events of interest in observed scenes manifest themselves
across multiple sensing modalities - vision, hearing, smell, etc. The remarkable
perceptions of audio-video signals by natural systems, such as humans, also
points to superiority of inferences drawn across modalities. It, therefore,
seems natural to enhance performance of automated systems by using joint, cross-
modal statistical inferences. However, the detection, organization, and
understanding of cues and events in real-world scenarios are difficult tasks.
This project seeks to develop a pattern-theoretic framework for achieving these
goals. The main research items are: (1) development of mathematical quantities
to represent audio and visual events and their spatiotemporal relations, (2) use
domain-specific ontologies to impose semantic structure and to incorporate prior
knowledge, and (3) derive algorithms for Bayesian inferences using efficient
adaptations of Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use
of pattern theory allows bridging of gaps between raw signals and high-level,
domain-dependent semantics, and helps discovers large groups of audio-visual
events likely to represent the same underlying event. This effort combines ideas
from perceptual organization in computer vision, computational analysis of
auditory signals, pattern theory, and prior developments in ontological
structures. The methods developed here are applicable to many scenarios that
deploy audio and video sensors, including problems of audio annotations of
videos, speaker tracking in teleconferencing, and separation of multiple objects
in remote surveillance. Broader impact activities involve the development of
teaching modules, innovation and entrepreneurial training of the students, and
communication of the findings to the community.