* 1217948
* CSR: Small: Adaptively Applying Data-Driven Execution Mode to Remove I/O Bottleneck for Data-Intensive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Song Jiang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 349,782.00

The increasingly common multi-core/many-core CPU architectures&lt;br/&gt;are
effective for accelerating programs√¢?? execution only when&lt;br/&gt;sufficient
parallelism is maintained. For data-intensive&lt;br/&gt;programs the increased
parallelism can severely compromise I/O&lt;br/&gt;efficiency: when a sequential
program is parallelized, not only&lt;br/&gt;computations, but also the I/O
operations associated with them, can&lt;br/&gt;be distributed among multiple
processes. Because the execution&lt;br/&gt;order of the processes is usually
determined by the scheduler at&lt;br/&gt;runtime, the relative progress of
processes is nondeterministic&lt;br/&gt;and the order in which the processes
issue their I/O requests is&lt;br/&gt;accordingly nondeterministic. It is this
I/O nondeterminism that&lt;br/&gt;can substantially compromise I/O efficiency,
and thus program&lt;br/&gt;performance, by negating the advantages of parallel
execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this problem the PI proposes a
facility built either&lt;br/&gt;in the operating system kernel or in the runtime
to streamline&lt;br/&gt;the service of I/O requests from different processes of
a&lt;br/&gt;parallel program. The major distinction from
conventional&lt;br/&gt;techniques for improving I/O performance is in the
coordination&lt;br/&gt;of I/O request issuance, via I/O-aware process
scheduling, to&lt;br/&gt;improve the locality of these requests for
I/O-intensive&lt;br/&gt;multithreaded and MPI programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the proposed research would introduce a
disruptive&lt;br/&gt;technique for data-centric computing to effectively relieve
the&lt;br/&gt;I/O bottleneck. This project also provides abundant
research&lt;br/&gt;training opportunities for students, especially under-
represented&lt;br/&gt;minority students in the southeast Michigan area, to help
relieve&lt;br/&gt;the shortage of IT professionals with expertise in
parallel&lt;br/&gt;computing and storage systems.