* 1217324
* RUI: Using computational homology to detect DNA Copy Number Aberrations in Breast Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Ellis, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 239,987.00

The analysis of large complex data sets poses a major challenge for
computational mathematics. Topological Data Analysis (TDA) applies concepts from
algebraic topology to address this challenge. Topological techniques have been
used successfully in engineering and biology but are seldom applied to the
analysis of genomic data. In cancer genomics, the identification of copy number
aberrations (CNAs) such as gains and losses of DNA segments is an important
problem because CNAs are known to contain cancer genes and therefore to be
involved in misregulation of key signaling pathways. CNAs may occur
independently or may co-occur. The latter are believed to act synergistically
and therefore result in unforeseen consequences. For example, the finding that
CNAs in 8p12 and 11q13.3 are co-amplified in some breast cancers led to the
discovery of functional interactions between the MYC and the TP53 pathways. Such
interactions offer an important paradigm for cancer research because many tumors
are believed to use similar mechanisms for their progression. Identification of
co-occurring CNAs has traditionally been hindered both by the large sample sizes
required to find co-occurrences and by the lack of mathematical methods to
identify them efficiently. Recently, large microarray-based data sets have
become available for breast cancer. The proposed research aims to develop a new
TDA-based method to detect independent and co-occurring CNAs in breast cancer.
In the proposed approach each CNA profile is characterized by a set of
biologically-meaningful topological spaces. Topological invariants of these
spaces (i.e., Betti numbers) will be used to de-noise the data and identify
CNAs. This project will yield broadly-applicable methods for: (1) representing
complex data sets in forms that are amenable to topological analysis; (2)
determining the statistical significance of TDA results; (3) computing
topological invariants from large data sets.

Rapid advances in the sciences have generated large, complex data sets of
unprecedented proportions. New mathematical methods are urgently needed in order
to solve fundamental problems in the analysis of such high-dimensional data. In
the field of genomics, thousands of measurements have been obtained with the
goal of unveiling molecular signatures that characterize essential biological
processes. This field has significantly influenced the direction of breast
cancer research because of its potential for differentiating various subtypes,
pathways and prognoses of the disease. Currently, the major approach to
detecting genomic signatures is focused on the identification of single
independent events. However, there is increasing evidence that copy number
aberrations (CNAs)-- such as amplifications and deletions of the genome--are not
always independent of one another; rather, they may co-occur with synergistic
and unforeseen consequences. For example, co-occurring CNAs detected in breast
cancer have led to the identification of cross-talk between different signaling
pathways. The systematic search for co-occurring CNAs has been hampered by a
lack of mathematical methods adequate to identify them. The PI proposes to
develop new methods in Topological Data Analysis to identify co-occurring CNAs
in breast cancer. Further, because copy number changes are associated with other
diseases and with evolutionary processes, this project will have important
impacts across the sciences, both basic (e.g. evolution and development) and
applied (e.g. diseases with a genetic component such as cancer, autism and
multiple sclerosis). The proposed research will advance the field of
mathematical genetics/genomics with new tools for analyzing complex interactions
among genetic elements in genetic/genomic data. The methods developed also have
the potential for extension to identify co-occurring events in large, complex
longitudinal data sets. Furthering its broader impacts, the project will
implement a series of public lectures on real-life applications of computational
mathematics with special outreach to local school teachers, students and
professionals.