* 1217730
* NetS: Small:  Collaborative Research: Playing the Devil's Advocate: The Profit Perspective in Secondary Spectrum Markets
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Saswati Sarkar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 215,000.00

The proliferation of wireless technology constitutes one of the most remarkable
success stories in the history of human intervention. This growth however raises
the question of whether technology will capitulate to its own success owing to
the scarcity of spectrum. Fortunately the problem is more artificial than
fundamental: the scarcity has been precipitated by the exclusive licensing
model, while large swaths of licensed spectrum remain underutilized. A
conjecture therefore is that unlicensed access of idle (but licensed) spectrum,
commonly referred to as secondary spectrum access, can help avert the impending
crisis. This however can only be realized if secondary access is profitable for
the license holders. This is the main motivation behind this research, which
seeks to design incentives to induce license holders to allow secondary access.
Specifically, the research studies a free secondary market where the licensed
and unlicensed users trade access rights based on bilateral agreements, and seek
to optimize their interaction strategies. The resulting decision problems are
analyzed using tools from game theory, optimization, graph theory and stochastic
control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The profit perspective adopted in this research
incentivizes greater participation of wireless carriers in the secondary
markets, enabling a quantum leap in more efficient spectrum utilization.
Students at both undergraduate and graduate levels are trained in subjects from
wireless technology to game theory and optimization theory. This research will
generate algorithms for computing the decision strategies of the license
holders. They will be evaluated through rigorous analysis and extensive
simulations. Results will be disseminated through conferences and journals.