* 1217052
* EXP: Collaborative Infographics for Science Literacy (CISL)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Joseph Polman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 05/31/2015
* USD 549,629.00

The project builds on an existing citizen journalism activity to investigate how
to use collaborative critique and construction of infographics to foster high
school students? science literacy and engagement. Foundations are in
sociocultural approaches to human action and learning, using the notions of
mediated action and identification over time to explain development and
preparation for future learning of individuals. Foundations are also in
cognitive science work on spatial and visual thinking that has found that
spatial metaphors provide a foundation for more abstract thinking, on notions of
meta-representational competence development of understanding of the process of
representation itself, and on collaborative idea development. Infographic design
and idea development around it are distributed across people and tools in the
environment, and learners better their own conceptual understandings through
collaboratively bettering the representations they are using to communicate. The
technological innovation is the socio-technical system that is being created
around design of infographics as a way of promoting science learning and
literacy and includes (i) the integration of infographics tools into learning
activities to promote science learning and literacy, (ii) a case library of
annotated infographics that can be used to promote idea development, ability to
read and understand infographics, and critique and construction of infographics,
and (iii) a case authoring tool that promotes reflection on one's infographic
designs as learners write up their designs and are guided to annotate them with
justifications for their designs. Research focuses on design of the socio-
technical system that allows infographic design to promote learning and foster
scientific literacy.

Drawing in more high schoolers to science, promoting scientific literacy, and
promoting deeper science learning among high schoolers are huge challenges to
the educational system. This project focuses on addressing those challenges
through design of citizen journalism activities that can be integrated with
other science curriculum activities. The activities themselves revolve around
collaborative critique and construction of infographics. Infographics are visual
representations of data and/or information, used to express and communicate
science, mathematical, technological, and sociological information and used
extensively in journalism today. The project seeks both to help high schoolers
learn to make sense of such graphics to use design of such graphics as a way to
promote learning. The activities themselves require students to engage in data
analysis and synthesis and to use science they are learning to develop visual
representations that others can make sense of and learn from. The technology is
authentic to what journalists use, and its use and the philosophy around its use
could be powerful in drawing high schoolers to the wonders of science and
helping them appreciate what scientists do, thus broadly promoting scientific
literacy. Activities using the technology for infographic design have potential
to engage and draw in not only those who already enjoy manipulating and
analyzing data, but in addition, and more importantly, those who consider
themselves writers and those who enjoy helping others learn. It also has
potential to draw into science and advance science literacy in those who simply
want to be recognized as making a contribution to their peer community. This
work goes beyond current philosophies of schooling in suggesting that we may
help people better their understanding by allowing them active roles in helping
others learn and in communicating to the populous.