* 1217651
* EAGER: Strong and Autonomous Self-Healing Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2015
* USD 230,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this EAGER award is to
investigate a new multiphase strategy for designing strong and autonomously
self-healing polymers. Self-healing materials are attractive for many
technological applications. Most approaches to self-healing materials either
require the input of external energy, or need healing agents (monomer and
catalysts), solvent (hydrogels) or plasticizer (rubber). Despite intense
research in this area, the synthesis of a strong polymer with intrinsic self-
healing ability remains a key challenge. In this EAGER project, a new design of
multiphase supramolecular thermoplastic elastomers is proposed to combine high
modulus and toughness with spontaneous healing capability. The designed brush
polymers self-assemble into complex hard-soft nanophases, combining the strong
and tough mechanical properties of nanocomposites with the self-healing capacity
of dynamic supramolecular assemblies. In contrast to typical self-healing
polymers, the proposed new system spontaneously self-heals as a single-component
solid material at ambient conditions without the need for any external stimulus,
healing agent, plasticizer, or solvent. The proposed approach to self-healing
materials should be generally applicable to a broad range of dynamic multiphase
systems, including graft and block copolymers, functional nano-assemblies, and
organic-inorganic nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to spontaneously heal injury is a key
biomaterial feature that increases the survivability and lifetime of most plants
and animals. In sharp contrast, synthetic materials fail after damage or
fracture. For decades scientists and engineers have dreamed of developing self-
healing polymers to improve the safety, lifetime, energy efficiency, and
environmental impact of synthetic materials. In this award an unconventional
biomimetic approach is proposed to design multi-phase self-healing polymerc
materials that can spontaneously repair themselves under ambient conditions
after mechanical damage. Successful demonstration of true self-healing human-
made materials could affect the manufacture of elastomers, plastics, and
composites, leading to technological advances that would benefit society. The
proposed multi-disciplinary research will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students, including underrepresented groups.