* 1217575
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Prehistoric Upland Use in the Central Alaska Range
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Frank Goebel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2014
* USD 29,255.00

This is a dissertation improvement grant award. Under the supervision of Dr. Ted
Goebel, Mr. John Blong will conduct his doctoral research in the central Alaska
Range, undertaking a study of human use of upland landscapes from earliest
colonization to less than 1,000 years ago. The primary focus of this project is
to explain the timing, environmental context, and nature of human colonization
of the uplands, and to explore how the environment and use of upland landscapes
changed throughout prehistory. This project will be the first comprehensive
study of human upland adaptations in central Alaska. There are several models
describing human use of the uplands, but there has been no focused exploration
of upland settlement and land-use strategies. The study area for conducting this
research is the upper Susitna River basin, where a pilot study resulted in the
location of 19 new archaeological sites, two of which have been radiocarbon
dated, with cultural components spanning the early through late Holocene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five specific objectives drive this research: (1) to
establish the paleoenvironmental history, and (2) record of human occupation of
upland landscapes of the upper Susitna River basin, (3) to reconstruct lithic
technological activities carried out over time in the uplands of the central
Alaska Range basin, from initial colonization to less than 1,000 years ago, (4)
to interpret technological-organization strategies carried out in the uplands of
the central Alaska Range, especially as they relate to subsistence/settlement
organization, and (5) to put the upper Susitna basin study area in the greater
context of the prehistoric record of central Alaska. To address these
objectives, the proposed research will include reconstruction of the
paleoenvironmental context of human activity through pollen coring and analysis,
archaeological survey and testing, and lithic analysis of assemblages recovered
from fieldwork and from eight previously known archaeological sites in the
central Alaska Range.