* 1217615
* III: Small: Combinatorial Optimization Methods for Problems in Molecular Biology and Genetics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Richard Karp, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 497,380.00

In virtually every area of science, engineering and commerce, optimization
problems arise for which no known solution method is guaranteed to yield
satisfactory solutions to large instances using a reasonable amount of
computation time. Computational complexity theory confirms the intractability of
most of these problems. Nevertheless, these problems demand to be solved in
practice, and very often heuristic algorithms work quite well in most cases,
although not in the worst case. The unreasonable success of heuristic algorithms
is one of the great mysteries in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will undertake four case studies in the design of heuristic algorithms.
1. Implicit hitting set problems are a class of constraint satisfaction problems
in which the constraints are too numerous to list explicitly. Many classic
optimization problems fit this model. A generic approach will be investigated
which aims to enumerate a small set of constraints sufficient to determine the
optimal solution. This approach has proved successful in solving a significant
group of genome alignment problems. 2. Integer programming can be used to
reconstruct a network of interacting genes and proteins from experimental data.
A network is modeled as a wiring diagram of interconnected gates, and integer
programming is used to reconstruct the logical functions of the gates. The
method has successfully mapped the subnetwork of TLM genes that control telomere
length in yeast, and will be applied to other models. 3. Another focus of the
research is the discovery of aggregates of interacting proteins that form
regulatory modules conserved in evolution. Given such a module in one species,
the problem of finding a corresponding module in a second species is abstracted
as a graph-theoretic problem called the colorful subgraph problem. The plan is
to develop fast and accurate heuristic algorithms for the solution of this
problem. 4. The final problem is partitioning a graph into a large number of
small dense clusters. An application is given from genetics, involving the
automatic inference of the familial relationships among a group of genetically
related individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems studied in this project
can serve as test cases for understanding the applicability of fundamental
algorithmic strategies such as constraint relaxation, integer programming and
local search.