* 1217854
* SHF: Small: Tool Support for Verifiably-Robust Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Brian Demsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,922.00

Society increasingly relies on software in critical roles for which crashes can
have serious consequences including the loss of lives. For example, it is now
commonplace for software to control the engines and brakes in our cars. This
research investigates a new approach for improving the resilience of software.
The goal is to verify that hidden bugs cannot cause programs to transition into
problematic states in which they stop responding to human control or respond
differently than when they were tested. Given the scale that our society depends
on software in critical roles, new approaches to improving software resilience
have the potential to reduce the financial costs of software failures and even
save lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work on software resilience largely
focused on extensive testing or formal verification of correctness. This project
takes a new approach - it seeks to verify that the consequences of a software
error have a limited scope in time. Precisely, it verifies that after a bounded
time period after an error, the execution will reach a state in which it will
respond with same behaviors seen while testing. This property is known in the
distributed systems literature as self-stabilization. The project will combine
type annotations with compiler analyses to verify that a computation is self-
stabilizing. A second thrust of the project is to explore how to compose self-
stabilizing computations with stateful computations while still providing useful
system level guarantees.