* 1217353
* SHF:Small:Collabroative Research: Elastic Fidelity: Trading off Computational Accuracy for Energy Efficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 182,000.00

Energy and power consumption have become a critical issue ranging from
microarchitectures to large-scale data centers and supercomputers. Conservative
estimates suggest that the information technology industry world-wide energy
consumption is in excess of 400 TWh and growing, generating roughly the same
carbon footprint as the airline industry, accounting for 2% of global emissions.
At the same time, the power constraints of chips hamper their performance, and
the shrinking transistor geometries and low supply voltages increase the
severity of processor variations resulting in higher timing error rates. High
error rates lead to a significant drop in yield and increased manufacturing
costs, calling for designs that are able to withstand them. This project seeks
to understand and explore the novel paradigm of elastic fidelity computing.
Elastic fidelity computing capitalizes on the observation that many applications
can naturally tolerate errors, and that not all of them need to run at 100%
fidelity all the time. Specifically, the goal of this work is to understand the
error models of various hardware components as they relate to data movement,
storage, and computation, and simultaneously to understand the error resiliency
of applications and re-architect them to leverage elastic fidelity. Elastic
fidelity offers potentially transformative effects for science and society, by
challenging conventional wisdom and taking a fresh look at the interplay of
errors, output quality and energy efficiency for an important class of pervasive
streaming and data-intensive applications. More specifically, elastic fidelity
promises significant energy savings that can put computing on an environmentally
sustainable path, by lowering the operational costs in major economic sectors,
and making the manufacturing of future chips cheaper by relaxing the accuracy
requirements of hardware components. The results of this research will be
disseminated through publications, workshops, advanced curriculum, and releases
of the developed infrastructure in the public domain. To accelerate broad
societal effects, the project participants will seek to foster technology
transfer by promoting collaboration and industry involvement through
presentations and site visit