* 1217306
* STTR Phase I:  Improving the Communications Performance and Reliability of In Vivo Wireless Medical Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Peter Savage, Innovatia Medical Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,723.00

Improving the Communications Performance and Reliability of In Vivo Wireless
Medical Devices

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project has the goal of
advancing novel wireless communications technologies that enable high
performance, reliable communications, and the ability to overcome link and/or
power failures among networked in vivo medical devices. Achieving this goal over
the in vivo wireless channel is a considerable challenge in a nascent, high-
risk, field with enormous potential for radically transforming healthcare. For
example, achieving this goal enables a new paradigm for Minimally Invasive
Surgery (MIS) by exploiting the possibilities offered by distributed wireless
networking of in vivo medical devices. Novel enabling technologies investigated
in this research will include packet-level coding across OFDM subchannels and
cooperative network coding using spatially distinct multihop links. Such
technologies will have application in many wireless systems. An initial
benchmark application is the design and exploratory development of a high-
definition video imaging system that includes a Camera Module that is both
wirelessly controlled and wirelessly communicates the video signals to an
external receiver. In this research, the Camera Module design will be extended
to be capable of distributed networking with other such Camera Modules to
demonstrate the benefits of the above novel technologies.

The broader impact/commercial potential of realizing technologies that achieve
high performance and reliability for in vivo wireless networked communications
among medical devices will be an important component in radically transforming
many biomedical applications, and in the creation of vast commercial, career,
and educational opportunities The prototype Camera Modules designed in this
project will facilitate a fundamentally new distributed-networking approach to
Minimally Invasive Surgery (MIS) and can replace cabled endoscopes with an
order-of-magnitude lower cost that has been validated by component and
manufacturing partners. Enabling Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN) devices such
as embedded sensors and actuators to provide reliable continuous monitoring
or/and actuation will stimulate many additional paradigm shifts in healthcare.
The expected wireless innovations that will realize high performance and
reliability, with near zero latency, and mitigation of interference over the in
vivo wireless channel will also have a broad impact on enabling solutions for
other special purpose wireless systems, such as sensor systems and emergency
communications systems. Beyond improving the capabilities of these special-
purpose wireless devices, these innovations provide foundation technologies that
will significantly advance wireless access and spectral utilization for a
plurality of wireless systems, including next-generation cellular and WLAN
systems.