* 1217435
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: OSTARA: An Optically-based Simultaneous Transmit and Receive Architecture for Enhancing Wireless Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mable Fok, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

Improving the usage of communication spectrum resources is critical to future
wireless systems. The OSTARA project focuses on the development of RF photonic
techniques that support the ability to simultaneously transmit and receive in
wireless devices. The effort involves a mix of theoretical development
(specifically investigating potential improvements in capacity), as well as
systems validation efforts involving building an opto-cancellation circuit
capable of cancelling out co-site interference associated with simultaneous
transmission and reception. . Specifically, the theoretical component of the
effort will involve using ray-tracing to understand the role of cancelation of
multipath components on communication rate, as well as an investigation into the
impact of idealized cancellation on network capacity using graph coloring. The
systems component of the effort will involve developing photonic circuits that
subtract off the transmitted signal from the receiver chain, as well as
potential multipath images of the transmitted signal. Validation will involve
field testing the opto-canceller by setting up test scenarios on the ORBIT
testbed at WINLAB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research
will improve the spectrum utilization of future wireless systems, an issue of
critical national importance. Additionally, the project will educate students
and post-doctoral fellows in the inter-disciplinary area of RF-photonics as
applied to advanced radio systems.