* 1217750
* SHF: Small: Efficient Test and Yield Enhancement Techniques for 3D Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Nur Touba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Three-dimensional integrated circuits (3D-ICs) using through-silicon vias (TSVs)
is an important new technology that overcomes barriers in interconnect scaling.
It provides significant advantages including increased functional density,
higher performance, and lower power. This research project will explore new
ideas, concepts, and directions for test and repair of 3D-ICs which hold promise
to significantly reduce test costs and improve yield. The ability to select
which dies/wafers are stacked together and in what order and with what
rotational symmetry are degrees of freedom in constructing 3D-ICs that can be
exploited. New strategies for using this to reduce the cost and increase the
effectiveness of defect tolerance techniques will be investigated. To reduce
test costs, new distributed test compression architectures will be developed
which create a new paradigm for test scheduling enabling much greater
flexibility and efficiency to shorten test time and improve product
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research project will generate new theory,
concepts, and techniques for significantly improving test costs and yield for
3D-ICs. This is a key factor for keeping down the manufacturing costs of 3D
chips and allowing them to penetrate new markets and benefit society. Knowledge
and experience generated from this project will be incorporated into courses in
VLSI design and test. Students will be trained and prepared for the next
generation semiconductor workforce. Undergraduate students will be involved in
the project, including those from underrepresented groups, through undergraduate
research projects, senior design projects, and course projects based on this
research.