* 1217605
* CIF: Small: BCSP: Rethinking Network Structure: The Role of Interactions in the Analysis of Network Structure
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kristina Lerman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Social, technological, and biological systems are often represented as a complex
network, whose structure reveals important properties of the system and leads to
insights about its behavior. Many methods have been proposed over the past
several decades to analyze the structure of complex networks, for example, to
identify influential people in a social network or functional modules in a
protein-protein interaction network. Most of these methods examine connections
between entities only, and ignore interactions between them. In recent years,
however, it has been recognized that network structure is the product of both
its connections (i.e., topology) and the interactions taking place between
entities in the network. These interactions determine how ideas, signals,
pathogens, or influence flow along the connections, and different interactions
may lead to different views of network structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will lay the foundation for understanding the interplay between
network structure, topology and dynamical interactions. It will develop a
mathematical framework for interactions-aware network analysis that will lead to
principled metrics and algorithms for finding communities or modules, measuring
proximity between entities in a network, and distance between networks.
Theoretical findings will be empirically validated using real-world network data
on tasks such as identifying modules, predicting missing links and others. This
new framework for network analysis will translate into new discoveries in
computer science, sociology, biology and medicine.