* 1217549
* AF: Small: Counting Problems, Holographic Algorithms and Dichotomy Theorems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jin-Yi Cai, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 479,987.00

This project studies counting problems in computational complexity theory. Three
related areas will be investigated. (1) The approximate complexity on spin
systems. It is hoped that progress will be made to understand precisely the
boundary between approximable and inapproximable partition functions for spin
systems. (2) To gain a much better understanding of the dichotomy theorems for
Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSP), and related frameworks of counting
problems such as Graph Homomorphisms and Holant Problems. Roughly, there have
emerged two types of dichotomy theorems. One type is very explicit and offers a
deeper understanding of the tractability criterion. Another type is more
infinitary, and often it is not even clear that the tractability criterion is
decidable. The strength of the second type is that it currently has a broader
coverage in a logical sense. This project will study the interrelationship
between various tractability criteria, with the concrete goal of proving a
decidable dichotomy theorem for the most general complex-weighted partition
functions of counting CSP problems over an arbitrary fixed domain. (3) To study
holographic algorithms based on matchgates for domain size greater than two. The
realizability and transformation theory of matchgates have already been well
developed for domain size two and over the general linear group of 2 by 2
matrices over the complex numbers. But for more general transformation groups
this is completely unexplored. This project will attempt to develop the theory
over more general groups. A concrete aim is to prove a dichotomy theorem for
problems over domain size greater than two, which states that all tractable
planar CSP problems are defined by constraint functions that are either
tractable for general CSP problems or tractable by a holographic transformation
followed by the FKT algorithm using matchgates.

There has been strong interest in the novel concept of holographic algorithms
(American Scientist magazine had a feature article on this development in the
Jan-Feb issue of 2008.) A sharper delineation between what is efficiently
computable, or approximable, and what is not has broader impact within computer
science and beyond. Within computer science there is a lot of interest in AI; a
substantial body of work is centered around graphic models. These are some forms
of partition functions. Outside computer science, there is a long tradition in
statistical physics to study phase transitions, and any provable link between
that and computational complexity theory will be of great interest. In addition
to graduate student training, there is also a significant amount of
computational experimentation in the design of reductions, which could engage
undergraduate students in research.