* 1217627
* HCC: Small: Understanding, Sensing, and Accommodating Situational Impairments in Mobile Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jacob Wobbrock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,722.00

A "computer user" can no longer be thought of only as a person sitting at a desk
in a consistent and comfortable working environment. Today's typical computer
user is now holding a mobile device smaller than his or her hand, is outdoors,
under the sun or in the rain, and perhaps even in motion, such as walking or
riding. However, mobile devices have no deep awareness of the environments in
which they are being used, or how those environments will affect their users'
abilities to act. Addressing this challenge is the central idea of this project.
The approach is to better understand, through scientific means, and better
accommodate, through clever sensing and design, the "situational impairments"
that affect the new-typical computer user for our age, the mobile user. Although
situational impairments have been noted in the past, few research efforts have
looked at how to sense impairing effects and what to do about them. Innovations
in sensors, inference, and user interfaces have the potential to improve mobile
interaction in the presence of situational impairments, showing that
accessibility is "for everyone." The intellectual merits of this work include:
(a) scientific studies of some situationally-impairing factors on human
performance; (b) the invention and evaluation of ten projects designed to
address and reduce the negative effects of certain situational impairments; (c)
the development of clever reusable sensing techniques to enable the creation of
those projects and advance the capabilities of mobile devices; and (d) the study
of the "crossover potential" of projects to people with physical or health-
induced impairments and disabilities. The broader impacts of this work include:
(a) pushing the capabilities of mobile devices and sensing technologies to
become more useful and usable, especially in varied contexts, which may have
relevance to mobile field workers; (b) concretely demonstrating that
accessibility research benefits everyone, and that all people incur impairments
of one form or another in their lives; (c) contributing to public health and
safety by reducing the dangers situational impairments cause, particularly to
and from people driving automobiles, and (d) creating a graduate course, an
undergraduate workshop, and a grades 6-12 science unit on ability-based design
for mobile computing.