* 1217793
* AF: Small: Fundamental High-Dimensional Algorithms based on Convex Geometry and Spectral Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

This project seeks to discover new algorithms and develop algorithmic tools to
address fundamental open problems in the theory of algorithms under the
following focus topics: (1) Rounding. The power of affine transformations in the
design of algorithms and in their analysis, including for solving LP's in
strongly polynomial time and approximately sandwiching convex bodies. (2)
Learning. Algorithms for learning polyhedra, learning subspace juntas and
identifying planted cliques in random graphs. (3) Isoperimetric inequalities.
Extensions of Cheeger's method to higher eigenvalues and multi-partitions, and
the KLS hyperplane conjecture. (4) Lattices and convex geometry. Optimization
and sampling problems over lattices, including: (a) the complexity of integer
programming (determining whether a convex body intersects a given lattice), (b)
the complexity of cutting plane methods, and (c) conditions under which lattice
points in a convex body be sampled efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
problems explored are of a basic nature, and originate from many areas,
including optimization (both discrete and continuous), sampling, machine
learning and data mining. With the increasing availability of high-dimensional
data in important application areas, efficient tools to handle such data are a
necessity. This award addresses some of the most basic questions arising from
this need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, an active member of the Algorithms and
Randomness Center (ARC), served as its founding director and continues in-depth
collaborations with scientists from various fields to identify problems and
ideas that could play a fundamental role in understanding the complexity of
computation. The project will contribute to graduate courses with online notes,
textbooks and up-to-date survey articles.