* 1217345
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research: Cognitive Approaches to Distributed Software Requirements Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kalle Lyytinen, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 173,298.00

This research seeks to uncover explanations and principles about how
requirements for information systems evolve and how they are managed across
project contexts. It will enumerate project design workflows and practices to
determine how different forms of artifact and process distribution affect
requirements engineering goals and project success. Currently there are no
rigorous, theory-based approaches to understanding and explaining large-scale
distribution of requirements, though there is evidence of its success.
Requirements engineering approaches address spatial and social distribution, and
to a lesser extent, structural and temporal distribution. Most importantly, the
combination of these issues, in total, has not been considered. Consequently, we
cannot say which configuration of practices is best suited to achieve specified
development goals, such as reduced time to market, or increased software quality
and customer satisfaction. New theoretical models and empirical research are
needed to understand the effects of distribution on evolving requirements.

The project will (1) conduct field studies and ethnography, (2) analyze work
procedures via grounded theory and comparative methods, (3) construct tools for
data analysis, model building, and model analysis, and (4) analyze models via
simulations and goal analyses. It will apply a distributed requirements
framework consisting of four forms of distribution (social, spatial, structural,
and temporal) and four requirements tasks (discovery, specification,
negotiation, monitoring) in conjunction with the theory of distributed cognition
to analyze requirements knowledge evolution in software projects. Additionally,
it will design new tools that help acquire, model, and analyze distributed
requirements workflows.

The research aims to develop critical insights on emerging realities in large-
scale design projects, which represent one of the drivers for economic growth
and new forms of industrial organization. Yet, many software organizations are
constrained by methodological and tool factors that do not recognize the
increased challenges for requirements engineering. This research highlights the
ways in which designers learn to manage the diversity of inputs and constraints,
and seeks to understand processes that enhance software-based open innovation in
the future.