* 1217136
* Reduced Basis Element Methods for Thermal Modeling of Integrated Circuits
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Ming-Cheng Cheng, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,189.00

The objective of this project is to develop "Reduced Basis Element" techniques
for thermal modeling of integrated circuits (ICs). Typical digital IC's are
designed using standard cells from "technology libraries", such as NOT, NAND,
NOR and XOR gates, flip-flops, adders, multipliers and coders/decoders, etc.,
each of which may consist of a number of semi-conductor transistors connected by
metal interconnects. A normal IC will contain millions of these standard cells
and as such it is computationally infeasible to perform detailed thermal
simulations of an entire IC. However, the development of accurate and efficient
thermal models is becoming increasingly important because of the increasing
power density of computing systems. Furthermore, new technologies such as
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) and 3D stacking only exacerbate chip-heating
problems. The proposed work will capitalize on the geometric repetition inherent
in an IC to develop accurate and computationally efficient thermal models.
Techniques for dividing and classifying an IC's cells and interconnects into
standard geometry blocks will developed. Compact reduced order models for these
blocks will then be created and these models will be coupled together to predict
the thermal behavior of an entire integrated circuit. The reduced order models
will be based on proper orthogonal decomposition analysis of detailed simulation
data of individual cells. As such, the reduced order models will not need any
ad-hoc modeling assumptions. Coupling procedures will use approaches borrowed
from discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods. The proposed approach will
enable thermal simulations of an IC with accuracy comparable to that of a direct
simulation at a computational cost which is affordable with today's computing
machinery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current computers pack more power into smaller
packages than ever before, which often results in significant internal heating
problems. Computer chip designers must make compromises based on the temperature
distribution in the integrated circuits and need efficient and accurate thermal
models to do this. Current models are derived using simplifying assumptions
about the heat flows in the integrated circuit and do not provide detailed
thermal data. These models limit designers from pursuing more advanced designs.
This work aims to develop an efficient, high-fidelity tool that will enable more
advanced designs to be tried while maintaining the short design cycle of the
semiconductor industry. In addition, the basic framework that will be developed
will be applicable to any problem having repeated geometric features such as
stacked-cell batteries, solar cell panels, thermoelectric modules, etc. Thus,
this technique could enable first-principles-based high-fidelity simulations in
a wide range of fields. These simulations will in turn enable the next
generation of advanced designs.