* 1217087
* EXP: Constructing Multimedia Artifacts Using a Video Repository
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Carolyn Maher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 549,917.00

This PI team is investigating three aspects of the use of video in education: i)
how people learn with video, ii) the role of technology in supporting use of the
vast corpora of video generated by decades of research, and iii) how video is
used in generative ways to help focus learners on phenomena of interest. The
researchers are basing their investigations on the Video Mosaic Collaborative
(VMC), a rich collection that includes video from multiple longitudinal studies
of children's mathematical reasoning, from urban, working class, and suburban
communities in both classroom and informal settings, as children work
individually and collaboratively on cognitively challenging math problems. The
technological innovation of this project lies in the development of a tool for
video selection and annotation, the VMCAnalytic. An analytic is a multimedia
object that combines selected portions of video with accompanying text in a
sequence of clips to yield a narrative for an intended purpose, which might
include such objects as a lesson plan or an exploration of a research question.
A critical design decision guides the development of this tool, to capture that
information in a standard format that: i) could persist outside the tool, ii) is
shareable and reusable in different formats (such as PDF with clickable video
links), iii) is readily expanded and enhanced as researcher needs change, and
iv) is recognized and treated as an information object in its own right. All
developments are open-source, which widens the impact of the project. The
project features two research and development cycles. The first cycle examines
how college professors use analytics to create learning tasks for their
students, and how their perception of what the analytic tool can do aligns with
the research team's initial socio-cognitive analysis. The researchers are also
studying how learners engage with tasks that were designed (e.g., how they make
explicit how learning develops or how teacher moves influence student outcomes),
allowing the development of conjectures about how students learn through the
multimedia construction tasks. From initial analyses of that data the research
team seeks to understand what kinds of supports and scaffolds need development
and implementation. The second design cycle then builds on the initial studies
and tests some of these supports and scaffolds.