* 1217519
* SHF: Small: Minimally Invasive Error Detection/Correction for Runtime Margin Elimination
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Dennis Sylvester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Microprocessors form the heart of most electronic systems that pervade our daily
life and they are responsible for the bulk of the power consumption of those
electronics. In this research, the PIs propose a promising method to
significantly reduce that power consumption, using an approach called Razor. One
of the issues with modern chips manufactured using silicon semi-conductor
processes is that the performance of the electronic components (such as
transistors, gate, etc) on these chips has become very unpredictable in terms of
their computational speed. This means some chips will run fast while others will
run slow. Currently, we address this performance uncertainty by operating all
chips at a slow speed that is considered safe for all possible chips. However,
this is hugely wasteful for most chips which can operate at a much faster
performance. We harness the performance margin of these chips by lowering their
operating voltage, such that they still meet the same safe performance
constraint, but operate significantly more energy efficiently. It has been
demonstrated that this approach can save as much as 50% of the power consumption
of an electronic circuit. The proposal suggests new ways for the chip to
automatically determine its lowest possible operating voltage while still
meeting the needed performance. It does so by progressively lowering the supply
voltage till the chip start to fail. These failures are then detected and
corrected and tell the voltage control that it has reached the limit of voltage
reduction. In this proposal, the PIs outline a new method to perform this error
detection and correction in a more efficient manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed methods, if successful and transferred to industry, could significantly
reduce energy consumption of processors and other electronic circuits. The
significantly larger energy efficiency of the proposed techniques could bring
about a number societal benefits. These technique will enable more effective
usage of energy for electronic circuits. Power consumption of electronic
circuits (computers, handhelds, servers farms etc.) is currently the fastest
growing component of the nation?s overall energy demand. Hence, reducing power
consumption of electronics is a critical concern for energy policy and could
reduce our dependence on oil and other non-renewable energy sources. In
addition, the proposed method will address a critical need to design circuits
that are immune to the increasing uncertainty in chips as we scale the silicon
technology further. This could play an important role in extending Moore's law
of scaling and have significant benefits for the semiconductor industry and the
nation?s economy. As part of this research, the PIs will expand our recent
practices of engaging with high school students through lab demonstrations and
tours to prepare these students for low power computing.