* 1217466
* III: Small: Transforming Feature Selection to Harness the Power of Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 426,387.00

The growth of social media data in size and variety accelerates rapidly as more
people use social media such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, among others. It is
a massive "treasure trove" interesting to researchers and practitioners of
different disciplines, and a great source for data mining. However, attribute-
value data in classic data mining differs from social media data besides both
are large-scale. Social media data are noisy, incomplete, comprised of multiple
sources, and form multi-modal and and multi-attributed networks. Furthermore,
such data are not independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). These unique
properties present new challenges for mining social media data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a novel approaches to feature
selection in linked data in general and social media data in particular.
Specifically, it seeks to exploit link information in supervised as well as
unsupervised feature selection for social media data. Because social media data
are drawn from multiple noisy, partial, or redundant sources, the proposed
approach to feature selection seeks to select relevant sources and use them
together to guide linked feature selection in multi-modal, multi-attributed
social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project lies at the confluence of feature
selection, social media analysis, and data mining. The project offers an
opportunity to engage students who are adept users of social media in developing
computational tools that can harness the power of social media. Some broader
impacts of this research include integration of social media analytics into
undergraduate and graduate courses as well as student research projects;
enhanced research-based training opportunities for students from under-
represented groups; and powerful social media analytics tools for understanding
collective behavior in social media, employing social media for crisis response
and disaster relief, and studying social and political movements. The results of
the project (including publications, software, etc.) will be made available
through the project web site: http://www.public.asu.edu/~huanliu/projects/NSF12