* 1217944
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Coding for Green Storage Technologies in Nonvolatile Memories
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anxiao Jiang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 222,903.00

The fast-advancing modern nonvolatile memory technology includes flash memory
and phase-change memory as the two most notable representatives. It is critical
to create new schemes and architectures to improve their energy efficiency as
well as their write speed, reliability and memory longevity. New schemes should
fully utilize the unique properties of the memory technologies, including cell
programming models, error models and endurance models. The key is to control
cell states more flexibly and robustly by closely coupling novel coding schemes
with the physics of these memory technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, a novel green storage technology will be developed based on coding
theory for nonvolatile memory. The focus will be on flash memory and phase-
change memory that share many common features. A new scheme for representing
data using relative cell levels will be studied; it optimizes the energy
efficiency for both writing and error correction. A novel variable-level cell
technology will be developed to maximize storage capacity. New error-correcting
codes will be designed to correct memory-specific errors. In addition, new
processing techniques will be developed to balance the power consumption at peak
and non-peak times. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new designs will be integrated to
form a comprehensive solution, and their performance will be analyzed
thoroughly. The results will contribute to providing a new platform for high-
performance ubiquitous computing based on nonvolatile memories.