* 1217225
* EXP: Collaborative Research:  Engaging Interdisciplinary Students in Innovation Education through Crowd-based Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Gerber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 287,540.00

This project team is exploring how crowd-based technology can support innovation
education through feedback from potential customers and users, specifically
looking at how the new forms of authentic feedback can be put to good use to
support learning better to design, solve problems, and innovate. Research is
around issues in learning through collaborations with potential consumers
mediated by technology. What are the affordances of crowd-based technology that
can support learning to design, learning to innovate, learning to use feedback
well, and learning to effectively iterate towards an effective and innovative
result? How does use of such technology and interactions need to be scaffolded
to such learning? What crowd-based activities and what types of design
challenges afford such learning? Foundations are in Learning by Design (LBD),
thick authenticity, and Project-Based Science (PBS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
to America's economic and social prosperity depends on people's ability to
innovate social and technical solutions. Crowd-based technologies provide
opportunities for innovators to interact with potential consumers and experts
while innovating, but they have not been used in innovation education. Feedback
from crowds could, however, be used to provide learners an opportunity to
receive rich informative feedback on design ideas and to develop solutions that
fit real-world needs. This project will contribute to our nation's ability to
better prepare engineers for innovation. The technology suggested here will, if
successful, make opportunities for experiencing both the difficulties of
innovating and the kinds of support structures that can help and will provide an
infrastructure for helping potential innovators learn to use feedback from
others wisely. In addition, the results of this project will contribute towards
enhancing project-based experiences throughout the curriculum. What is learned
in this project about supporting learning to design, learning to innovate,
learning to use feedback well, and learning to effectively iterate towards an
effective result has potential to inform the effective use of project-based and
design-based classes across grades and disciplines.