* 1217457
* SHF: Small: Error Correction for Biomolecular Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 457,998.00

Intellectual Merit: Error-correction is a fundamental challenge for all types of
computation, and it is a particularly essential challenge for molecular-scale
computation. DNA computation is molecular computation using DNA as the
computational hardware. Current methods for DNA computations are beset by a high
error rate. Error-handling techniques are the key to achieving robust DNA
computation in the laboratory. Indeed, a look at the successes in the field of
DNA computation clearly demonstrates the role played by error-handling
techniques. Winfree's group at Caltech recently made successful laboratory
implementations of Boolean DNA circuits of impressive complexity, using a type
of chemical logical gate known as a seesaw gate. Their work made use of two
types of error-correction (i) inbuilt signal restoration at the circuit network
level, and (ii)clamps, a method of error-suppression at the DNA gate design
level. Error-correction remains the single largest challenge to further scaling
these molecular computations. A particularly difficult type of error is leaks
where an output signal is eventually produced even in the absence of an input
signal. Due to leaks, logical gates in DNA circuits generally only correctly
operate for a limited time interval, and afterwards provide erroneous outputs.
The central goal of the proposed work is methods for error-correction of ?leaks?
in DNA computations. Proposed work will develop novel network level designs and
gate level designs that suppress leaks using a family of innovative techniques,
shadow networks and error-modulation gates. A key application is to DNA
amplifiers, which take as input a DNA strand at some concentration and produce
an output signal DNA strand. DNA amplifiers are leaky, producing signal DNA even
in the absence of input, albeit at a slower rate. The difference between signal
and noise decides the sensitivity of an amplifier. Enzyme-free DNA exponential
amplifiers have high leak rates that limit their sensitivity to detecting small
amounts of signal. This proposal describes both network level designs and gate
level designs that suppress leaks in such amplifiers. As a concrete and
challenging test case, error-suppression in an exponential cross-catalytic DNA
amplifier will be demonstrated as a major goal. A well-balanced combination of
modeling, software simulation, and experimental tests to verify the error-
correction methods will be used. Proposed error-handling techniques are modeled
as chemical reaction networks and such networks are then simulated. This
exponential amplifier is based on seesaw gates and is hence well modeled as a
chemical reaction network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The designs
outlined in the proposal are modular, allowing the various error-correcting
components to be used almost as black boxes. The error-suppression techniques
are general and translate to a wide variety of other DNA amplifier designs and
DNA computing applications involving amplification or restoration of a signal.
An ability to systematically identify, at the design stage, possible errors in
experimental DNA systems and methods to suppress and/or correct them is
essential for designing scalable and intricate DNA nanosystems. As an
educational effort, an advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate level
course is planned that teaches error-handling as an integral part of designing
DNA systems. The course will introduce students to modeling tools and sequence
design tools. The students will develop error-correcting schemes for some common
DNA systems like amplifiers, oscillators and switches. They then model their
techniques and the ones that work best in simulation will be given an
opportunity to implement them in the laboratory.