* 1217569
* CSR: Small: Prediction-Based Data Placement for New Memory and Storage Hierarchies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Du, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Many high-end computing and data-intensive applications, such as transaction
processing systems, large-scale scientific simulations, and on-demand services,
are limited by the performance of the underlying memory and storage systems. The
goal of this project is to improve the memory/storage hierarchy by integrating
new and emerging memory/storage technologies with the existing memory/storage
hierarchy. Flash memory based Solid State Drives (SSDs) and Phase Change Memory
(PCM) are two emerging memory/storage technologies that show tremendous promise
to improve the performance of current computer systems. Shingled Write Disks
(SWDs) have been recently proposed to further improve the magnetic disk space
capacity to another level. This project is to investigate effective data
placement in the new memory/storage hierarchies to better support high-end
computing and data-intensive applications. Considering the special
characteristics of these new technologies, this project provides innovative
solutions for prediction-based data placement in the new memory/storage
hierarchies to effectively improve the performance of both memory and storage
data accesses. It speeds up the integration of PCM with DRAM as a new memory
hierarchy and flash memory-based SSDs and SWDs with the existing storage
hierarchy. Providing efficient solutions to the fundamental performance issues
greatly improves the performance of many critical applications including weather
forecasting, large-scale scientific simulations, e-commerce, etc. Therefore, the
project makes huge impact on our daily life. Quickly integrating SWDs into the
existing storage hierarchy will also enhance our capability to handle huge
amounts of available data. This project creates positive impact on every layer
of the memory and storage hierarchies.