* 1218344
* SHF: Small: Next-Generation, Dependent Type-based Software Model Checking for C
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ranjit Jhala, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Static formal verification is a crucial last line of defense at the lowest
levels of the systems software stack, as at those levels we cannot fall back on
dynamic mechanisms to shield against bugs, crashes, or malicious attacks. The
last decade saw significant advances in formal verification research but
progress has been hindered by the vexing challenge of precisely inferring
invariants of data values that are stored within unbounded heap data structures
and manipulated by function pointers, callbacks, and other higher-order
constructs. These problems have been elegantly addressed by the machinery of
dependent types which exploit a syntactic programming discipline, to
compositionally propagate correctness invariants through data structures and
higher-order functions, thereby facilitating precise formal verification.
However, mainstream adoption of dependent types is blocked as the machinery has
been largely developed in the context of interactive proof assistants or purely
functional languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop the
theory, algorithms, and tools required to bring the transformative software
engineering benefits of dependent type based software verification to
mainstream, systems programming languages like C. To this end the PI will use
the framework of Liquid Types which demonstrates how the powerful machinery of
abstract interpretation and software model checking can be used to automatically
infer dependent types, thereby automating their use in formal verification. If
successful, this research will directly benefit software developers, by
incorporating verification smoothly within a familiar technology (types), and by
providing rich API specifications that will simplify code review and component
reuse; program analysis designers, by providing a general framework that can be
instantiated to obtain multiple domain- and application- specific verification
engines; and ultimately, end users, by providing static guarantees for a variety
of critical safety and security and reliability properties.