* 1218817
* CSR: Small: Cloud Security on Demand
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ruby Lee, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Cloud computing provides many benefits including convenience, consolidation,
compatibility, and cost-reduction. However, security is a major concern, since
cloud resources are shared with other users who may be adversarial. The goal of
this research is to define a framework for security-on-demand: cloud customers
can request the security they need and cloud providers can map these security
requests to the appropriate secure servers. Since customers have different
security needs, a range of threat models is explored together with servers with
different security capabilities. Research contributions include (1) new
strategies for measuring cloud server security capabilities, and (2) new
hardware-software mechanisms for collecting runtime trust evidence that a server
is enforcing a customer's requested security policy. (3) Secure protocols are
designed for collecting and reporting server security capabilities to cloud
management software, as well as (4) a hardware-software security verification
methodology to verify these protocols, using model checking and other tools. (5)
Novel actionable models of cloud servers? security properties that can be
matched to customers' requests are implemented by new trust monitoring and
policy enforcement modules. Also, (6) hardware mechanisms and migration
protocols for secure Virtual Machine migration to improve cloud security are
designed. The broader impact of this work includes providing greater security in
cloud computing for customers, allowing cloud providers to differentiate their
offerings with security provisioning using different secure server
architectures, enabling the specification and provisioning of customized and
verifiable security, and providing a research platform for investigating secure
hardware and software architecture in a cloud environment.