* 1218277
* III: Small: Optimization Techniques for Scalable Semantic Web Data Processing in the Cloud
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Kemafor Anyanwu-Ogan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 446,942.00

The use of cloud-based data processing platforms is an increasingly attractive
alternative for large-scale data processing. There is active investigation into
their use for various types of processing tasks on large-scale unstructured and
structured data. However, due to an increased interest in many communities to
enable more automatic sharing and exchange of data on the Web using Semantic Web
techniques, there is a rapid surge in the availability of very large, real-
world, Semantic Web datasets. Such data are semi-structured and have more
complex processing requirements than relational data processing due to the fine-
grained modeling of data and also the need for inferencing during processing.
Consequently, existing optimization techniques for cloud data processing
platforms which often adapt relational processing optimization techniques do not
address the needs of such workloads. Further, such techniques do not adequately
account for the nuances of cloud runtime platforms such as Hadoop e.g., dataflow
length as a cost metric, no a-priori existence of indexes and statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes insight into query optimization
requirements for Semantic Web data processing on Map Reduce platforms. Its
contributions include a novel Nested TripleGroup data model and Algebra (NTGA),
algebraic and dynamic cost query optimization techniques; inter and intra-work
sharing techniques, data representation formats and system architecture issues
of integrating Semantic Web optimization techniques into frameworks such as
Apache Pig. The impact of this project will cut across the increasing range of
communities that are aggressively adopting Semantic Web tenets such as,
scientific, business, government and other general-purpose communities.
&lt;br/&gt;