* 1218608
* SHF: Small: Design for Competitive Automated Layout (DCAL) of Mobile Application Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Eric Rotenberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 12/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Smart phones, tablet computers, and other mobile devices are transforming the
way people work, play, and interact. Their mobility, connection to the cloud,
and integration of sensors, computation and communication have inspired unique
applications unforeseen just a short time ago. The future holds even greater
promise, as applications fuse diverse inputs to deliver new levels of situation
awareness and embedded intelligence. To fuel this rapidly growing market, the
processors that power mobile devices must be designed more quickly than
processors in conventional computers, even as the complexity of mobile
processors approaches that of desktop and server processors. Product development
is accelerated by licensing hardware descriptions of the latest processors -
called soft cores - from third parties, and integrating them with proprietary
designs into an overall system-on-chip. Unfortunately, there is an additional
step that erodes the productivity gains won by licensing soft cores. A soft core
must be converted into a hard core, i.e., a circuit layout that can be
fabricated in a semiconductor foundry. Producing a high-quality layout is a
painstaking, manual process requiring niche expertise. Alternatively, automated
synthesis and place-and-route (SPR) tools can be used, but they produce poor
layouts with sub-par performance and power consumption.

This research combines the convenience of automated layout with the quality of
manual layout. The key innovation is to not compromise on automation - SPR must
be used - but rather to modify the design of mobile processors so that SPR is
able to produce a quality layout on par with manual layout. That is, the mobile
processor is designed with the knowledge that SPR is going to be used. This new
paradigm is called Design for Competitive Automated Layout (DCAL). DCAL applies
a novel regimen of design strategies at multiple levels that enables SPR to
produce competitive layouts. A common theme across all levels is to restructure
or eliminate sources of processor complexity that SPR handles poorly. (1)
Circuit-level DCAL: Highly-ported memory structures traditionally require
intense manual layout. Making matters worse, there are many of them in a modern
processor. These are restructured to achieve quality layouts without manual
effort. (2) Microarchitecture-level DCAL: The most challenging processor units
are restructured so that aggressive circuit and layout optimizations for meeting
timing closure are rendered unnecessary. (3) Core-level DCAL: Designing a single
microarchitecture that performs well across arbitrary program phases is a
significant source of complexity. Core-level DCAL divides program behaviors into
useful classes and provides dedicated core designs for these classes; the cores
are streamlined for the targeted behaviors, enabling SPR to produce quality
physical designs. (4) ISA-level DCAL: For portability across many different
processors, mobile device software is often distributed using a virtual
instruction-set-architecture (ISA) that does not correspond to any particular
processor ISA. The prerequisite for translating the virtual ISA into a processor
ISA on-the-fly opens the door to improvising on the processor's ISA for one or
multiple core types, with the aim of further streamlining cores for SPR to
generate quality physical designs.

The economic and societal benefits of DCAL are tangible. Automation accelerates
innovation by allowing companies to focus more on developing richer user
experiences and less on low-level technology that makes it all possible.
Moreover, automation puts this technology into the hands of more people,
including folks without niche expertise and small nimble design teams. Both
companies and everyday users profit from the fact that more innovative products
are being delivered to market sooner.