* 1218168
* III: Small: Towards Spatial Database Management Systems for Flash Memory Storage
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Mohamed Mokbel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this research project is to design and develop highly efficient
spatial and spatio-temporal database systems on flash memory storage. More
specifically, this project conducts research, develops requisite scientific
knowledge, builds software infrastructure, and integrates teaching activities
with research for four specific aims: (1) Supporting efficient spatial indexing
on flash memory, which includes data- and space-partitioning index structures,
(2) Supporting efficient spatial query processing and optimization, which
includes supporting various forms of the spatial join operation and query cost
estimation, (3) Supporting spatio-temporal indexing and querying, which includes
extending the spatial index data structures and the query processor to support
the high update frequency common in spatio-temporal applications, and (4)
Exploiting a storage hierarchy of flash and magnetic disks where spatial and
spatio-temporal indexing, query processing, and optimization can exploit the
full potential of both storage media. Besides its impact on industry, this
project will have significant broader impact across multiple segments of society
that include enhancing productivity, graduate and undergraduate student
education, curriculum development, and tutorial presentations. Publications,
technical reports, open-source software, and experimental data from this
research are disseminated via the project web site
(http://www.cs.umn.edu/~mokbel/flash).