* 1218212
* NeTS: Small: RUI: Dynamic Mathematical Modeling Towards Understanding Information Diffusion in Online Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kuai Xu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Online social networks have played an increasingly important role in connecting
people and spreading information. It becomes urgent and necessary to understand
the information diffusion process over large scale online social networks.
However, due to the intricacy of human dynamics and social interactions, the
vast scale of users and information, and the heterogeneity and diversity of
online social networks, understanding information diffusion in social networks
remains a daunting task. The PIs explore one key question in this project: how
does a piece of information travel over time and space in an online social
network. Similar questions have been asked and investigated for the outbreak of
epidemics, but little attempt has been made in online social networks to model
the diffusion of information from both temporal and spatial dimensions due to
the challenges in quantitatively modeling the diffusion process in online social
networks. The PIs combine the advances in data mining, graph theory, and dynamic
mathematical modeling, specifically partial differential equation modeling, to
characterize and predict the temporal and spatial dynamics of information
diffusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This work not only builds the
first extendable theoretical framework for characterizing, modeling and
predicting the diffusion process of information with dynamic mathematical
modeling approach, but also helps facilitate the spreading of positive
information and limit the distribution of unwanted misinformation such as spam
and phishing messages because it can gain an in-depth understanding of
information diffusion in social networks. Moreover, this project provides an
opportunity for undergraduate students to gain valuable research experiences in
mathematical modeling, graph theory and large scale data collection and
analysis, and to prepare them for the challenges and opportunities in the
increasingly important field of online social networks.