* 1218115
* SHF: Small: From Scenario-Based Software Requirements to Component-Level Behavior
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Nenad Medvidovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,961.00

Use-case scenario-based specifications are frequently used to capture the most
important requirements for a software system. Several techniques have been
proposed for representing the scenario models and for mapping them to software
system behavior models. The resulting behavior models yield several important
benefits, including the ability to perform early system assessment and to aid
the software engineers in implementing the required functionality. The two key
observations guiding this research are that (1) use-case scenarios are
inherently partial and (2) modern software systems are typically built by
composing independent components. Existing techniques support either modeling
the partial behavior of an entire system, or modeling component-level behaviors
under the assumption that they are known completely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
bridge the above disconnect, this research provides a trio of formally correct
techniques for mapping use-case scenario models of a system's requirements to
partial-behavior models of the constituent system components. The resulting
behavior models are then used to validate existing and elicit new requirements,
which in turn, result in further refinements of the components models. The
resulting techniques are evaluated theoretically for correctness, completeness,
and complexity, and empirically for practical usefulness and scalability. The
research yields several broader impacts: it improves the current state of
software requirements specification and formalizes its relationship to the
prevalent component-based software system development; its reliance on popular
scenario-based modeling notations renders the resulting techniques easy to adopt
in practice; the support for eliciting currently unspecified requirements leads
to improved understandings of systems under development; finally, the supported
early discovery and resolution of system behavior discrepancies helps to
mitigate significant costs that would be incurred if detected at later stages of
a system's lifecycle.