* 1218805
* CIF: Small: Computationally Efficient Analytic Reconstructions via Embeddings and Sparsity for Non-Linear Dynamic Imaging Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Birsen Yazici, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2015
* USD 172,053.00

With the development of low cost, high endurance uninhabited vehicles, it is now
possible to acquire imaging data persistently over long periods of time and
space using multiple distributed sensors. Such persistent multi-pass sensing
systems have several advantages over single-pass systems including the ability
to monitor a dynamic medium, wider spatial coverage, increased resolution and
the ability to acquire three or higher dimensional information. While such
persistent systems have the potential to revolutionize sensing and imaging
across many domains of applications, one of the fundamental bottlenecks for the
deployment of these systems is the challenges in image formation: First, the
reconstructions of 3D deformations, velocity fields and imaging in unknown
complex environments are highly non-linear large scale inverse problems.
Secondly, such systems can acquire hundreds of terabytes of data daily and
forming a standard image using even a single-pass data cannot currently be done
in real-time.

This project develops a unified mathematical framework and new classes of novel,
computationally efficient analytic image reconstruction methods to address these
large scale, computationally demanding, non-linear inverse problems. Central to
our development is the synergistic combination of inverse scattering theory,
sparse signal recovery methods and microlocal analysis. Our research involves
the following topics: (i) Development of accurate forward models for 3D
deformation-rate imaging, velocity imaging and imaging in unknown heterogenous
environments using multiple sensors. (ii) Reformulation of the resulting
nonlinear problems as linear problems by embedding them into larger dimensional
spaces coupled with sparsity constraints. (iii) Design of analytic,
computationally efficient methods for inversion by synergistically combining
ideas from microlocal analysis and sparse signal recovery methods.