* 1218929
* NETS: Small: Exploiting Social Communication Channels Against Cyber Criminals
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* A.L. Narasimha Reddy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Malware, especially botnets, have become the main source of most attacks and
malicious activities on Internet. Bots communicate with each other and Command
&amp; Control servers to coordinate their malicious activities. This project is
developing new techniques and tools to detect malicious activities and botnets
through analyzing their communication channels. This project plans to
investigate mechanisms for detecting these communication channels through
several novel mechanisms: (i) through a graph analysis of social contacts, (ii)
analyzing graph properties of communication to decipher Peer to peer
communication properties of bots and (iii) machine learning based approaches to
analyzing network traffic. The automation required to propagate malicious
contents and malware will result in different behavior than human behavior in
these communication channels. We expect the generated names, content, the time
of contacts and communication, the social graph structures to be sufficiently
different to enable us to develop techniques for detection of malicious
entities. Our work focuses on developing robust techniques that are hard to
evade or limit the botnet functions when they try to evade the detection
mechanisms. Developed analysis tools will help in detecting botnets in networks
and malicious entities in social networks. Educational impact will include
training graduate and undergraduate students with valuable research skills while
advancing the state of the art in network security and traffic analysis,
contributing to the technology workforce. We will publish our results and enable
technology transfer to industry.