* 1218303
* SHF: Small: Tactic-Centric Traceability Models for Preserving Architectural Quality
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Jane Huang, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 522,193.00

Software-intensive systems are typically designed around a set of architectural
decisions. These decisions are often based on well-known architectural tactics,
which work together to shape the structure, behavior, properties, processes, and
governance of the delivered solution. Unfortunately, architectural quality often
degrades over time as ongoing maintenance activities are undertaken to correct
faults, improve performance, or to adapt the system in response to changing
requirements. This research presents a novel and practical approach for
addressing the problem of architectural degradation based on a new concept of
tactic Traceability Information Models (tTIMs). tTIMS provide semantically
typed, reusable, and extensible traceability links, and are designed to
significantly simplify the traceability process, reduce its costs, scale up to
support traceability and architectural preservation in large and complex
projects, and facilitate the visualization of underlying design rationales to
the software maintainer. The proposed techniques will have the potential to
impact a wide variety of high-performance and safety critical software systems.

The project makes several important contributions. First, it provides a
potentially transformative solution for integrating existing techniques from the
field of architectural assessment and trace retrieval into the maintenance
process. Second it develops new algorithms and techniques for capturing and
reusing traceability knowledge across projects in the form of a reusable
infrastructure of semantically typed traceability links. Third, it provides new
visualization techniques for communicating underlying architectural decisions
and their interrelationships to developers and maintainers within the context of
common software engineering tasks. Fourth, it advances cutting edge trace-
retrieval solutions by utilizing a combination of trace retrieval, machine
learning, and structural analysis techniques in order to detect classes related
to architectural tactics and then to classify those classes according to
specific roles in the tactic. Finally, it utilizes this information to
automatically generate architecturally significant traceability links.