* 1218002
* CCF-SHF Small: Beyond Algebraic Data Types: Combinatorial Species and Mathematically-Structured Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Stephanie Weirich, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2017
* USD 325,840.00

At the heart of any computer program is the data that the program is designed to
manipulate. Data, in turn, is only useful when organized into some sort of
structure ---be it as simple as a list or as complex as a network or
hierarchical tree. The mathematical theory of "combinatorial species" studies
many variations of such structure, but it has not often been applied in a
computer science context. The goal of this project is a new understanding of
data structure through the abstractions of combinatorial species. This
understanding will lead to new classes of data structures as well as practical
tools for working with existing ones. Ultimately, this work will lead to more
expressive programming languages, allowing computer programs to be written at a
higher level and with fewer errors.

More specifically, the project seeks to extend the existing computational theory
of algebraic data types with constructs derived from the theory of combinatorial
species. In particular, the project will explore the specification of data types
with nontrivial symmetries and sharing, such as cycles, bags, and simple graphs.
The project will develop libraries and language extensions to support the use of
species data types in the Haskell programming language. As a significant test
case, it will explore the application of species data types to property-based
testing. Although the work is to be carried out in the context of the Haskell
programming language, the results will be applicable to any language, including
those with direct support for algebraic datatypes (such as OCaml, F#, Racket or
Scala), and those without. All libraries and tools developed under this project
will be made available as open source.