* 1218876
* NeTS: Small: Integrating Electronic and Visual Signals for Accurate Localization
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Yuan Zheng, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 430,000.00

Nowadays, an increasing number of objects can be represented by their wireless
electronic identifiers. For examples, people can be recognized by their cellular
phones' or laptops' MAC addresses and products can be identified by their RFID
numbers. Localizing objects with electronic identifiers is more and more
important as our society is becoming increasingly "digitalized". However,
traditional wireless localization techniques cannot meet the rapidly mounting
requirements of accurate and cost-effective localization. Some of them need
expensive hardware to achieve high accuracy, which is impractical for massive
deployments, while others such as WiFi RSSI based localization are inaccurate
and not robust to environmental noise.

This project designs a novel localization methodology called EVLoc. In EVLoc,
visual signals (V signals) are used to improve the accuracy of electronic
localization, as the accuracy of visual localization is around 0.1-0.5 meter.
This technique fully leverages V signals' high accuracy and the pervasiveness of
electronic signals (E signals). The project conducts three main research tasks:
(1) perform object localization given complete and distinct E and V signals, (2)
perform object localization in practical settings when the E and V signals are
not complete and distinct, and (3) implement the E-V approach to validate its
accuracy and efficacy. This pioneering research develops a transformative
approach that integrates E and V signals for accurate localization. The approach
can be applied to many emerging applications such as epidemic control and
tracking of elderly people, children, and those exhibiting at-risk behaviors for
healthcare purposes.