* 1218823
* NETS: Small: Machine Learning Based Algorithms for Quasi-Static Ad Hoc Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Rohit Negi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Quasi-static ad hoc wireless networks are models for city-wide mesh networks,
machine-to-machine networks deployed for control, and certain sensor networks,
which are of growing importance in applications such as smart electricity grids,
transportation grid control and infrastructure monitoring. The goal of this
project is to design distributed online network protocols that learn the
characteristics of such networks and self-optimize to achieve more predictable
performance, such as delay guarantees. This is especially important for networks
such as smart grid, where end-to-end delay must be predictable. A factor graph
is used to model the probability distribution over the allowed network control
actions. A novel information theoretic formulation is being investigated, which
measures the information sharing required to coordinate network actions, between
devices and across the network stack within each device. The solution to this
problem will then be obtained by using statistical sampling techniques from
machine learning, providing the online algorithm for network control. This
algorithm will be distributed, because it is obtained by minimizing the
information sharing required. Thus, the project will provide a formal
mathematical basis for the probabilistic design of distributed protocols for
quasi-static ad hoc networks, utilizing the information theoretic concepts of
information, entropy, and side-information to quantify the value of distributed
actions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will be published and
presented in major professional conferences and journals, and will be available
to the wider public. The project will support the training of doctoral students
in the important field of wireless networks. The theoretical framework obtained
will be discussed in courses on statistical engineering methods and information
theory. The MAC protocol concepts will be used to augment the PI?s under-
graduate experimental set-up based on software radios, so that students of
communication theory can obtain hands-on experience with system design.