* 1218289
* CIF: Small: Data Reduction for Networked Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Biao Chen, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 416,845.00

Technological advances in devices, computing, communication, and networking have
allowed the development and deployment of networked sensing systems of varying
scales with diverse applications. The voluminous data collected in these
networked systems, however, present some unique challenges. Ensuring that useful
data be available at the right location in a timely fashion is difficult in a
large scale network because of various limitations inherent in such systems. In
addition, the collected data in its raw form often lacks clarity for making an
informed decision. The primary goal of the project is to develop theory and
methodology that allow the raw data to be reduced to the extent such that 1)
their transmission to the desired destination is compliant to the system
limitation, and 2) there is no loss of information with respect to the mission
of the networked system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project pursues a
comprehensive treatment of data reduction in such inference networks and aims to
develop the sufficiency principle and related theory and methods to overcome
these challenges. Intimate connection between data reduction for inference and
data compression for transmission is exploited and expanded in the network
setting. New interpretations using the sufficiency principle for some classical
multi-terminal source coding problems will be developed; they provide a new
venue for the exploration of the connection between statistics and information
theory. The development of theory and methods that guide data reduction in a
networked inference system also has the potential to unify existing works that
are tailored toward specific inference problems.