* 1218170
* CGV: Small: Toward Objective, In-Situ, and Generalizable Evaluation of Visual Analytics by Integrating Brain Imaging with Cognitive Factors Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Remco Chang, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 515,381.00

Evaluating complex, interactive visual analytics systems is challenging for many
reasons. The exploratory nature of using visualization makes quantitative
measurements of individual components of the visualization task infeasible. The
range of potential users and their differing goals render standardized metrics
too restrictive. And environmental conditions can influence experimental
outcomes, making it difficult to compare and generalize the results of separate
evaluations. Although numerous methods have been proposed for evaluating
visualizations and HCI, few can be readily applied to objectively evaluate
visual analytics systems in real-world settings. In this project the PI will
address this open challenge by developing a method to evaluate complex,
interactive visual analytics systems using objective measures that can be
performed in-situ to yield reproducible, generalizable results. His approach is
to integrate noninvasive brain imaging using functional near-infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS) and cognitive factors measurements. The PI argues this will
allow him to address issues in visual analytics evaluation by explaining the
user's cognitive processes at a deeper level. Lightweight, noninvasive brain
imaging techniques such as fNIRS have become more mature and reliable in recent
years. fNIRS is easy to set up, robust to movement, and has been demonstrated in
studies to be effective in determining a user's cognitive load, preferences, and
perception when using a visualization. Cognitive factors such as locus of
control, spatial visualization ability, and perceptual speed have recently been
shown to correlate with a user's ability to interact with a visualization, and
can be generalized to predict the behavioral patterns of users with different
cognitive profiles. Both approaches aim to better understand the user's
cognitive state and abilities. In this research cognitive factors measurements
will provide low-level, baseline information about the user which is stable and
unchanging ("traits"), while fNIRS provides immediate, real-time feedback on the
user's current cognitive state when interacting with a visualization ("states").
In practice, without accounting for the individual user's traits, it is
difficult to generalize the signals provided by fNIRS (for example, right- and
left-handed subjects produce very different brain signals). By combining
information on both "traits" and "states," evaluation results can generalize to
a larger population based on cognitive profiles. The PI and his team have
conducted two preliminary experiments that demonstrate the feasibility of the
approach. They have replicated the classic experiment by Cleveland and McGill
using fNIRS, and successfully distinguished participants' brain signals when
using bar charts versus pie charts. In another experiment, they successfully
correlated participants' locus of control with their ability to use hierarchical
visualizations with different visual metaphors.

Broader Impacts: The results of this work will have both immediate and long term
impact on the field of visualization. In the short term, project outcomes will
provide a robust and reliable evaluation mechanism for measuring the
effectiveness of complex, interactive visual analytics systems. Ultimately, the
findings of this research will help open the human-cognition "black box" and
illuminate how interacting with a visualization helps a user gain insight. Such
an understanding may in turn lead to the realization of insight-based evaluation
and the emergence of a new visualization theory that is based on human cognitive
processing. Finally, by integrating real-time fNIRS into visual analytics
systems, effective adaptive mixed-initiative visual analytics systems can become
one step closer to reality.