* 1218620
* AF: Small: RUI: Network design and facility location problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Guy Kortsarz, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 359,134.00

In some combinatorial optimization problems, the resulting
solution&lt;br/&gt;may violate some constraints provided the cost of finding the
solution&lt;br/&gt;is significantly reduced. Such problems are called soft
constraints&lt;br/&gt;problems. In hard constraints problems, an acceptable
solution cannot&lt;br/&gt;violate any of the constraints. Hard constraints
versions of many&lt;br/&gt;problems have resisted satisfactory solutions as
compared to the&lt;br/&gt;corresponding problems with soft constraints. The goal
of&lt;br/&gt;this project is to study combinatorial optimization problems with
hard&lt;br/&gt;capacity constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will be
focusing on hard capacity versions of network design&lt;br/&gt;and facility
location problems. These problems have applications in&lt;br/&gt;networking and
resource allocation and are among the central problems&lt;br/&gt;in
combinatorial optimization. As it has happened often in the past,&lt;br/&gt;the
PIs believe that techniques developed for solving these problems&lt;br/&gt;will
have broader impact in solving other combinatorial problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training and fostering undergraduate as well as high
school students&lt;br/&gt;is a major emphasis of the broader impact of the
proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs' prior work with undergraduates have led to
very good career&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for many of them. The PIs will continue
working with&lt;br/&gt;students at Rutgers-Camden, fostering their raw talent
and helping&lt;br/&gt;them discover their own potential. The PIs will also
continue working&lt;br/&gt;with high school students, giving them exposure to
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;computer science and working on research with some of
them.