* 1218488
* III: Small: A Theoretical Framework for Practical Entity Resolution in Network Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Lise Getoor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

In an era of information overload and big data, there is a pressing need to
analyze, protect, prioritize and utilize data. Much of this data is inherently
relational; thus, it is crucial to understand the benefits, challenges and
potential hazards of exploiting the relational properties. Integrating,
cleaning, and linking relational data requires matching and resolving references
in the data. At the same time, matching and linking pose significant privacy
risks. The proposed work develops a theoretical understanding of entity
resolution in network data with the goal of developing tools and methods which
can tell us how easy or difficult it will be to resolve data in different
settings. Making use of the theory, new entity resolution algorithms will be
developed with accuracy guarantees and for scaling entity resolution to large-
scale data sources. These research results will enable more informed data
sharing and usage decisions by individuals, industry, and government. Accurate
analysis of network data is of utmost importance to science, medicine and
national security. Whether studying socioeconomic trends, integrating data from
large microarrays, analyzing organized crime or terrorist networks, or mining
financial data for corporate misconduct, accurate network data, and its
associated statistics, are crucial. At the same time, understanding how entity
resolution effects privacy guarantees, and educating the public about the impact
of releasing identifying information, is equally important.