* 1218705
* HCC: Small: Multitasking as a Collaborative System: Examining the Millennial Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Stephanie Reich, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This research investigates how Millennials, having grown up with the Internet,
can become effective future information workers. Studies are suggesting that
multitasking with digital media is associated with errors, stress and degraded
performance. This study provides two main research contributions. First, to date
no one has conducted an in situ investigation of multitasking among the
Millennial generation. Second, whereas most investigations have approached
multitasking as an individual activity, this research will instead take a new
perspective on multitasking as a collaborative social system. This study will
examine whether connectivity leads to information overload and distraction, how
online media experience affects learning, communication, and behavior offline,
as well as the relationship between degree of connectivity and work performance.
This study will use a mixed-methods approach involving ethnographic techniques,
sensors, and diaries to collect detailed activity. The results can contribute to
an understanding of how young adults use digital media, it can inform the design
of requirements for future technologies, and it can be used for the design of
media literacy programs in K-12 schools. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The results will contribute towards plans and policies that schools and
organizations can enact to help young people manage their work and use of
digital devices more effectively. A media literacy curriculum developed from
this research can serve as a model for K-12 schools. While there has been much
concern given to preventing worker "burnout" and lowering stress among
information workers, this study can provide concrete results of how digital
technologies contribute to distraction and stress, especially among the
Millennial generation. The study will elicit requirements for technology design
that could help people better manage multitasking, increase situational
awareness and reduce errors. Results of this study will help young people
improve their effectiveness in using digital media, which could improve future
work life, productivity and satisfaction. Finally, the project will provide
educational impact through the participation of undergraduate and graduate in
the research and through the development of a new doctoral seminar.