* 1218515
* CGV: Small: High-Fidelity Representation of Architectural Material Appearance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Holly Rushmeier, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Humans are constantly making judgments about the world based on material
appearance (e.g. is something old or new, clean or dirty, soft or hard?). A
material appearance editor is an essential feature in any software system for
generating synthetic photorealistic images. Increasingly the applications that
rely on photorealistic imagery -- design, historical reconstruction, training,
and entertainment -- depend on renderings of high visual quality. Ultimately
human perception determines what is required for high visual fidelity. However,
very little work has been done modeling human perception of materials in a form
that can be applied to computer graphics rendering systems. In this project, the
researchers are conducting a series of physical and psychophysical experiments
with the goal of developing a material appearance model that is applicable to
computer graphics. The focus is a class of materials with clear economic impact
-- materials used in architectural design. This work holds promise of a strong
impact on architectural-design and material manufacture by providing high-
quality visualization of architectural materials. It will accelerate developing
architectural materials by allowing researchers to simulate material appearance
with physical accuracy as well as perceptual fidelity. Additionally, the
psychophysical experiments will provide new insights into human
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to produce a material
appearance model that informs the efficient modeling, measurement and
representation of materials for visual simulation. The results obtained in the
process of developing this model include:&lt;br/&gt;- an apparatus particularly
suited to measuring architectural material appearance properties.&lt;br/&gt;-
psychophysical measures of the perception of materials accounting for
directional, scale, and surround effects that are typical of architectural
applications.&lt;br/&gt;- simplified material models, based on applying
psychophysical measures to physical data.&lt;br/&gt;- experimental results
verifying the visual accuracy of simplified material models.&lt;br/&gt;- a
common database for both physical and psychophysical measures of material
appearance for architectural applications.