* 1218189
* CIF: Small: Adaptive Information: Sequential Sensing and Active Learning Theory,  Methods and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Robert Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 626,505.00

Complex systems, such as living cells and the Internet, involve interactions and
associations between large numbers of individual components. Specific examples
include interactions between proteins in biological cells and connections
between users in communication networks. Developing theory and methods to model
and analyze large-scale networked systems is a grand challenge for the 21st
century. For instance, new mathematical methods will lead to better models of
biological systems and thus improvements in disease prevention. Measuring the
signals of such systems is a crucial step in developing good models, and a major
hurdle is that it is often impractical or impossible to measure all variables in
large systems. This project addresses the hurdle by developing adaptive methods
that automatically adjust the measurement process by using information gleaned
from previously collected data in order to focus and optimize the gathering of
new information. Ultimately, these methods will dramatically accelerate the pace
of discovery in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main theme of
the project is an investigation of the role of adaptive measurement, sensing and
experimentation in large complex systems of many variables. Adaptive methods are
sequential procedures that optimize the selection of the next measurements or
experiments based on previously gathered data. The research involves the
development of a general theory for adaptive measurement that is applicable to
various domains of engineering and science. The main goals are to mathematically
characterize and quantify the advantages of adaptive measurements relative to
non-adaptive methods and to design optimal adaptive measurement procedures. The
investigation also explores the potential of adaptive methods by studying
specific problems and applications in biology, national security, and human-
computer interaction.