* 1218452
* CIF:  Small:  Two-Dimensional Channel Modeling, Detection and Coding for Shingled Magnetic Recording
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* J Cruz, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 418,565.00

Current magnetic recording technology is fast approaching its theoretical limit
of 1 terabit per square inch (1 Tb/in^2), and unless new technology is developed
that can deliver areal densities of up to 10Tb/in^2, the annual increases in
hard-disk drive capacity will taper rapidly. Several candidate technologies are
currently being developed that will extend the areal densities up to 4Tb/in^2,
but only two that can possibly extend it all the way to 10Tb/in^2, namely energy
assisted recording on bit-patterned media and two-dimensional magnetic
recording. Bit-patterned media requires extreme nano-lithography and imprinting
techniques, which are prohibitively expensive, and very tight specifications on
the planarization of the disk surface. Two-dimensional magnetic recording, on
the other hand, uses conventional heads and media, but requires the development
of new two-dimensional signal processing and coding techniques suitable for the
magnetic recording channel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims at
providing an in-depth understanding of two-dimensional shingled magnetic
recording through: 1) development of realistic channel models at the magnetic
grain level; 2) development of techniques to analyze the statistical properties
of such models; 3) development of two-dimensional intersymbol interference
channel detectors with limited per-symbol complexity; 4) development of a novel
and transformative approach to the design of capacity-approaching codes based on
fundamental algebraic properties of cyclic codes; and 5) determination of the
maximum areal recording density that can be achieved in practice. This research
program will help answer the fundamental question of whether it is possible to
approach the ultimate theoretical limit of one user bit per magnetic grain using
shingled writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader goal of this research program
is to help determine the feasibility of hard-disk drives with areal densities of
up to 10Tb/in^2 using shingled writing. Its successful completion would
establish two-dimensional magnetic recording as the technology of choice for the
next generation of magnetic storage devices and potentially shape future
research in this field. The significance of achieving such a high recording
density is that one could store up to ten times as much data on a drive of the
same size as current ones, thus fostering a multi-billion dollar economic impact
on the storage industry. In addition, the methods devised for detection and
coding for channels with two-dimensional intersymbol interference have a wider
application to new two-dimensional transmission and storage systems as they
become available, for instance multi-aperture free-space optical communication
systems and holographic data storage systems.