* 1218597
* NeTS: Small: Efficient Energy-Aware Web Browsing in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Guohong Cao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2015
* USD 406,000.00

Web browsing is one of the most common and important services provided by
smartphones. However, it currently suffers from long delays and creates a huge
drain on the battery lifetime of smartphones. These limitations are caused by
complex interactions between the processing flow in mobile web browsers and
specialized characteristics of the wireless radio interface, and by the
processing limitations of the smartphones. This project addresses these
limitations by focusing on three intertwined issues: (i) various techniques to
reorganize the computation sequence of the web browser to let the wireless radio
interface enter sleep earlier, are designed, implemented and evaluated; (ii)
practical data mining based methods are introduced to predict the user viewing
time of webpages and determine when the smartphone should switch to low power
state, considering the resource limitations of the smartphone and various
tradeoffs between delay and power; and (iii) a new architecture is proposed to
shift the computing from smartphones to the virtual-machine based proxy to
address the computation limitations in smartphones considering scalability
issues and bandwidth constraints. This project will make significant theoretical
and technical advances on reducing the power consumption and access delay of web
browsing in wireless networks. The success of this project will affect many
people's daily life, making smartphones last longer and web browsing faster. The
results of the project will be disseminated widely through high quality
publications and presentations. The proposed research will also be integrated
with the education curricula at the Pennsylvania State University.