* 1218457
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: LAWN: Scaling Up Cellular Data Networks using a Large Number of Antennas
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Yang Yang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2016
* USD 140,000.00

The exponential growth of mobile data is a major challenge to the operators of
cellular networks. Looking beyond conventional capacity-improving approaches
such as adding more cells and acquiring more spectrum, this project seeks to
fundamentally improve the spectral efficiency of cellular data networks. The
project investigates LAWN (Large number of Antenna based Wireless Networking), a
radically new cellular network architecture, in which a large number of antennas
simultaneously serve a relatively much smaller number of wireless terminals
using multiuser beamforming. The project has two inter-related thrusts. The
first investigates a novel LAWN base station design and prototype that can cost-
effectively scale to hundreds of antennas and exploit physical-layer tradeoffs
between computational complexity and network capacity. The second thrust studies
the resulting new network architecture that efficiently schedules terminals,
intelligently allocates transmission power, and coordinates pilot signal
transmissions to mitigate inter-cell interference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project targets improving the spectral and power efficiency of cellular networks
by many fold, leading to not only fast wireless data networks but also longer
battery lifetime of mobile terminals. Results from the project are likely to
provide fresh insights for new theoretical development, bringing large-scale
multi-user beamforming one significant leap closer to practical deployment in
cellular data networks. In addition to academic publications, the project will
produce an open platform, including hardware, software, and documentation
available on-line, for teaching and researching base station design. It will
actively involve undergraduate students as well as students from under-
represented populations.