* 1218745
* CSR: Small: Exploiting 3D Integration for Power Management in Embedded Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Saibal Mukhopadhyay, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

The complexity and power demands for System-on-Chips are projected to grow in
coming years, making low-power design and low-loss power delivery critical for
power-efficiency of future embedded systems. The objective of the proposed
research is to explore innovative technology and methodologies for effective
power management in embedded processors considering the interdependence between
power delivery and low-power design. A system platform is being developed in
which the power management unit, consisting of the power delivery and the power
control circuits, is integrated vertically with a processor using 3D
heterogeneous integration. An integrated approach is pursued that couples the
circuit innovations in the 3D power management tier with the on-line control of
the processor power to maximize the power-efficiency of the system while
ensuring reliable operation.

Embedded systems are ubiquitous in modern society in various applications
including medical systems, handheld devices, aviation systems, networking, and
security, to name a few. Power management is often considered to be the most
critical problem for future embedded systems. The 3D approach to power
management can enable transformative solutions to the power problem in embedded
systems, removing barriers to major advancements in their power-performance,
relaxing packaging constraints, and reducing system footprint. The research
results are disseminated through conference and journal publications, short-
courses, tutorials, and project website and integrated in the graduate and
undergraduate VLSI courses. The project is engaged with the Summer Undergraduate
Research in Engineering/Science (SURE) and Facilitating Academic Careers in
Engineering and Science (FACES) programs to increase participation of
undergraduate and under-represented students in computer systems research.