* 1218325
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Finding and Exploiting Hierarchical Structure in Time Series Using Statistical Language Processing Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jessica Lin, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Applications as diverse as manufacturing, medicine, earth science, finance, and
entomology generate massive amounts of temporal or spatio-temporal data. More
specifically, information about moving objects, events, and atmospheric
measurements that are geo-referenced may be derived from high-resolution
satellites, sensors, ground and aerial imagery, GPS, and RFID. Such data present
challenges to current approaches for mining time series data. For example,
shape-based similarity measures used for classification and clustering
consistently fail to produce satisfactory results for long sequences, or
trajectories modeling objects that move in 2D or 3D space which may often
exhibit similar motion patterns but differ in locations and orientations. In
addition, algorithms for finding frequent patterns and anomalies assume known,
fixed pattern lengths. This project aims to address the limitations of current
approaches to time series data analysis by adapting statistical language
processing algorithms and approaches. Specifically, fast algorithms for learning
context-free grammars can expose hierarchical structure in time series and thus
enable efficient discovery of variable length patterns and facilitate human
understanding of time series structure. Also, using the hierarchy to populate a
"bag of patterns" can result in significantly more effective similarity measures
for long time series, much like the familiar bag of words representation used
with documents is effective for a variety of similarity-based language
processing tasks on massive corpora.

Given the ubiquitous nature of time series data, advances in algorithms that can
help uncover the structure of such data are likely to impact a broad range of
applications. All of the results of this research, including publications,
algorithms and software, would be made freely available to the broader research
and educational community. The project offers enhanced research-based training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The project leverages
existing programs at George Mason University and the University of Maryland at
Baltimore County to to increase the participation of women members of other
groups that are under-represented in Computer Science.