* 1218993
* SHF: CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Automated Model Synthesis of Library and System Functions for Program-Environment Co-Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Xiangyu Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 44,845.00

Program analysis provides solid foundations for a broad range of applications,
such as detecting security vulnerabilities, localizing program faults, proving
program correctness, and optimizing performance. A pervasive and critical
challenge in program analysis is to handle library functions and system calls,
which provide an essential execution environment for a program and would be
ideal to be co-analyzed with the program itself. Despite its importance,
achieving program-environment co-analysis in practice is challenging. First, the
difficulty to acquire the source code of some environmental functions precludes
source code based analysis. Moreover, even if source code is available, the code
base is often prohibitively large and complex, making analysis difficult.
Existing solutions are to provide program analysis with either manually-
constructed models, which do not scale, or imprecise models, which are overly
conservative.

In this project, the goal is to apply program synthesis technique to construct
models for environmental functions from their binary implementation and a set of
initial inputs. The models are essentially programs that provide the same
functionality of the functions being modeled, yet substantially simplified. Such
programs can be included as part of the application, enabling program-
environment co-analysis. The proposed technique will lead to an automated
solution that will offload the onus of manually crafting models from program
analysis developers' shoulders. Moreover, it will demonstrate the feasibility of
precise program-environment co-analysis through applications.