* 1218083
* Investigating the Emergence of Cranial Modification and Violence among the Chanka of Andahuaylas, Peru (AD 1000-1400)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Tiffiny Tung, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 13,026.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Tiffiny Tung, Danielle Kurin will conduct the final
phase of dissertation research using AMS radiocarbon dates to determine the
chronology of several different mortuary contexts and associated human remains
from prehistoric Andean populations, known as the Chanka. The research is
focused on how the collapse of the Wari Empire structured violence and bodily
expressions of ethnic identity among post-Wari Chanka populations, and the
carbon-14 dates will enable Ms. Kurin to document the timing of serious
outbreaks of violence, whether during the Wari era (MH, ca. 600-1000 AD), or in
the aftermath of imperial collapse (LIP, ca. AD 1000-1400). The carbon-14 dates
will also aid in determining when a practice known as cranial modification
became a common means for signaling ethnic identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State
collapse often causes people to redefine who they are, and how they interact
with others. It is a recurring phenomeneon neither limited to a certain part of
the world, nor a particular era in history. This research utilizes an innovative
approach that elucidates mechanisms for violence and identity-marking applicable
in both modern and ancient contexts of state disintegration. By documenting the
emergence of violence in post-imperial populations like the Chanka, it may be
possible to offer insights into the nature Wari fragmentation, specifically, as
well as address broader issues of state transformation in general. This project
provides a glimpse of a less-studied society and less-known time period,
enriching and refining the chronology and history of the south-central highland
Andes in general, and Andahuaylas in particular. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human
skeletal remains from imperial and post-imperial burials in Andahuaylas, Peru,
were excavated by the Ms. Kurin; analysis revealed evidence for violence
(inferred through skull fractures), as well as prominent, corporeal markers of
ethnic identity (i.e., cranial modification). Based on associated ceramics,
evidence from human remains appears to demonstrate an increase in violence
following Wari imperial collapse. Importantly, cranial fractures are almost
exclusively present on skulls that exhibit cranial modification, while
unmodified skulls largely lack evidence of injury. Radiocarbon dates will be
used in this final phase to test whether modified and unmodified individuals
existed contemporaneously, or whether these individuals lived in distinct time
periods. This final set of data is necessary to understand how Wari's decline
may have restructured interactions between 'post-collapse' Chanka groups in the
hinterland region of Andahuaylas, Peru.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will have significant broader impacts. Project data formed the
basis of two university courses developed and taught by the Ms. Kurin in Peru;
artifacts and remains recovered during excavations will be exhibited at a new
community museum in Andahuaylas, opened in late 2009 by Ms. Kurin and Peruvian
colleagues. Future research in the region will continue to include female,
minority, and indigenous students from both the United States and Peru. Finally,
this project will result in Spanish and English language scholarly and general
public publications, conference papers, and undergraduate and graduate theses,
including Ms. Kurin's doctoral dissertation.