* 1218475
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Integrated Control of Fidelity and Real-Time Performance in Networked Sensing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Guoliang Xing, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 230,000.00

Networked Sensing Systems (NSSs) interact with the physical world by tightly
integrating sensing, computation, networking, and physical processes. NSS
systems are being deployed for numerous critical applications such as security,
civil infrastructure, healthcare, manufacturing, and transportation. These
applications often impose stringent performance requirements. Many computation
and communication tasks of NSS systems must be finished within certain timing
constraints to avoid undesirable or even catastrophic consequences -- a property
known as real-time assurance. In addition, mission-critical NSS systems must
maintain their performance at an acceptable level even when noises and errors
occur in input and/or internal system components -- a property known as
fidelity. This research is to design a novel NSS control framework that
integrates data fusion, calibration, and real-time performance control into a
solution that balances requirements for fidelity and real-time assurance. The
expected outcomes include: 1) a unified multi-tier performance control framework
for both fidelity and real-time assurance; 2) improvements in fidelity assurance
through novel model and fusion calibration algorithms; 3) a fidelity-aware real-
time performance control mechanism; and 4) integrated fidelity and real-time
assurance for several mission-critical domains including real-time volcano
monitoring and tomography, and high-fidelity ad hoc surveillance.

This project has broad implications for future NSS systems in multiple
application domains that require high-fidelity processing of dynamic and complex
physical information within stringent timeliness constraints. Educational and
outreach activities include introduction of NSS systems into two new graduate
courses with software, testbed, and labs developed in the course of this
project, and recruitment of women and minority students for participation in the
project.