* 1218349
* AF: Small: Algorithms for computing aggregate functions of matrices with applications to Lattice QCD
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kostas Orginos, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

One of the most computationally challenging tasks in Numerical Linear
&lt;br/&gt;Algebra (NLA) is the estimation of the trace or the determinant of
functions &lt;br/&gt;of matrices. The computational difficulty arises for very
large matrices &lt;br/&gt;where the computation of the entire spectrum is
infeasible. Traditionally, &lt;br/&gt;this problem is approached through
stochastic techniques, such as Monte &lt;br/&gt;Carlo, where each step involves
the solution of a linear system of equations. &lt;br/&gt;Deterministic
techniques could provide approximations much faster but &lt;br/&gt;introduce
bias in the result. This research will employ a combination of &lt;br/&gt;these
techniques. Deterministic techniques involve novel uses of
&lt;br/&gt;traditional NLA tools such as low rank approximations, deflation, and
&lt;br/&gt;preconditioners, not only for speeding the solution of linear systems
but also &lt;br/&gt;for reducing the variance of the stochastic process. The
team plans to use Hadamard &lt;br/&gt;vectors, which are popular in coding
theory, with an ordering induced by &lt;br/&gt;hierarchical graph-coloring, to
produce a deterministic sequence of sampling &lt;br/&gt;vectors for Monte Carlo
that exploits the structure of the matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although most of
these techniques address the general NLA problem, the &lt;br/&gt;motivating
application is lattice quantum chromodynamics (LQCD). The goal &lt;br/&gt;of
LQCD is to calculate the properties, structure, and interactions of
hadrons,&lt;br/&gt;the basic constituents of matter. Computation of observables
in LQCD entails &lt;br/&gt;averaging of correlation functions over an ensemble
of gauge fields. &lt;br/&gt;These correlation functions often require the trace
of the inverse of a large &lt;br/&gt;sparse matrix, or the ratio of determinants
of two such matrices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is increasingly clear that there
is an opportunity for real gains by &lt;br/&gt;harnessing the synergy between
randomized and deterministic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Based on such an approach,
this research will advance the current &lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art in NLA, while
transforming some of the standard computational &lt;br/&gt;practices in LQCD. It
will also be useful in other disciplines, as the &lt;br/&gt;problem is common in
many statistical applications, in data mining, &lt;br/&gt;in uncertainty
quantification, as well as in quantum physics applications &lt;br/&gt;such as
quantum Monte Carlo.