* 1218839
* SHF: SMALL: Embedded Cooling of High-Performance ICs Using Novel Nanostructured Thermoelectrics: Multiscale Software Development and Device Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Shaikh Ahmed, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 165,921.00

Recently, nano-enabled thermoelectric devices have attracted much attention for
cost-effective embedded (hot spot) and portable cooling applications such as in
high-performance integrated circuits, lasers, and medical and food chillers.
However, efficiency of this novel technology, to a large extent, relies on: (i)
Fine-tuning the basic material parameters (Seebeck coefficient, electrical
conductivity, and thermal conductivity) that are strong function of coupled
structural-electronic processes at the nanoscale; and ii) System-level
optimization considering the geometry, substrates, and contacts. These critical
and challenging tasks have not yet been fully addressed and assessed
experimentally and, therefore, demand a careful numerical investigation. As a
response to this need, the goal of this research is to design nano-enabled
embedded thermoelectric cooling modules offering improved efficiency and the
ability to be operated at high temperature. For this purpose, a multiscale
simulator will be integrated, where the material and device parameters will be
obtained atomistically using first-principles and molecular dynamics simulations
and will eventually be used in the system level design and optimization. The
multiscale simulation platform will expose new degrees-of-freedom available at
nanoscale (such as engineering density-of-states, effective mass, structural
relaxation, localized disorder, surface-to-volume ratio, internal polarization,
and non-degeneracy) and create transformative design routes for boosting
efficiency and reliability of thermoelectric
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric technology offers high power
density and fast response, is vibration and noise free, small and lightweight,
and environmentally safe. Besides applications in embedded and potable coolers,
thermoelectric devices are used as power sources for remote telecommunication,
navigation, and radioisotope generator for space vehicles, and has potential
promise in heat scavenging in vehicle exhaust system. Solid-state
thermoelectrics will thus diversify and help sustain the growth in the global
semiconductor market. The project also encompasses significant education and
outreach activities. Graduate students will be engaged in software development,
integration, and data analysis. In addition, senior design projects will be
developed for undergraduate students. The simulator, along with the
documentation, tutorials, case studies, will be freely distributed under the GNU
public use license and an educational version (with a graphical user interface)
will be deployed on NSF?s nanoHUB.org for the broader community for use in
research and class-room teaching activities.