* 1218758
* SHF-Small: Robust Methodologies for Effective Data Center Management
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Evgenia Smirni, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2017
* USD 490,816.00

Despite the ubiquity of data centers, little is known about their effective
management. Consolidation of multiple applications with diverse and changing
resource requirements is common in data centers as hardware resources are
abundant and opportunities for better system usage are plenty, as are
opportunities to degrade individual application performance due to unregulated
performance interference between applications and system resources. Is it
possible to maximize resource usage while respecting individual application
performance targets or is it an oxymoron to simultaneously meet such conflicting
measures? In this project, a solution methodology to the above difficult problem
is proposed using a three-pronged approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, a
detailed large scale performance study on several thousands of data center
servers within a time period that spans two years is going to be conducted. This
study provides a micro and macro view of current workload requirements, of
workload resource demands on&lt;br/&gt;basic resource components including CPU,
memory, disk, and their temporal evolution. This analysis provides a baseline
for the development of scalable and efficient resource management in data
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, extensive experimentation on basic
components of data centers is going to quantify performance interference among
different classes of applications due to consolidation. This experimentation
drives the development of a light-weight profiler that is system- and
application-agnostic. The methodology captures application resource demands via
non-intrusive low-level measurements that are provided via standard tools.The
experimental observations have the potential to drive the development of
resource allocation policies in data centers both at the micro level (i.e., at
specific hardware components that are used as data center building blocks) and
at the macro level (i.e., at the data center as a
whole).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, a queueing-theory based tool is developed
that uses as input the resource demands measured by the profiler to accurately
predict application scalability under homogeneous and heterogeneous
consolidations. The model can be used to predict the application and system
performance under virtualized environments at the micro and macro levels, and
provide consolidation suggestions such that pre-defined user- or system-
specified performance targets are met.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
methodologies have the potential to improve the effectiveness of resource
allocation in data centers that operate under complex workloads and show
excellent potential for allocation solutions that meet pre-defined user and
system performance targets. This research will affect the state-of-the-practice
via industrial collaborations, especially IBM Research and NEC Research Labs.
More broadly, this research has the potential to make a strong impact in
management of in-production data centers. Through this project, several students
will be prepared to better meet industry demands in the areas of performance
modeling and resource allocation in complex environments.