* 1218323
* SHF: Small:Energy-Optimized Memory Hierarchies
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* David Wood, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The early 21st century finds power and energy as the central challenges to
continued improvements in computer system performance and cost. From handheld
mobile devices to the data centers that support them, computer architects must
invent new energy-efficient techniques to facilitate future innovations in
science, education, government and commerce. In current systems, the memory
hierarchy-which stores and moves the data values used and produced by the
computation-consumes more energy than the computation itself. For example,
obtaining operands for a double-precision multiply-add can consume 1.7 to 200
times the operation's energy depending on where in the memory hierarchy the
values are stored. Improving the energy-efficiency of memory hierarchies can not
only enable advances in future computer systems, but also reduces the emission
of greenhouse gases.

This project seeks novel memory hierarchy designs that minimize power and
energy, rather than the classical focus on reducing latency and/or bandwidth.
These designs build on three key hypotheses: (1) cache memories can reduce
energy more than either latency or bandwidth, (2) optimizing latency becomes
less important when it can be tolerated, and (3) overlapping activity does not
save power, but can save energy due to static power dissipation. Initial
research directions include (1) a technique to reduce address translation energy
using a hybrid virtual/physical cache that eliminates the need to access a
highly-associative TLB on every memory access and (2) energy-efficient cache
hierarchies that use data compression techniques to replace the high energy cost
of misses with lower compression and decompression overheads. This research will
also extend the widely-used open-source gem5 simulation infrastructure to more
accurately model the power and energy of emerging memory hierarchies.