* 1218992
* CIF: Small: Sensing-Aware Decision Making for High-Dimensional Signals
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* William Karl, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,997.00

There has been an explosion in our ability to sense and record the world around
us. This has led to new discoveries and allowed us to consider new paradigms in
nearly every walk of life. While the promise of these developments is
significant, the explosion of sensing has also created substantial challenges.
These challenges include high-dimensionality of observations and the associated
``curse of dimensionality'', non-trivial relationships between the observations
and the latent variables we care about, poor understanding of models, and lack
of sufficient training data from which to learn these models. Motivated by such
problems, this research studies an approach which we term ``sensing-aware
inferencing'' that leverages knowledge about the underlying structure of the
sensing process for data-driven inferencing. Such problems are at the frontier
of statistical signal processing and advance this frontier by contributing to
signal processing theory and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves both analysis of the fundamental limits to the performance of, as well
as the development of new methods for, decision making and inference from high-
dimensional data when the data are related to latent variables through a
underlying sensing structure. The methods being developed explicitly acknowledge
and account for the underlying sensing process in a unified and optimal way.
Research is being advanced along two major thrusts: 1) theoretical investigation
of the fundamental limits of classification performance as dimension grows
faster than available training data under various states of sensing knowledge,
2) development of methods for inference in high-dimensional problems exploiting
sensing structure in a unified way. Throughout, the samples available for such
learning are severely limited relative to the dimensionality of the
observations.