* 1218808
* CSR: CC: Small: Collaborative Research: Language and Runtime Support for Large-Scale Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Chandra Krintz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 246,905.00

As the cost of computing and communication resources has plummeted, applications
have become data-centric with data products growing explosively in both number
and size. Although accessing such data using the compute power necessary for its
analysis and processing is cheap and readily available via cloud computing
(intuitive, utility-style access to vast resource pools), doing so currently
requires significant expertise, experience, and time (for customization,
configuration, deployment, etc). This work investigates new models of cloud
computing that combine domain-targeted languages with scalable data processing,
sharing, and management abstractions within a distributed service platform that
"scales" programmer productivity. To enable this, this research explores new
programming language, runtime, and distributed systems techniques and
technologies that integrate the R programming language environment with open
source cloud platform-as-a-service (PaaS) in ways that simplify processing
massive datasets, sharing datasets across applications and users, and tracking
and enforcing data provenance. The PIs' plans for research, outreach, integrated
curricula, and open source release of research artifacts have the potential for
making cloud computing more accessible to a much wider range of users: The data
analytics community who use the R statistical analysis environment to apply
their techniques and algorithms to important problems in areas such as biology,
chemistry, physics, political science and finance, by enabling them to use cloud
resources transparently for their analyses, and to share their scientific
data/results in a way that enables others to reproduce and verify them.