* 1218136
* CIF: Small: Intervention: A Design Framework for Resource Sharing and Exchanges Among Self-interested Users
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Mihaela van der Schaar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2017
* USD 491,670.00

In non-cooperative resource sharing and exchange systems, users compete for
available resources aiming to optimize their individual objectives. Operation by
self-interested users often results in suboptimal performance from a system
designer's point of view. This research involves the development of a new
incentive design framework for resource sharing and exchange systems where the
designer can perfectly or imperfectly monitor the actions of self-interested
users and intervene in their interaction.

The investigators systematically study what the designer can achieve in terms of
improving the performance of various non-cooperative networks and systems by
designing suitable protocols and how it can achieve these improvements, given
its abilities to monitor the users and its capability to intervene. This
research formulates and solves the designer's problem of finding an optimal
intervention rule that optimizes the designer's objective while explicitly
considering the selfish nature of users. The results obtained characterize the
extent to which the designer can shape the incentives of users depending on its
ability to monitor the actions of users and to impact the payoffs of users. The
investigators systematically study both multi-user interactions scenarios where
the users interact sporadically, which will be modeled as one-shot games with
intervention, as well as the case where users establish long-term relationships,
which will be modeled as repeated games with intervention. In both scenarios,
the cases of perfect and imperfect monitoring of the users? actions will be
investigated. Overall, this research provides a novel framework to evaluate the
performance gain from having a designer that has a monitoring and intervention
ability, and to figure out the best way to utilize its capabilities.