* 1218454
* A Fully Discrete Framework for the Adaptive Solution of Inverse Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Adrian Sandu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Inverse problems like parameter estimation, data assimilation,
optimal&lt;br/&gt;engineering design, and optimal control of large scale systems
governed by&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations, are of considerable
importance in many&lt;br/&gt;fields including atmospheric science and
oceanography, aerospace&lt;br/&gt;engineering, and fluid and structural
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art solvers for large scale partial
differential equations&lt;br/&gt;adaptively refine the time step and the mesh,
and adjust the computational&lt;br/&gt;pattern according to the features of the
solution. Adaptivity is necessary&lt;br/&gt;to control the numerical errors
introduced by temporal and spatial&lt;br/&gt;discretizations and to preserve the
qualitative features of the solution&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., avoid the formation of
spurious wiggles). In contrast, most inverse&lt;br/&gt;problems to date have
been solved using non-adaptive methods (e.g., fixed&lt;br/&gt;grids and
timesteps).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a fully discrete
framework for solving inverse&lt;br/&gt;problems in the context of adaptive
models. The framework fills the gap&lt;br/&gt;between the state-of-the-art
adaptive methods used in (forward)&lt;br/&gt;simulations and the computational
tools currently available for the&lt;br/&gt;solution of inverse problems. The
specific research objectives are to&lt;br/&gt;develop discrete algorithms for
inverse problems with models that employ&lt;br/&gt;refinement of the spatial
discretization, and adaptive time stepping, to&lt;br/&gt;guarantee that the
discrete inversion process leads to convergent&lt;br/&gt;numerical
approximations, and to control the accuracy of the
inverse&lt;br/&gt;solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work are
general algorithms and methodologies that&lt;br/&gt;will advance the field of
inverse problems by developing the capability to&lt;br/&gt;adapt time steps,
grid sizes, and computational patterns, such as to&lt;br/&gt;control the quality
and accuracy of the inverse solutions. These results&lt;br/&gt;have the
potential to impact any mature&lt;br/&gt;field which relies on adaptive
simulations, such as data assimilation in&lt;br/&gt;atmospheric sciences,
oceanography, and environmental sciences; optimal&lt;br/&gt;control of flows,
and optimal engineering design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithmic and
software tools developed during this research will be&lt;br/&gt;largely
disseminated through specialized journals and conferences.
This&lt;br/&gt;project provides an excellent opportunity for training graduate
students in&lt;br/&gt;the areas of inverse problems and adaptive computations.