* 1218282
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Efficient, Nonparametric and Local-Minimum-Free Latent Variable Models: With Application to Large-Scale Computer Vision and Genomics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Eric Xing, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Many modern applications ranging from computer vision to biology require
modeling and inferring high-dimensional continuous variables based on
distributions with multimodality, skewness, and rich latent structures. Most
existing models in this regime rely heavily on parametric assumptions where the
components of the model are typically assumed to be discrete or multivariate
Gaussian, or the relations between variables are linear, which may be very
different from the actual data generating processes. Furthermore, existing
algorithms for discovering the latent dependency structures and learning the
latent parameters largely are restricted to local search heuristics such as
expectation maximization. Conclusions inferred under these restricted
assumptions and suboptimal solutions can be misleading, if the underlying
assumptions are violated or if the suboptimal solutions differ greatly from the
globally optimal ones. This project aims to develop a novel framework which can
(i) discover and take advantage of latent structures in the data, while (ii)
allowing parts to handle near-arbitrary distributions, and (iii) allowing the
models to scale to modern massive datasets in a local-minimum-free fashion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation in the project is a novel nonparametric
latent variable modeling framework based on kernel embedding of distributions.
The basic idea is to map distributions into infinite dimensional feature spaces
using kernels, such that subsequent comparisons and manipulations of
distributions can be achieved via feature space operations, such as inner
products, distances, projections, linear transformations and spectral analysis.
Conceptually, the framework represents components from latent variable models,
such as marginal distributions over a single variable, joint distributions over
variable pairs, triplets and more variables, as infinite dimensional vectors,
matrices, tensors and high-order tensors respectively. Probabilistic relations
between these components, i.e., conditional distributions, Sum Rule, Product
Rule etc. become linear transformations and relations between these feature
space components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework supports modeling data with
diverse statistical features without the need for making restrictive assumptions
about the type of distributions and relations. It supports the application of a
large pool of linear and multi-linear algebraic (tensor) tools for addressing
challenging graphical model problems in the presence of latent variables,
including structure discovery, inference, parameter learning and latent feature
extraction. The framework applies not only to general continuous variables, but
also to variables that take values on strings, graphs, groups, compact
manifolds, and other domains on which kernels may be
defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides advancing the state of the art in machine
learning,the new non-parametric methods resulting from the project find
applications in image data and understanding and gene expression data analysis.
It also contributes to research-based training of graduate and undergraduate
students at Georgia Tech and CMU.