* 1218635
* CIF: Small: Modules as a Framework for Interference Alignment in Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Daniela Tuninetti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2014
* USD 117,000.00

Interference Alignment is a breakthrough paradigm for wireless networks where
several users share the same channel resources. Today's commercially available
networks are built so as to avoid interference, so that a given resource is used
by only one user at a time. With interference alignment, all users access the
channel simultaneously and each user obtains half the interference-free rate,
thereby achieving a network throughput that scales linearly with the number of
users. The two most commonly studied approaches to interference alignment are
the linear and non-linear schemes. In the former case the alignment problem can
be formulated as that of solving an overdetermined system of equations with
respect to a subset of the unknowns, and can be cast into the familiar language
of vector spaces. The latter requires deep results in number theory on
approximating an irrational number by a rational one. At present no unifying
framework exists that encompasses both approaches. This research uses the theory
of modules (on residue rings or polynomial rings) from modern algebra as a
unifying framework for interference alignment. First the framework is introduced
and shown to reduce to well known linear and non-linear interference alignment
by choosing proper rings. Then, channels are classified in terms of their
submodule decomposition and their degrees of freedom evaluated. Finally, actual
codes are designed through a novel method where a destination decodes the
lattice code that is the closet (in a nested lattice chain) to the received
signal. This latter task has connections with the recently proposed compute-and-
forward method of relaying. Connections among the two are also
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central impact of the proposed work stems
from its unified theoretical treatment of interference alignment. No such
unified framework or methodology exists at present. Although it has been often
observed that classical linear algebra tools are insufficient for network
problems, the theory of modules has not emerged so far as a tool to explain,
analyze and design codes for interference networks. This research, by exploring
novel foundations of interference alignment, will provide the community with an
extremely rich toolset to design and analyze codes, which is expected to impact
and benefit other network problem such as network coding and compute-and-forward
relaying.&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective the new paradigm proposed in
this research will enlarge the scope of information processing in interference
networks, and provide an important step forward into the consolidation of a
comprehensive theory of network science for distributed, decentralized,
interfering networks. The results of this research will be presented at major
national and international professional venues, in the information theory and
communication networks communities and are expected to be of immediate use to
the industrial sector.