* 1218206
* SHF: Small: Analytical Modeling and Design Methodology for Large-scale Computational Systems Employing Flexible Electronics for Extensive Physical Interfacing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Naveen Verma, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Electronics has enabled substantial computational capabilities in small-scale
devices; this means that signals from physical systems can be presented to these
devices to derive high-value outputs. The challenge is that although immense
computational capacity can be realized in embedded devices, the ability to
acquire a large number of signals that are distributed across a physical system,
and to then communicate information over the associated distances, remains
disproportionately small. Technologies are emerging, however, that enable
transformational possibilities for creating communication channels and large-
scale physical interfaces to electronics. Large-area electronics is a technology
that enables the fabrication of interconnects as well as expansive arrays of
diverse sensors on flexible, low-cost sheets. When combined with high-
performance silicon integrated circuits (ICs), this technology can lead to
systems where computation can be applied to physical signals on a much larger
scale than that possible today. The resulting design space for the systems
covers two technology domains. To create efficient and scalable systems, the
platform components and hardware architectures must be analyzed rigorously, and
methodologies for understanding and optimizing design trade-offs must be
developed. The objective of this research is to analytically model the platform
components and architectures for sensing and communication, and then to
synthesize these into system design methodologies. The platform architectures
include interfaces for digital and analog signaling, control circuits for
sensing, and communication networks scalable to many nodes. The methodologies
span analysis at the device, architecture, and system-protocol levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the compelling applications that require large-
scale interfacing of electronics with physical systems include detection of
early-stage structural degradation in bridges and buildings through centimeter-
resolution strain sensing, interactive surfaces for visually-rich computing via
high-resolution displays and input sensors, etc. Large-area electronics and
high-performance ICs, used synergistically, have the potential to enable such
applications. By developing analytical models and methodologies for system
design, this research aims to unite the efforts from both the technology-
development and computer-systems domains. The outcomes of this study will help
coordinate and focus research and engineering efforts in these areas towards the
creation of optimal systems. This research will also engage a new generation of
engineers, particularly from underrepresented groups, through the unique
opportunity to develop systematic principles for the design of computing systems
that interact extensively with physical systems. The broadened focus and new
form-factors possible for computing systems will be illustrated to students
through undergraduate projects and special-topic courses, as well as through
Princeton outreach programs such as the Science and Engineering Expo for middle-
school students, the Materials Camp for teachers, and the Princeton University
Materials Academy for under-represented high-school students.