* 1218419
* Development of tunable nanomagnetic microwave oscillators and circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Sergei Urazhdin, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 261,916.00

The project will address the mechanisms of spin transfer-induced magnetization
oscillations in nanodevices based on magnetic point contacts, and explore the
methods to control their characteristics. In order to improve the variability
among the devices and reduce the generation linewidth for practical
applications, it is important to understand the spatial properties of
magnetization dynamics and their relationship with the device geometry and
physical conditions. To accomplish these goals, a combination of electronic
spectroscopy and two imaging techniques, Brillouin light scattering microscopy
and x-ray dichroism microscopy, will be employed for characterization of spatial
and spectral properties of oscillators. To understand the role of device
structure, two new magnetic geometries will be explored that will enable
independent control of the configurations of the magnetic layers in the devices.
Nanomagnetic oscillators with improved oscillation characteristics will be
designed by employing magnetic confinement effects as well as dynamical
feedback. Two types of feedback will be implemented including a resonant circuit
and an electromagnetically coupled active external feedback. The latter will be
implemented through phase locking to second harmonic, also known as parametric
pumping, or other higher order phase locking
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The main outcome of the
project will be comprehensive measurement of the magnetization dynamics induced
by spin transfer, which will lead to an improved fundamental understanding of
the effects of spin transfer and magnetization dynamics in nanoscale systems.
The information obtained from the proposed measurements will be used to develop
new methods to control and modify magnetic dynamics in nanostructures. The
project will contribute to development of magnetic microscopy and spectroscopy
techniques, as well as time-resolved microscopic measurements. The main
transformative aspect of the project will be a qualitatively new level of
understanding of current-induced dynamical properties of magnetic nanodevices
achieved by using new measurement techniques, as well as development of novel
active magnetic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The project will
contribute to the development of new nanoscale magnetic measurement techniques
involving spectroscopy and time-resolved microscopy. In addition to practical
applications in microwave technology, the project will invigorate the broader
research area of science and engineering of nanomagnetic devices, with
additional benefits for design and implementation of magnetic memory and logic
devices that share the fundamental properties with magnetic nano-
oscillators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to professional
development of the students involved in its implementation, other students in
the PI's group via group-level interactions, as well as a much larger group of
students and researchers that will be involved in the measurements at the
collaborating institution and the national facility, and those attending
conferences and seminars where the results of the research will be presented.
The impact on the professional development of undergraduate students will be
enhanced by the continued commitment of the PI to undergraduate student
research, and active involvement in several undergraduate summer research
programs. A female and/or a minority student will be specifically targeted for
the participation in the project.