* 1218026
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Diversity and Feedback in Random Testing for Systems Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* John Regehr, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 249,036.00

Testing is an extremely important part of any software development effort,
especially for programs that have access to sensitive resources (personal
information, sensor data, etc.) and that can be reached through the Internet.
The PIs' work will improve the state of the art in software testing for mobile
applications running on the open source Android platform, resulting in fewer
bugs and reduced testing effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundation of the PIs'
work is random testing, where random numbers are used as inputs to an algorithm
for constructing test cases. Although random testing has been shown to be highly
effective for discovering serious bugs in complex software systems, it suffers
from various problems including the fact that it is very difficult to engineer a
random tester that doesn't spend a lot of time re-exploring the same application
behaviors over and over again. The PIs will build upon their "swarm testing"
work, which has been shown to be an inexpensive way to increase the diversity of
random test cases, and also to increase their effectiveness in discovering bugs.
Additionally, the PIs are investigating how to marry random testing with modern
symbolic execution methods, and how to use feedback from executions of the
software under test in order to improve the efficacy of random
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of more efficient and effective
testing techniques and tools will lower the cost and raise the quality of
software. Test coverage is a challenging, open problem that is being addressed
here in a novel way.