* 1218092
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research:  Towards Principled Network Troubleshooting via Efficient Packet Stream Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jun Xu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2016
* USD 306,000.00

Troubleshooting undesirable network events, such as poor connectivity or
performance, is difficult at best. The high-speed link techniques that work on
LANs, such as dumping packets and analyzing the detailed traffic, are impossible
due to massive data volume. This project will explore mathematical techniques
and network tools that will reduce the amount of data that has to be captured
and stored while still allowing network operators to troubleshoot their
networks. The project's objective is to extract from high-speed packet streams
on individual network links an approximate and highly compressed representation
of the link traffic that is orders of magnitude smaller in size than the raw
traffic stream but which permits almost the same degree of troubleshooting as
the raw data. The project will develop the algorithms and mathematical theory
needed to design intelligent sampling algorithms for compressing network
traffic. Specific areas to be studied for purposes of developing sampling
techniques include identifying what constitutes the representative flows for
troubleshooting purposes and investigating how to best encode and decode the
sampled data, and how the samples can be gracefully shrunk over time so as to
reclaim space for new data as they arrive.

Broader Impact: The project will provide research experience for undergraduates.
Undergraduates at Georgia Tech, Denison and other institutions will be recruited
via undergraduate workshops and research symposiums. Additionally, the project
will integrate education and research via inclusion of the research into
courses. In addition to publishing in appropriate scientific venues, the PIs
will expand the Wikipedia entries on topics related to data streaming algorithms
as part of the process of disseminating general information about the topic area
to the scientific community. In terms of commercial impact, the project will
lead to better methods for the diagnosis of large-scale networks, thereby
reducing the cost to maintain and operate them. As part of the transfer of
research findings into commercial practice the PIs will collaborate with members
of AT&T's Network Management and Engineering Department.