* 1218552
* SHF:  Small:  INTEGRATED CIRCUITS BROADBAND MULTISCALE ANALYSIS WITH FAST ALGORITHMS
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Jose Schutt-Aine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 445,000.00

This project aims to improve and develop electromagnetic (EM) analysis tools to
meet the demand of the computer chip industry. The modeling of EM effects in
computer integrated circuits (IC) has in recent years become increasingly
important, due to the increased transistor density and switching clock rate of
CPU?s in a computer. For this reason, EM effect is a challenge identified by the
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) as an area of
priority. But the exorbitant computational cost and complexity of such EM
modeling problems have precluded their precise solution so far. Commercial
simulation tools for multi-function broadband ICs, which trade accuracy for
efficiency, cannot fully meet the stringent demands for broad bandwidth and
complexity of next generation applications. However, fast algorithms for EM
simulations have potentials when stabilized with appropriate techniques for
broadband applications to capture both circuit physics and wave physics. Fast,
efficient, and highly stable algorithms will be developed for seeking broadband,
multi-scale solutions of IC problems. The solutions will be integrated with
existing Electronics Design and Automation (EDA) tools, and co-design will be
studied at chip and package levels. The work will be connected to real-world
problems and models will be validated with measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of fast and efficient modeling
technique for electronic ICs can alter how computers are designed. It will
remove bottlenecks caused by EM effects due to increased transistor density and
switching clock rates, and allow the accurate virtual prototyping of circuit
design over a broad frequency range. It will also encourage IC designers to use
more microwave engineering paradigms in future IC designs. Hence, it will expand
the design space of IC and circuit designers, increase their repertoire of
toolboxes, and enrich new possibilities for future IC designs. Due to the lack
of high-quality computer-aided design (CAD) design tools that incorporate EM
effects efficiently and accurately, IC designers face bottlenecks due to signal
and power integrity issues in 3D IC designs. By precise and efficient
electromagnetic modeling, CAD IC characterization will be improved and the
design barriers faced by IC designers will be pushed back.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will train students, at various
levels ranging from undergraduates to graduates, to be well versed in
electromagnetic physics, applied mathematics, computer science, and measurements
(with a keen focus on the science of IC simulation and design). Students
schooled in this cross-disciplinary field generally adapt easily to adjacent
areas of research in academia and industry. Hence, this project will train badly
needed human resource in computational science and engineering and adjacent
fields for the advancement of high tech. EM physics, valid over a vast length
scale, is fundamental to many electrical engineering technologies. Fast,
broadband computational electromagnetics (CEM) algorithms for complex structures
are applicable to a large variety of other applications including micro- and
nano-technologies, ranging from meta-material modeling, to nano-optics and nano-
lithography. It can help in the design of super-resolution lithography, and
improve the modeling of EM effects in N/MEMS, sensors and actuators,
interconnects in computers at the package level, as well as at the board level.
It will enable the modeling of small, complex, smart, and reconfigurable
antennas, RF integrated circuits, as well as greatly impacting terahertz
modeling, biotech, and homeland security technology development.