* 1218977
* NeTS: Small: Do You See What I See: Finding and Measuring Faults in the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2018
* USD 496,014.00

Diagnosing network and network application faults remains one of the most
challenging and frustrating aspects of using the Internet, particularly for non-
technical users, but also for system administrators. A single VoIP application
may depend on half a dozen protocols, and basic network access requires numerous
network elements, from wireless access points to authorization servers, to
function. On a larger scale, researchers have only anecdotal evidence of the
most common network problems and their prevalence. This makes it difficult to
use actual Internet experiences to improve existing protocols and
implementations.

The project proposes a new architecture and system, "Do You See What I See"
(DYSWIS), to automate fault finding in residential, mobile, enterprise and data
center networks in a systematic, extensible and scalable manner: Using protocol
state analysis and packet timing analysis, DYSWIS automatically recognizes when
network applications are likely malfunctioning. Leveraging social network
graphs, the system finds suitable and mutually-trusting friends whose DYSWIS
application can help with finding problems. As necessary, building on a
programmable network platform, NetServ, in-network nodes are instantiated and
discovered. DYSWIS then attempts to determine the cause of the fault, leveraging
network views of other nodes to improve its diagnosis, by remotely invoking
active probes at the network, transport and application layer.

DYSWIS collects and aggregates statistics about faults and their resolution,
allowing researchers and operators to see trends and determine common sources of
problems. DYSWIS is designed to be extensible, so that new standardized and
proprietary protocols and applications can be added selectively. The project
explores how to scale DYSWIS to the Internet, evaluates its effectiveness, and
extends it to use a programmable network platform.

The project enhances undergraduate and graduate teaching, involves
undergraduates in research projects, reaches out to industry and standardization
organizations, provides tools and large data sets to researchers, and offers a
data gathering platform and data for the benefit of Federal and State telecom
regulators.