* 1218605
* SHF:  Small:  Usable Verification using Rewriting and Matching Logic
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Grigore Rosu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Computers, and implicitly programming languages, are used in many critical
applications these days, where correct behavior is necessary. Rigorous, formal
semantic definitions of the employed programming languages are therefore
necessary in order to verify computing systems. Unfortunately, in spite of more
than forty years of research in programming language semantics, most program
verifiers are not directly based on a formal semantics, but rather on complex
and ad-hoc hardwired models of their target programming languages. This has at
least two negative consequences: first, it makes the development and maintenance
of program verifiers hard and uneconomical, particularly for new programming
languages or languages which evolve fast; second, it allows room for subtle bugs
in program verifiers themselves. This research project aims at developing a
generic program verification framework that takes a programming language given
through its formal semantics as input, and yields a program verifier for that
language as output. Moreover, the language semantics will be executable, so
testable, and public, so will serve as a reference implementation for the
language and as a formal basis for language understanding. Specifically, this
projects builds upon recent advances in matching logic and its use for verifying
reachability properties. A language-independent sound and relatively complete
proof system takes a programming language operational semantics as a set of
axioms, and can be used to derive any reachability property about any program in
the given language. This is in sharp contrast to the existing verification
approaches based on Hoare logic and on dynamic logic, since these approaches are
language-specific. This research will therefore lead to the development of
semantic and verification techniques and algorithms that will work for any
language, provided a formal semantics of the language is given. Consequently,
the broader impact of this research is that it will increase the quality and
robustness of software systems, and will narrow the gap between the
specification and the implementation of computer systems.