* 1218819
* CSR: Small: Energy-Aware Resource Management for Networked Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Manimaran Govindarasu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This project develops innovative energy-aware resource management algorithms for
networked real-time systems, that seek to optimize system-level energy
consumption, including both computation and communication. Central to this
research is the systematic exploitation of network coding, both at the physical
and network layers, to reduce the number of message transmissions and hence
reduce the overall energy consumption. Research tasks include: (i) design of
energy-aware scheduling algorithms for static and dynamic workloads; (ii) design
of energy-aware run-time adaptation algorithms accounting for both workload and
channel variations; (iii) performance evaluation of the algorithms through a
combination of simulation- and testbed-based experiments under a variety of
realistic workloads accounting for various system overheads including those that
are due to network coding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time embedded systems
combining sensing, computation, and communication play a prominent role in a
variety of current and emerging safety- and mission-critical applications. Such
systems typically rely on batteries or other limited energy sources. It is a
continuing challenge to satisfy timeliness and reliability constraints in such
energy-limited environments. This project investigates the application of
incorporating "network coding" -- a technique for combining multiple packets of
information into a single message -- as a means of reducing energy consumed for
wireless communication, as part of a broader strategy for energy conservation.
Besides contributing to technology that will enable functionally richer and
long-lived real-time applications, this project develops novel curriculum
modules, mentors undergraduate students including under-represented minorities
through capstone design projects, and exposes high school students to energy
management concepts in real-time applications via testbed demonstrations.