* 1218036
* III: Small: Mining Local Correlations in Extremely High-Dimensional Data: Models, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Xiaofeng Zhu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 471,187.00

This project develops the computational and statistical principles of mining
local latent correlations in extremely high-dimensional data. Recent advances in
experimental technologies have rendered it possible to collect data of extremely
high dimensionality. Examples include gene expression, genetic variation, and
protein and DNA sequence data. A key problem in analyzing such data is finding
latent local correlations among features. Such local correlations only exist in
feature subspaces and may involve more than two features. The large number of
features and the noisy characteristics of the data make modeling, identifying,
and assessing the statistical significance of such local correlations a
challenging research problem.

The project aims to develop tools that enable users to mine and explore local
correlations efficiently and effectively. It seeks to develop (1) effective
models to capture the local correlations among features; (2) scalable algorithms
to identify local correlations from extremely high-dimensional data; (3) robust
methods to assess the statistical significance of the identified correlations.
The proposed methods combine the advantages of dimension reduction, intrinsic
dimensionality estimation, information theoretic approach, and hypothesis
testing for modeling and identifying significant local correlations.

The resuling tools will assist scientists in many disciplines including
biologists in their study of gene function and medical doctors in their
understanding of disease progression and searching for new and effective
treatments. The research results will be published in peer reviewed data mining
and bioinformatics journals and conferences and integrated into the educational
and outreach programs at CWRU. The project Web site
(http://engr.case.edu/zhang_xiang) will be used for dissemination of research
results including publications, data, and software.