* 1218183
* CSR: Small: Heterogeneous Memory Design: Exploiting Device Diversity for Superior System Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Chaitali Chakrabarti, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 440,000.00

As technology scales to 10nm, CMOS-based memory devices may no longer be the
technology of choice. Instead, emerging technologies, such as phase-change
memory, spin-transfer torque magnetic memory, and ferromagnetic memory, are more
scalable and are viable alternatives for the post-silicon era. These memory
devices are diverse in their physical operation and performance and there is no
winner-takes-all! This project advocates the use of heterogeneous memory systems
which combine the advantages of the different memory technologies to deliver
superior system performance. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The first step involves
development of a hierarchical memory model which captures both the generic
behavior and unique device physics of the different memory technologies. This
model is also capable of predicting the performance and reliability of future
technology nodes. The next step is on integration of this model into circuit and
architecture-level simulators for exploration of heterogeneous memory systems.
The intellectual merit lies in the coordinated effort spanning from device
physics to modeling to architecture exploration. Research advances will be made
in memory device modeling including predictive modeling, error analysis and
modeling, error management for improved reliability and heterogeneous memory
system design. The research outcome from this project is expected to have a
significant impact on integrated circuit design industry and national economy.
The proposed effort will foster a unique environment for multi-disciplinary
research and training. It will help bridge the gap between memory device physics
and computer architects by training undergraduate and graduate students in
cross-disciplinary research and also by providing an open simulation environment
for exploratory memory design.