* 1218471
* III: Small: Scalable Analytics for Data Bases and Data Streams--a Unified Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Carlo Zaniolo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,011.00

The goal of this project is to support the development of big-data analytics and
facilitate the deployment of such applications over the different execution
environments encountered in the life-cycle of big-data software. The project
achieves its goal by (i) designing and implementating a Scalable Analytics
Language (SAL) that supports the definition of advanced analytics through user-
defined aggregate functions; (ii) developing a compiler for SAL that optimizes
parallel MapReduce-oriented executions over distributed systems containing many
nodes, and (iii) developing an early accurate result library (EARL) that
enhances (ii) with the ability of providing approximate results based on
sampling of the data. Using EARL, the analyst can avoid the slow response and
long set up-time of MapReduce applications by simply specifying a target
accuracy, with no modification of the original program required. The final
delivery of the project is a SAL compiler that optimizes parallel execution of
continuous analytical queries on massive data streams, by supporting the
synoptic and load-shedding primitives needed to achieve quasi real-time response
in this environment. These research results are expected to have great impacts
in several areas, including domain science, digital government and e-commerce.
The project supports Ph.D. students pursuing research on big-data analytics and
their management. Publications, technical reports, software, and experimental
data from this research will be disseminated via the project web site
(http://yellowstone.cs.ucla.edu/nsf-projects/nsf1218471.html).