* 1218932
* RI: Small: Natural Language-Based Human Instruction for Task Embedded Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Manuela Veloso, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Chirikjian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This project will advance the scientific state of the art in social service
robots by introducing a novel approach for performing, composing, and correcting
tasks using spatial language, and for handling the challenges of long-term
interaction with people. The team of investigators will leverage prior work on
CoBot service robots as a scientific platform. CoBots can transport objects,
deliver messages, escort people and go to places, continuously executing these
tasks over multiple weeks in a multi-floor building. The team will collaborate
to research, develop, and evaluate algorithms for learning, composing, and
correcting the execution of tasks via natural language. The proposed research
will enable any person to train the robot; we will use the CoBot robots to
perform evaluation and testing of our proposed
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of a continuously operating robot in
a real-world environment that can update its behavior in response to human
instruction will have a broad impact on the way students, faculty and visitors
interact with and view the usefulness of robots. Some examples include: (1)
Customizable intelligent robots will give people the creative power to simply
and intuitively update robot behavior, making the system broadly accessible to
non-experts. (2) Outreach to the community will transform the view that robots
are static unchangeable systems by creating an awareness towards robots co-
inhabiting our environment. We will invite children of different age groups and
people from different cultures to interact with our co-robot through language-
based instruction. (3) Synergistic activities across multiple research groups
have and will continue to be explored and encouraged (e.g., continuous
environmental measurement and monitoring).