* 1218629
* SHF: Small: Automated Techniques for Efficient Post-Silicon Validation and Debug of Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Prabhat Mishra, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 474,000.00

Due to increasing design complexity coupled with shrinking time-to-market
constraints, it is not possible to detect all design flaws during pre-silicon
validation of System-on-Chip (SoC) designs. Post-silicon validation needs to
capture these escaped functional errors as well as electrical faults. Various
studies suggest that post-silicon validation consumes almost half of the overall
SoC design effort (total cost). A major concern during post-silicon debug is the
observability of internal signals since the chip has already been manufactured.
Design overhead considerations limit the number of signals that can be traced or
stored in a trace buffer. The central objective of this project is to develop
automated tools and techniques for efficient post-silicon validation and debug
of integrated circuits. To achieve this goal, this project will investigate the
synergistic integration of four innovative concepts: i) debug-friendly trace
signal selection, ii) efficient trace hardware design, iii) observability-aware
directed test generation, and iv) high-level debug to reproduce post-silicon
errors. A successful implementation of this research is expected to reduce the
post-silicon validation and debug effort by several orders of
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make significant broader
impact in several fronts. The tools and techniques resulted from this project
will empower designers to reuse pre-silicon verification efforts for post-
silicon validation in order to reduce overall validation cost and improve design
quality. The outcome of this research has direct impact on everyday life.
Improved validation techniques will have double impact: (i) low-cost and high-
quality embedded systems (e.g., everyday appliances) for the public and (ii)
improved accuracy of the safety-critical devices. Going beyond integrated
circuits and systems, some of the analysis and validation techniques resulting
from this work can be applied to other areas of science and engineering
including validation of embedded software and dynamic monitoring of autonomous
systems. This project will integrate research and educational activities through
development of courses on post-silicon validation as well as dissemination of
research results through publications, seminars, and tutorials. The PI will
involve minority undergraduate students in this project through UMMP and SEAGEP
programs at University of Florida.