* 1218117
* CSR: Small: Practical Geo-Replicated Storage for Web Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jinyang Li, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

There is increasing demand to deploy web applications across multiple
data&lt;br/&gt;centers to improve fault tolerance and reduce network delays
to&lt;br/&gt;users. As application servers need to share data,
their&lt;br/&gt;construction can be significantly simplified if a storage
backend exists for&lt;br/&gt;applications to seamlessly access replicated data
at different data centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A geo-replicated storage system
faces the unpleasant tradeoff of consistency&lt;br/&gt;vs. performance because
of large inter-data-center communication delay. This&lt;br/&gt;proposal
investigates novel consistency and programming models for&lt;br/&gt;geo-
replicated storage that are easy-to-use and can achieve good
performance.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project proposes parallel snapshot
isolation, a novel &lt;br/&gt;consistency model that enables efficient
implementation with minimal&lt;br/&gt;coordination across data centers. Parallel
snapshot isolation provides much&lt;br/&gt;stronger guarantees than existing
weak consistency models by disallowing&lt;br/&gt;write-write conflicts and
preserving the causality of operations. The PI&lt;br/&gt;builds Walter, a geo-
replicated transactional key-value store that guarantees&lt;br/&gt;parallel
snapshot isolation. A number of common web applications are written&lt;br/&gt;on
top of Walter and evaluations demonstrate that the new consistency model
is&lt;br/&gt;easy to program for and enables applications to achieve high
performance. The&lt;br/&gt;success of this project will bring much improvement
to the state-of-art in&lt;br/&gt;writing scalable and fault tolerant web
applications.