* 1218414
* CAREER: Current-Induced Effects in Magnetic Nanostructures and Development of Science Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2015
* Sergei Urazhdin, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 302,625.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Continued technological development
depends on the advanced understanding of phenomena specific to nanoscale
systems, and the ability to harness the phenomena for application in
nanodevices. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development project at West
Virginia University is to explore new physical phenomena in nanoscale magnetic
devices. Such devices promise higher speed and smaller power consumption
compared to the conventional semiconductor devices. The functionality of
nanomagnetic devices is associated with changes of their magnetic configuration,
which can be efficiently achieved by passing an electrical current through the
device. The goal of this project is to establish the scope of current-induced
phenomena in nanomagnetic devices. The project will investigate whether using
advanced magnetic materials with complex magnetic properties can enhance the
efficiency of manipulation of magnetic nanodevices by electrical current.
Additionally, new current-induced effects in magnetic devices will be probed,
expanding the range of configurations achievable by applying an electrical
current. The research goals of the project will be complemented by a
comprehensive nanoscience education program, which includes a science camp for
middle school students and development of a nanoscale physics course in the
framework of the nanoscience minor at WVU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Future technological development relies on the advanced
understanding of phenomena specific to nanoscale systems, and the ability to
harness the phenomena for application in nanodevices. Magnetic nanodevices are a
promising replacement for the conventional semiconductor devices. Their
configuration can be manipulated by spin polarized electrical currents, which
can rotate the magnetic moments via the spin transfer torque exerted by
polarized electrons. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development project
at West Virginia University is to explore new current-induced phenomena in
nanomagnetic devices that can make the manipulation of magnetic devices by
current more efficient. The project will address the possibility of expanding
the scope of manipulation by spin transfer to complex magnetic systems including
antiferromagnets, and to magnetic configurations in which the usual spin torque
becomes inefficient. The research goals of the project will be complemented by a
comprehensive nanoscience education program, which includes a science camp for
middle school students and development of a nanoscale physics course in the
framework of the nanoscience minor at WVU.&lt;br/&gt;