* 1218473
* CCF: SHF Small: Coping with the Slowing of Dennard's Scaling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2012,03/31/2014
* T Vijaykumar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 03/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

Dennard's scaling, which governs the growth of power, voltage and frequency of
CMOS integrated chips, has been as instrumental as Moore's law in enabling the
exponential growth of the number of active transistors on a chip. Unfortunately,
the recent slowing down of Dennard's scaling of the supply voltage in future
multicores may result in dark silicon where an increasing number of cores must
be kept powered down due to lack of power. One alternative is to improve power
efficiency by customizing the cores for specific functionalities. While the dark
silicon option obviously degrades performance, the customization option puts
multicores on a potentially arduous path of increased effort for hardware
design, verification, and test, and degraded programmability. The challenge that
architects face is to design around the reality of the slowing of Dennard's
scaling while avoiding either of the two harsh consequences (dark silicon, or
the increased cost/effort of customized core design).

This project addresses the above challenge by pursuing an alternative, gentle
(i.e., non-arduous) path for multicore scaling, while remaining within the power
envelope imposed by the slowing of Dennard's scaling. The design employs
successive frequency unscaling, where all the cores are kept powered and run at
successively slower clocks every generation to stay within the power budget. An
analytical model (developed as part of this project) for the performance of
systems with and without successive frequency unscaling makes the surprising
prediction that despite considerably slower clocks in later generations (e.g.,
sub-GHz), successive frequency unscaling would exceed the dark silicon
performance limit. The key research goal of this project is to validate the
predictions of the model with real applications and detailed system simulation.
Validating an alternative, gentle path for multicore scaling has the potential
to offer significant benefits for the microprocessor and computer industry.
Beyond the research impacts, the project's integration of education components
in both graduate and undergraduate curricula helps expand its educational
impact.