* 1218794
* SHF: Small: Heterogeneous Memory Architectures for Future Many-core Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Ricardo Bianchini, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,999.00

As computation devices are becoming increasingly ubiquitous, they are running
software from a variety of domains ranging from the mobile and graphics space
all the way to high-performance, large-data server domains. This software must
achieve high performance, while consuming minimal power for environmental
reasons. As a result, computing systems are becoming increasingly heterogeneous,
accommodating diverse hardware structures conducive to different software
domains on a single platform. While processors in computing systems have
traditionally been the focal point for this proliferation of heterogeneity,
memory systems continue to be architected using traditional means. As such, a
major challenge in forward-looking heterogeneous computing systems is how best
to design memory systems to support this heterogeneity. These designs are
crucial to ensure that computing systems continue to adapt to their varied
software, performance, and energy requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research provides the foundation to construct memory systems using a variety of
architectures and technologies to run software from a variety of domains in a
high-performance, yet energy-efficient manner. This work focuses on (1)
constructing a systematic design methodology, software characterizations, and
analytical models that guide how diverse current and future memory technologies
should be combined to best support heterogeneous computing systems software, and
(2) designing a range of detailed, yet flexible experimental platforms to test
such studies. This project impacts society in a number of ways, most keenly by
(1) reducing the energy consumption of current and future heterogeneous
computing systems without sacrificing their high performance; (2) providing a
systematic and rigorous scientific means to match different memory technologies
and components to different software requirements; and (3) creating the
evaluation tools necessary to accommodate a host of future memory subsystem
research.