* 1218906
* SHF: SMALL: GOALI: Design for Manufacturability in Extreme Scaling with Emerging Nanolithography
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* David Pan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Advancing lithography patterning, which enables feature size scaling, has been a
holy grail for the semiconductor industry. There are several leading
nanolithography technologies for 14nm, 11nm, 7nm and 1x nm for extreme scaling,
including multiple patterning lithography (MPL), extreme ultraviolet lithography
(EUVL) and e-beam lithography (EBL). This project aims at developing novel
design for manufacturability algorithms, tools, and methodologies for nanometer
integrated circuits (IC) manufactured through these emerging nanolithography
technologies. The proposed research will synergistically link nanolithography
process modeling/abstraction with multi-scale layout optimization. For MPL,
robust and scalable multi-objective layout decomposition algorithms and MPL-
aware physical design tools will be developed. For next-generation
nanolithography such as EUVL and EBL, new design and process integration issues
will be studied. Hybrid nanolithography (e.g., combining MPL with EBL) will also
be explored to shed light on ultimate nano-patterning for future IC layout
design. The proposed solutions will span multiple technology layers and bring
together experts from both academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed project addresses fundamental challenges to bridge the gap between IC
design and manufacturing in extreme scaling. Thus its potential impacts to the
semiconductor industry and associated information and high-tech industries
cannot be overstated. The academia-industry collaboration between University of
Texas and IBM promises innovative and high-risk academia research coupled with
realistic industry data/benchmarks and timely technology transfer through IBM
and its global partners to benefit the overall industry. The highly
interdisciplinary nature of this research will be tightly integrated into a
variety of curriculum development and diverse student mentoring programs.