* 1218197
* CSR: Small: Privacy and Security for MapReduce Clouds with PASMAC
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Erik-Oliver Blass, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 494,406.00

This research targets the design and evaluation of protocols
for&lt;br/&gt;secure, privacy-preserving data analysis in an
untrusted&lt;br/&gt;cloud. Therewith, the user can store and query data in the
cloud,&lt;br/&gt;preserving privacy and integrity of outsourced data and
queries. The&lt;br/&gt;PIs specifically address a real-world cloud framework:
Google's&lt;br/&gt;prominent MapReduce
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional solutions for single server setups
and related work on,&lt;br/&gt;e.g., fully homomorphic encryption, are
computationally too heavy and&lt;br/&gt;uneconomical and offset cloud
advantages. The PIs' rationale is to&lt;br/&gt;design new protocols tailored to
the specifics of the MapReduce&lt;br/&gt;computing paradigm. The PIs'
methodology is twofold. First, the PIs&lt;br/&gt;design new protocols that allow
the cloud user to specify data&lt;br/&gt;analysis queries for typical operations
such as searching, pattern&lt;br/&gt;matching or counting. For this, the PIs
extend privacy-preserving&lt;br/&gt;techniques, e.g., private information
retrieval or order preserving&lt;br/&gt;encryption. Second, the PIs design
protocols guaranteeing genuineness&lt;br/&gt;of data retrieved from the cloud.
Using cryptographic accumulators,&lt;br/&gt;users can verify whether data has
not been tampered with. Besides&lt;br/&gt;design, the PIs also implement a
prototype that is usable in a&lt;br/&gt;realistic setting with
MapReduce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this project enables privacy-
preserving operations and&lt;br/&gt;secure data storage in a widely-used cloud
computing framework, thus&lt;br/&gt;remove one major adoption obstacle, and make
cloud computing available&lt;br/&gt;for a larger community.