* 1218960
* CSR: Small: Cost Effective, High Performance Solutions Using Erasure Codes for Big Data Management in Large Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Xubin He, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 11/30/2016
* USD 431,984.00

Data and I/O availability is an increasing concern in todayÕs large data centers
where both data volume and complexity are increasing dramatically. Most existing
solutions are based on multi-replication techniques to provide data redundancy,
where data chunks are replicated across storage server nodes. However, multi-
replication techniques are insufficient to manage big data: itÕs a big challenge
to efficiently replicate N copies of a data set of tens-to-hundreds of
petabytes! As an alternative solution, erasure codes tolerating multiple
failures can provide reliability and availability at much lower cost. However,
the biggest challenge using erasure codes to manage big data is the performance
problem due to the complex encoding/decoding operations, which limits the
application of erasure codes in large-scale data centers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops cost effective techniques to exploit
erasure codes to achieve high availability and enhance performance in large data
centers to efficiently manage big data via several research innovations. This
project cohesively investigates how to utilize proper spatial cost and
system/architecture techniques to improve the overall data access performance of
server clusters built upon erasure codes. This research has fundamental
contributions to pave the way to efficiently deploy data centers using erasure
codes. It has potential to benefit numerous big data applications such as online
searching, social network, e-business, health care, and so on which are
typically data intensive.