* 1218771
* CIF: Small: Network Beamforming: A Distributed Source Coding Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Hamid Jafarkhani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 09/30/2016
* USD 444,410.00

Wireless networks have influenced our life tremendously through the promise of
portability, mobility, and accessibility. Spectrum is the most valuable resource
in a wireless network. As the number of users in a wireless network is
increased, different users compete for the same portion of the available
spectrum. The result of such a competition may be a lower quality of service,
dropping of some users, higher prices and so on. One promising idea to resolve
some of these challenges is to let the users cooperate in addition to compete
with each other. The study of such a multi-user cooperative communications
system is the main goal of this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the
emphasis in cooperative communications has been on improving the performance of
a single-user (point-to-point) communication. The insights from the single-user
setting are not sufficient to address the challenges of multi-user communication
networks. When shifting the paradigm from single-user to multi-user, the natural
question that arises is the following - what are the benefits of cooperation in
a multi-user network setting suffering from interference and how to achieve
them? We start by defining new performance measures called generalized diversity
orders. Then, we study different aspects of the above question including the
maximum possible diversity orders in different multi-user cooperative
communications network scenarios. We also propose to design practical systems
that achieve these maximum diversity orders.