* 1218103
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Designing a Patient-Oriented Prescription Language: An Executable Medical Algorithm for Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Matthew Flatt, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,903.00

Preventable errors in healthcare are a leading cause of patient injury and
death. Despite considerable effort and the expenditure of billions of dollars,
computerization has yet to improve the efficacy or safety of healthcare. To this
problem, the PIs bring a novel insight: a prescription is a program. That is,
they hypothesize that prescription writing is a long lost sibling of software
engineering, using many computer programming constructs but without the benefit
of the extensive conceptual framework provided by Computer Science. This project
will test this hypothesis by exploiting software engineering and programming
languages know?how to create a highly?intuitive, domain specific language for
building and executing prescriptions. The PIs will then build and validate a
"patient oriented prescription" to manage the care of patients with Gestational
Diabetes Mellitus (GDM), a disease affecting 600,000 women
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limitations of current GDM management include low
patient adherence, modest efficacy of interventions, time?burden for clinicians,
and cost. Using extensive archives of rich data from real patients, including
diet, activity, glucose readings, and insulin use, the PIs will perform pure
computer-based simulations that will help them determine how their POP-GDM
program will respond to real-world data. They will also perform simulations with
real clinicians, actor patients, and simulated inputs from smartphones,
glucometers, and accelerometers in our state of the art medical simulation
facility. The PIs expect this work to generate multiple new insights regarding
the building and maintenance of multi-stage programs, the development of new
kinds of analyses of programs, and the discovery of new general methods for
developing high-reliability software that facilitates collaboration between
machines and humans.