* 1218265
* SHF: Small: Solving the Search for Relevant Code in Large Repositories with Lightweight Specifications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Sebastian Elbaum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 449,033.00

Searching for relevant code is a common task among programmers, one that is
becoming more crucial to their productivity as open code repositories grow in
size and programmers have the opportunity to reuse the resources therein. Yet,
the code search tools for programmers to leverage such massive repositories have
barely evolved in the last decade. Programmers still search by specifying
keywords, an approach that may perform very inconsistently as it depends on the
programmer's ability to provide terms that match how the programs in the
repository are implemented or documented. This is problematic because a slightly
wrong keyword could miss relevant results and return mostly spurious results,
reducing programmer's productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
address these limitations by exploring a code search that is novel in two
aspects. First, it allows programmers to search for code by specifying desired
code behavior in the form of inputs and outputs. This removes the need for the
programmer to imagine how the solution to a problem may have been implemented,
and instead the programmer can concentrate on defining what the software should
do. Second, given the inputs and outputs describing the desired behavior and the
set of programs in a code repository, both automatically encoded as constraints,
the proposed approach employs a constraints solver to identify what programs in
the repository could satisfy the programmers' specifications, effectively
solving the search. This guarantees the search results behave as specified.
Developing this approach requires tackling several fundamental challenges
including the definition of mappings to automatically and efficiently encode
programs as constraints so that solvers can find suitable solutions. Systematic
strategies must also be developed to refine the programmers' specifications when
they are too weak and return too many matches, and to relax the constraints in
order to find partial matches when exact ones are not available. Techniques to
support the composition of partial matches will also be necessary to scale the
approach to larger and more diverse search queries. Last, infrastructure must be
built and studies conducted to determine whether the proposed approach can be
cost-effective in practice. Use of these techniques will change the way
programmers operate, directly impacting their productivity by enabling them to
truly leverage existing code in increasingly rich code repositories.