* 1218043
* III: Small: Providing Relevant and Timely Results: Real-Time Search Architectures and Relevance Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jimmy Lin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,960.00

Information search remains one of the best solutions today for satisfying
individuals' problem-solving needs. However, we are inundated with growing
quantities of information as its volume on different media grows, and so does
its velocity -- the rate at which information is being generated, transmitted,
and consumed. The growing importance of social media such as Twitter and blogs
further exacerbates this problem. It is clear that better real-time search
capabilities are needed. This project aims to advance the state of the art in
information retrieval research by tackling the real-time search problem. The
effort consists of two themes: the first concerns high-performance search
architectures for low-latency, high-throughput query evaluation and indexing;
the second concerns relevance algorithms, exploring strategies to model time-
varying relevance signals in a learning-to-rank framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced real-time search capabilities promise to provide
users more effective access to time-sensitive information. Scenarios include
journalists tracking situations around the globe, victims of natural disaster
trying to find loved ones, and political analysts digesting reactions to a
candidate's speech. This project is expected to yield an open-source
demonstration platform for real-time search on tweets and blogs. Close
coordination with shared, community-wide evaluations at the NIST-sponsored Text
Retrieval Conferences (TREC) further benefits the broader research community.
More information is will disseminated via the project web site
(http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/~jimmylin/projects/ ). Research results will be
incorporated into class material for the large-data computing course that brings
cloud computing into the classroom, and graduate students will have an
opportunity to gain research and system development experience.