* 1218179
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Programming Interface And Runtime For Self-Tuning Scalable C/C++ Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Qing Yi, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

A key challenge in developing multi-threaded applications on modern
architectures is correctly synchronizing data shared among the threads while
avoiding excessive performance penalties. Unsafe low-level synchronization
mechanisms can easily introduce errors (e.g. race conditions and deadlock) that
are extremely difficult to debug. At the same time, application performance and
scalability are frequently compromised due to inefficient implementations of
synchronous operations on shared data.

This research develops a library of highly concurrent scalable data containers
with associated programming interface and optimization support to significantly
enhance the productivity and performance of multi-threaded C/C++ applications on
multicore architectures. The library provides an easy to use and composable
interface similar to that of C++ Standard Template Library (STL) and enhances
each container type with internal support for non-blocking synchronization of
their data accesses, thereby providing better safety and performance than
traditional blocking synchronization by eliminating hazards such as deadlock,
livelock, and priority inversion, and by being highly scalable in supporting
large numbers of threads. A higher level programming interface, similar to that
of OpenMP, is supported by a preprocessing compiler associated with the runtime
to ease the transition of existing sequential or multi-threaded C/C++
applications to using the non-blocking synchronous template library and to
provide optimization and tuning support for the use of the library abstractions.
The developed deliverables are expected to demonstrate a seamless integration of
developer input, compiler optimization, and multicore runtimes to support
systematic migration of C/C++ applications to continuously evolving
architectures.

The scalable template library and the associated programming interface and
tuning support is expected to provide an immense productivity and performance
boost for developers of high-end scientific and systems applications, including
branch and bound, graph analysis, complex scene rendering, and goal propagation
in autonomous embedded systems. The developed programming techniques and tools
can enable the transformation of such applications into software that is
substantially more reliable, efficient, and scalable than existing state of the
art. The software techniques is also expected to be employed as an educational
toolkit in the teaching of programming languages, compilers, systems software,
and parallel programming courses.