* 1218395
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research: Mobile Gesture Interaction for Kids: Sensing, Recognition, and Error Recovery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Lisa Anthony, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2014
* USD 234,258.00

Though many children use mobile applications to support their learning and
entertainment, the devices and underlying interactions were not designed
specifically for children. The goal of this project is to make touch and gesture
interactions more accessible and user-friendly to young users. This research
will yield new understanding about the appropriate and successful ways to sense,
recognize, and recover from errors in touch-based interactions with children.
The approach involves studying children interacting with mobile applications
that gather data on their touch and gesture interactions, as well as conducting
design sessions with children to elicit their preferences for mobile device
interactions and error feedback and recovery strategies. This approach will
result in design guidelines for those creating applications and tools for young
users. The proposed research contributes towards the evolution of alternative
interaction technologies such as touch and gesture, and the understanding of
child-computer interaction with new gesture-based technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impacts of this project lie
in contributions towards the evolution of alternative interaction technologies
such as touch and gesture, and the understanding of child-computer interaction
with new gesture-based technologies. This work also will develop and validate an
approach for investigating such interaction issues and designing improvements
for them that can be used in future work with other populations such as older
individuals or those with varying physical abilities. The grant will support two
female young investigators, and will fund research experiences to benefit
computer science students attending Bowie State University, a minority serving
institution.