* 1218377
* CIF:Small: A Signal Processing Approach to the Analysis of Time-Varying Functional Networks of the Brain
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Selin Aviyente, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 268,567.00

Complex network theory has proved to be a versatile framework to represent and
analyze relational data in many disciplines including the social sciences,
biology and information systems. One particular application that has benefited
from these developments is cognitive neuroscience. Contemporary neuroimaging
techniques provide neural recordings with increasing spatial and temporal
resolution yielding rich multichannel datasets that can be exploited for
detailed description of functional connectivity patterns in the brain. Recent
research provides evidence that neural integration across various spatial and
temporal scales plays an important role in a wide range of cognitive and
executive processes as well as in the manifestation of neural diseases and
psychopathologies. The current characterizations of functional brain networks
are limited to global and static measures that quantify average activity across
subjects, brain regions and time. This research addresses this problem by
developing a signal processing framework to study the time-varying nature of the
functional brain networks based on multichannel electroencephalogram (EEG) data
for a better understanding of cognitive control.

This research develops three major approaches to study the dynamic nature of
functional connectivity in the brain. First, time-varying measures of synchrony
along with statistical hypothesis testing are implemented to construct sparse
weighted graphs across time and frequency. Second, hierarchical multiple subject
clustering algorithms are developed with information theoretic criteria to
identify time-varying community structure. Third, a statistical signal
processing framework is developed to summarize dynamic network activity with a
few representative networks and to identify transient and stationary activity.
Finally, this research is applied to the study of cognitive control for
identifying the pathways that control cognition and perception, and in
understanding the basic network causes of psychopathologies.