* 1218570
* HCC: Small: Non-Visual Skimming: Improving the Usability of Web Access for Blind People
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* I. Ramakrishnan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

In our information driven Web-based society, we are all gradually falling
victims to information overload. But while sighted people can develop ways to
quickly skim Web content in order to get the gist of the information and find
what they need, blind users are stymied because they must rely on screen reader
software with limited functionality to narrate content using computer-generated
speech through a serial audio interface, which does not allow these users to
find out what content is important before they listen to it. So, they either
listen to all content or listen to the first part of each sentence or paragraph
before skipping to the next. The PI's goal in this project is to address this
problem by developing novel interfaces and algorithmic techniques for non-visual
skimming that will empower people with visual impairments to access information
on the Web significantly faster than is currently possible with state-of-the-art
screen readers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When skimming, sighted people quickly look
through content and pick out keywords and relevant phrases. The PI's approach is
to emulate this process and enable a computer-assisted skimming experience for
screen-reader users. To this end, he will iteratively and concurrently pursue
two research directions: designing interfaces for non-visual skimming, and
developing algorithms to enable these interfaces. Through a process of
participatory design interfaces will be derived for skimming with standard
shortcut-driven screen-readers, touch-based devices, and simulated haptic
surfaces, while algorithms for generating summaries will be created to support
skimming of various types of Web content at different levels of granularity and
speed. Controlled and in-situ real-world experiments will be conducted to
evaluate the utility of the resulting interfaces and algorithms. Project
outcomes will include an open-source skimming tool and reusable datasets of Web
pages with annotations and summaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Technology to facilitate non-visual skimming will transform information access
for visually impaired users while also contributing to the fields of natural
language processing, machine learning, and Web information retrieval.
Additionally, this research will help us better understand how a combination of
touch and haptic interfaces can improve website navigation and skimming.
Although not explored in this research, project outcomes will likely prove
useful to people with other disabilities such as cognitive and motor
impairments, and they may ultimately also be helpful to sighted people.