* 1218283
* HCC: Small: Determining the Effects of Latency in Virtual Reality Physical Rehabilitation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John Quarles, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 472,840.00

Although the effect of latency (i.e., how quickly a system can respond to user
input) on users has been one of the fundamental research areas in virtual
reality (VR) for many years, latency's effect on persons with physical
disabilities is still unknown. The PI's objective in this project is to acquire
a better understanding of how latency of visual feedback in VR can impact
interaction performance, perception, and subjective experience for users with
reaction time and reflex deficits (e.g., due to neurological, vestibular,
balance issues), and to investigate how this ultimately impacts the
effectiveness of VR-based rehabilitation. The PI's central hypothesis, based on
preliminary data, is that latency will be less perceivable but will have a more
significant impact on interaction performance for persons with disabilities as
compared to healthy persons. To test this hypothesis, the PI will focus on the
main set of applications typically used in VR rehabilitation: games, exercise,
and accessibility. He will explore, for members of the target community,
latency's impact in VR rehabilitation games, on the effectiveness of visual
feedback during rehabilitation exercises in virtual environments (VE), and on
accessibility in a VE. Through a series of empirical studies, the PI will
determine latency thresholds in VR with respect to interaction performance,
physiological response, perception, and subjective impressions.

Broader Impacts: Project outcomes will afford a deeper understanding of the
effectiveness of VR as a medium for rehabilitation. If the PI's hypothesis is
confirmed, the potentially negative implications for the efficacy of VR-based
rehabilitation may disrupt accepted theories and revolutionize design guidelines
for this type of rehabilitation. Alternatively, this research may inspire other
researchers to develop approaches to combat latency in VR specifically for
disabled persons, which will also produce further vertical advancement in the
field. More generally, this research will provide a critical step towards the
grand challenge of universal usability in VR.