* 1218568
* SHF: Small: Autograph: A System for Synthesizing Concurrent Data Structure Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Keshav Pingali, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2016
* USD 399,998.00

Most electronic devices today are built from multicore processors, which consist
of four to eight small cores (computers) that cooperate to perform computational
tasks. Programming such multicore processors is much more difficult than
programming a single computer, so one of the major research challenges in
Computer Science is to design and implement tools that make this programming
task easier. The Autograph project focuses on one aspect of this problem, which
is the implementation of data structures that can be read and written safely by
multiple cores at the same time. When completed, the Autograph tool will permit
multicore programmers to specify the properties of the desired data structure,
leaving it to the tool to synthesize the parallel data structure automatically.
This tool will simplify the parallel programming task
substantially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The input to Autograph is a high-level
relational specification of the desired parallel data structure. Autograph works
by composing a set of "building-block" data structures called tiles to implement
the parallel data structure. The application programmer can control which tiles
are used to produce the desired data structure. Therefore, application
programmers can quickly produce parallel data structure implementations and tune
their performance without having to write explicitly parallel code. Autograph
will (i) implement the full system for the complete relational specification
language, (ii) build code generators that can produce parallel C++ graph data
structures from this language, (iii) extend this compiler to produce
distributed-memory data structures, (iv) produce tools for autotuning the
generated implementations, and (v) investigate the use of Autograph in
implementing a GraphBLAS. Autograph will be implemented and demonstrated in the
context of speculative parallelization systems like Galois, but it will also
produce concurrent data structures for use in parallel systems that do not use
speculation, such as OpenMP or pThreads. By simplifying one of the most complex
aspects of parallel programming, namely the production of high-performance
parallel data structures, Autograph will have a transformative effect on the
critical field of parallel programming.