* 1218885
* CIF:Small:GOALI:Signal Processing and Coding for Two-Dimensional Magnetic Recording Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Benjamin Belzer, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 453,596.00

Industry is approaching the limit of the data storage density possible on
magnetic disks with the traditional approach of reading and writing data on a
single-track. This research considers an alternate approach called two
dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR), wherein bits are read and written in two
dimensions on conventional magnetic disks. A key problem in TDMR is that a given
magnetic grain on the disk retains the polarization of the last bit written on
it; hence, if a grain is large enough to contain two bit centers, the oldest bit
will be overwritten by the newer one if they have different polarities. Bits are
read from the disk by a 2D read head. Because bits are stored at high density,
the signal read from a given bit suffers 2D intersymbol interference (2D ISI)
from bits in both down and cross track directions. This research allows industry
to continue to refine conventional magnetic recording technology, without
radical redesign of the recording medium.

The investigators study 2D signal processing and coding techniques to combat
grain overwriting and 2D ISI in TDMR, with the goal of approaching the recently
estimated channel capacity of 0.5 bit/grain. Specific objectives include: 1)
Investigate detectors for the TDMR magnetic grain channel based on three channel
models: rectangular-grain model, discrete-grain Voronoi model, and Voronoi
model. 2) Integrate grain channel detection with 2D ISI detection and with
channel decoding. 3) Develop capacity bounds for the TDMR/ISI channel models. 4)
Evaluate the developed algorithms against the capacity bounds and against
experimental data from the project s industrial partner Hitachi Global Storage
Technologies, a Western Digital company.