* 1218576
* SHF:Small:Test Data Learning for Ultra High Dignostic Resolution
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Ronald Blanton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Integrated circuits (ICs) are pervasive in all aspects of our lives, used in
everything from computers to mobile phones to automobiles. However, fabricating
ICs that both work and are reliable is becoming extremely difficult due to the
significant complexity inherent in the underlying fabrication processes. It is
therefore extremely important to understand the reasons why some ICs fail to
operate properly. In this NSF project, new methodologies for locating and
characterizing the root cause for IC failure will be developed. Existing
approaches typically produce uncertain results because they rely on limited
information about the IC design. In this work, additional design information and
data extracted from other failing ICs will be holistically used to efficiently
derive the reason for IC failure from data measured from failing ICs.
Efficiently discovering the root-cause of failure for an IC will enable the
design, the fabrication and even the testing of ICs to be significantly
improved, helping to ensure the continued advancement of the electronics
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator (PI) is committed to
having a broader impact through training a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate researchers. His research group has members from under-represented
groups that include women, African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Native
Americans. In addition, as director of the Center for the Silicon System
Implementation (CSSI) at Carnegie Mellon University, the PI manages a program
that recruits undergrads researchers from various universities (including
minority-serving institutions), and the annual convention of the National
Society of Black Engineers. This program has been very successful, resulting in
the recruitment of many undergraduate researchers, including both women and
African-Americans. In the last few years, the PI himself has supervised nine
undergraduate researchers, three of which were African-American (two male and
one female). In addition, the preliminary work undertaken by this NSF contract
is now published and was actually accomplished by one of our African-American
researchers. The PI will continue to recruit a diverse group of students, both
at the graduate and undergraduate levels, for participation in this project.