* 1218129
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Linking Evolving Software Requirements and Acceptance Tests
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Denys Poshyvanyk, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Two distinct milestones of any software development lifecycle are requirements
gathering and acceptance testing, where a software product is verified against
its requirements. Yet this verification is one of the most difficult tasks,
since it involves bridging an abstraction gap between high-level descriptions of
requirements and their low-level implementations in the source code. Determining
how different requirements are covered by acceptance tests is very hard, since
it means tracing each acceptance test to specific requirements. Many companies
and organizations do not have or cannot invest significant resources into
recovering links among requirements, acceptance tests and other artifacts. As a
result, software development is not as efficient as it could be, lacking
controls to steer the overall testing and bug-fixing effort, and involving extra
work peripheral to the core tasks. The end result is a situation in which it is
unclear how well software is tested and how much confidence stakeholders can
have in it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are addressing this fundamental problem by
defining and developing a new, integrated model for recovering traceability
links using execution artifacts, diverse models, and requirements. We develop
techniques for automatically generating additional test cases that execute
untested code to recover additional traceability links and verify existing ones.
To ensure that our approach is effective, we will perform rigorous case studies
in real industrial scenarios to evaluate the model, techniques, and
methodologies. As a result, the state-of-the-practice in software development
will be improved that faces difficulties in ensuing that software products are
tested fully with respect to their requirements. Among the broader impacts the
project includes developing educational course content, involving
underrepresented categories of students, producing software tools under open
source licenses, and collaborating with industry to transfer technology.