* 1218266
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Tracing and Reasoning about Changing Artifacts
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Hazeline Asuncion, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 504,980.00

Change pervades the entire software development process. Software may be changed
in response to market forces, changing customer requirements, or new hardware
and software dependencies. The thread of changes, along with the decisions
behind those changes, is often transient and is rarely directly captured by a
development team. Source code drifts away from requirement and design documents
(and other artifacts) that explain the motivations and decisions behind the
code. There is a high overhead in maintaining consistency between these
artifacts and the code. Project schedules have tight deadlines, with little or
no time to explicitly document the decisions behind code changes. Thus, further
code modifications are often expensive because the software engineers lack the
understanding of past decisions.

This project aims to investigate a lightweight, flexible, and systematic
approach to identifying and connecting related changes to support future
maintenance activities. By leveraging traceability and refactoring techniques,
we can represent change as a first-class artifact so that software engineers can
better understand the nature of change and how it impacts related artifacts. Our
approach is novel because it allows developers to reason about changes as varied
as high-level concepts to low-level code that cuts across several modules. We
also investigate techniques for bridging any gaps between these connections.

The approach is applicable to organizations that maintain legacy systems or
acquire software from other organizations. The results will also be valuable to
any medium- or large-scale development context in assimilating new personnel and
in coordinating distributed development.