* 1218012
* SHF: Small: Low Power System-on-Chip Circuits and CAD
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Kenneth Stevens, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 444,978.00

Energy impacts all aspects of society. Much of the U.S. electrical energy
consumption occurs unnoticed due to the ubiquitous nature of electronics that
improves and enhances our standard of living. For example, according to the US
EPA Report to Congress, the electricity costs of data centers used by our cell
phones and computers amounted to $4.5 billion dollars in 2006 -- the equivalent
of 15 power plants. This proposal develops a transformative technology that
reduces the power consumption of electronics by a factor of three. The core of
the technology is based on a theory applied to the timing of logic and
communication elements on an integrated circuit, where signals can travel up to
the speed-of-light in the given medium. The primary result of this funding will
be to develop circuit, software (computer-aided design), and design technology
that will enable this low power technology to be moved from scientific
laboratories into commercial products. The relative timing theory will be mapped
onto the current commercial design and validation flow, using formal proofs of
correctness for the translation. This is what will enable fast commercialization
of the technology. A new ultra low power circuit family will be developed based
on exhaustive behavioral investigations. This family can likewise be technology
mapped to current fabrication libraries used by the foundries. Finally, a factor
of three reduction in power as well as the ability to rapidly build commercial
products will be demonstrated through the design and fabrication of a complex
system-on-chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary impact of the work is the
reduction of energy used by our ubiquitous electronics. The impact of energy
usage has worldwide ramifications. Electronics have had an exponential growth in
energy consumption over the last decade. The energy consumed by integrated
circuits already pose a considerable impact on the economy and environment in
terms of CO_2 emissions. The research performed by this grant will continue to
improve U.S. technology leadership and competitiveness. The technology transfer
to industry will also create hundreds of jobs and provide taxable revenue. This
research has significant collaboration and support from industry, including
direct interactions with Texas Instruments, Intel, Mentor Graphics, and ON
Semiconductor. This work builds on the strong research foundation of the
University of Utah. The University has a strong record of outreach to increase
the engineering student population.