* 1218411
* CGV: Small: Collaborative Research: Diffractive masks and algorithms for light field capture
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ramesh Raskar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

Diffractive masks and algorithms for light field capture&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Ramesh
Raskar, MIT Media Lab Alyosha Molnar, Cornell ECE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced
imaging and display technology requires integrated, low cost systems able to
efficiently capture and characterize light from 3-D scenes. In particular, a 3-D
scene can be described by the collection of light rays it generates, called the
light field. This research combines concepts from mask-based light-field imaging
with angle sensitive pixels (ASPs). While mask-based light-field capture is much
better understood mathematically, and masks are cheaper to manufacture and more
easily modified on-the-fly, diffractive ASPs provide smaller, denser light field
sensors, and provide naturally compressible outputs. This project combines the
physics and signal processing of these approaches to enable optical imaging
systems that capture more information than normal cameras while reducing the
system's complexity. This work broadly impacts diverse applications spanning
consumer imaging and displays, machine vision and automation, scientific/medical
imaging and displays, robotic surgery, surveillance and remote
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3-D images and video can be captured by measuring
the combined spatial and angular distribution of light (the light field). This
research combines two techniques for light-field capture: mask-based light-field
imaging and diffractive angle sensitive pixels (ASPs). A critical element of
this work is the development of a mathematical framework that maps between
conventional geometric light fields and the diffractive optics upon which ASPs
rely. A second element is constructing hybrid systems based on this mathematics,
leveraging diffractive effects in mask design, and combining masks with ASPs in
single light-field cameras. This work also combines formalisms in existing light
field methods with knowledge about real 3-D scene statistics to develop optimal
(in the sense of usability and compressibility) basis sets for sampling and
encoding the light-field. All of these aspects combine to reduce the size, cost
and complexity of light field cameras, while simultaneously enhancing their
capabilities.