* 1218200
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Per-Process Energy Accounting in Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Tian Lan, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 220,000.00

This project targets at solving a longstanding, hard problem in operating system
research: how to determine the contribution by a process to the system energy
consumption when multiple processes are active. Energy is an important system
resource for mobile and embedded systems that are battery-powered and thermally
constrained. Per-process energy accounting is important for software evaluation
and optimization as well as system energy management and security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles this hard problem with two novel
methodologies. First, it leverages the smart battery interface available in
modern mobile systems and statistical learning to estimate system energy
consumption for very short time intervals. Second, the project exploits and
extends technologies from multi-player game theory, in particular, Shapley
value, to distribute the system energy consumption to concurrently running
processes. The project targets three novel contributions: (1) system and
algorithmic solutions to achieve high accuracy in system energy estimation for
very short time intervals without any external assistance; (2) extended multi-
player game theory based on Shapley value to distribute system energy
consumption to running processes with incomplete measurement; and (3) utility-
based system energy management based on per-process energy accounting. Results
from this project apply to not only mobile systems but also servers and data
centers. By applying statistical learning and game theory to systems research,
the project produces novel, interdisciplinary curriculum modules for teaching
both these theories and operating systems. The project also generates open-
source tools and data sets for energy modeling and optimization in mobile
systems.