* 1218075
* SHF: Small: Ensuring Reliability and Portability of Scientific Software for Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2016
* USD 507,857.00

Numerical results of scientific computations are stored in computers as
floating-point numbers, an approximation of real numbers that accounts for the
fact that a computer's storage is limited. This need for approximation has the
unfortunate side effect that floating-point numbers don't abide by common laws
of arithmetic known from high school, such as the associativity of addition. As
a consequence, apparently equivalent implementations of floating-point
operations on computer hardware may produce very different results, such as when
the order of operands of an addition is changed by a compiler. Programs
generically written for high-performance parallel computing platforms are likely
to be compiled using different floating-point implementations and schedulings,
as the executable resulting from the compilation depends on the available
hardware. Such parallel scientific programs are therefore susceptible to
reliability and portability issues that can range from simple deviations in
precision to drastic changes of program control flow when moving from one
architecture to another. The results of this research will be tools and
techniques to help scientists find bugs more effectively in such programs. This
research has important implications for the reliability of important scientific
programs such as those used in biomedical imaging applications, climate
modelling, and vehicle design.

This project develops rigorous methods for analyzing parallel scientific code,
specifically written using the now emerging OpenCL parallel programming
standard. The goal is to detect potential sources of reliability and portability
deficiencies in such code that are due to dependencies of the floating-point
behavior on the underlying hardware, which may be unknown to the programmer.
Traditional reliability methods such as program testing and debugging are
ineffective for parallel OpenCL programs, because program behavior may vary
across runs, making after-test behavior uncertain. For these reasons, the
investigators will use rigorous analysis methods that are not solely based on
program execution. Instead, the program is formally modeled as a transition
system; the model is encoded symbolically, using logical formula representations
that can often compactly represent the set of executions of the program without
executing it. The program model is then analyzed for portability violations and
program errors using floating point-capable decision procedures and model
checkers. To achieve scalability, the investigators plan to exploit the highly
symmetric and parametric form of OpenCL programs, where identical operations are
performed by many computational threads in Single Instruction Multiple Data
(SIMD) style.