* 1218865
* Vision and Change (V&C) in  Undergraduate Biology  Education Follow-Up
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2016
* USD 892,225.00

In 2009 the American Academy for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) held a
workshop/meeting that included a representative segment of the nation's biology
university and college faculty (500 attendees in all) in a discussion of the
need for change in the way we approach biology undergraduate education in light
of the vast changes in the discipline itself. That meeting resulted in a 2011
publication, Vision and Change in Biology Undergraduate Education: A Call for
Action, that has, so far, been distributed to more than 6000 people and a web
page that has had about 5,000 hits. The essential outline and general contents
of the publication reflect the discussions at the 2009 meeting and were, in
fact, written by a consortium of attendees. That meeting and the subsequent
dissemination of its findings benefitted from the support of representatives
from the National Institute of Health, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the
National Academy, and the Directorates of Biology and of Education and Human
Resources within NSF. The current project is a follow up to the initial effort
and fulfills a request by meeting attendees to determine the community's
response to the meeting and its publications (both in print and on the web).
Representatives of the United States Department of Agriculture have joined the
group planning this meeting.

Intellectual Merit: This project involves a large segment of the biology
community. It is concerned with discovering how change occurs within biology
undergraduate education and covers such topics as: what have faculty,
institutions of higher education, and professional societies done in response to
the widespread call for change; what were the outcomes of these actions for
change; how were these outcomes documented; and has the unit of change included
more than just one or two faculty members to involve a department or set of
departments in a coordinated effort to change teaching approaches within courses
and across the department. This sort of information can provide a useful base
for educational researchers interested in describing change efforts in academia,
as well as provide information to interested faculty and institutions on how to
uccessfully institute new approaches in teaching their discipline.

Broader Impact: The breadth of institutions, fields within biology, and faculty
that are included speaks for the broader impact of this project. In addition
AAAS serves all STEM disciplines so the publicity given this effort can result
in other disciplines trying similar efforts to improve their approaches to
undergraduate education. The original effort has already catalyzed an interest
from the engineering community. The fact that recent published efforts by both
the American Academy of Medical Colleges (as concerns the preparation of pre-
medical and medical students) and the Educational Testing Service (as concerns
AP Biology) mirror the concerns and suggestions within the original Vision and
Change publication heightens community interest in the results of this seminal
meeting.