* 1218692
* RI: Small: Learning Open Domain Semantic Parsers
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Alexander Yates, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2015
* USD 425,821.00

Supervised semantic parsers, which learn to map language to relational data,
perform poorly on texts that differ in vocabulary or style from the training
text, and on databases that differ from the database used in training. Today's
semantic parsers have only been tested on narrowly-circumscribed domains like
geography, but the ideal semantic parser would generalize to the many and
incredibly diverse relational databases available on the Web.

This project develops semantic parsers that approach this ideal system. The
project divides the overall task into two parts: mapping named-entities in text
to database constants in any domain, and mapping full sentences and questions to
logical forms written in a variant of the lambda calculus. Techniques for
resolving named-entities make use of domain-independent contextual information
around the named-entity for disambiguation. To connect words like "directed"
with a database relation listing directors of movies, the project relies on
schema-matching techniques from database integration. The system extracts a
relational view of a corpus, and then generates alignments between these
extracted alignments and the fixed relational structure of existing databases.
The project uses transfer-learning and co-training approaches to estimate
parameters for statistical models for named-entity disambiguation and schema
matching across domains and databases.

The project is expected to produce new methods and software systems for
connecting human language with relational data. It enables language-based
queries to the broad array of structured data available on the Web, making it
easier to find information than ever before.