* 1218492
* SHF Small: Hierarchical Unsupervised Inference Using Robust Neuromorphic Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jeremiah Holleman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2016
* USD 250,000.00

The human brain contains roughly 100 billion neurons. Each operates at
approximately 150 Hz, far slower than modern digital processors, suggesting that
the brain's computational strength stems from its massively parallel
architecture rather than sheer processing speed. Deep machine learning (DML) has
recently emerged as a promising framework for mimicking the information
representation capabilities of the brain. Inspired by discoveries in
neurobiology, hidden layers of deep learning systems encode hierarchically
distributed representations of complex inputs. However, the fundamental mismatch
between a highly parallel architecture and the serial structure of conventional
processors limits the scalability of software-based DML systems. By fully
leveraging the computational power of individual transistors, analog
neuromorphic circuits achieve much greater density and energy efficiency than
digital technology. The goal of this research is to use neuromorphic analog
computational elements to enable scalable deep learning
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research offers the potential to
revolutionize the design and utilization of large-scale deep machine learning
systems with applications to real-world, complex, high-dimensional pattern
recognition problems. In particular, the study of floating-gate circuitry for
realizing such systems is expected to have broad impact on the field of
neuromorphic engineering. The long-range impact of compact, power-efficient
learning systems will be profound, with benefits to society ranging from micro-
scale health-monitoring sensors capable of learning from their own observations
to large-scale autonomous processing of multimedia data. The interdisciplinary
nature of the project will provide an opportunity for graduate and undergraduate
students to work at the intersection of different specializations and provide a
unique platform on which to study the emergent properties of complex
biologically-inspired systems.