* 1218981
* III: Small: MapReduce Workload Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Shivnath Babu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 315,971.00

Researchers and decision makers in diverse fields such as &lt;br/&gt;fraud
detection, genome sequencing, and datacenter&lt;br/&gt;management need to
process many terabytes of data every day. &lt;br/&gt;Many fields are turning to
MapReduce systems to process such &lt;br/&gt;growing datasets. Consequently, the
relatively young MapReduce&lt;br/&gt;ecosystem has to support complex workloads
that include &lt;br/&gt;declarative queries for report generation, MapReduce
&lt;br/&gt;programs for machine learning tasks, and large job
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, elastic and pay-as-you-go cloud platforms pose
novel &lt;br/&gt;challenges and opportunities for MapReduce workload
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is building the Hadoop AutoAdmin
system for &lt;br/&gt;automating MapReduce workload management. To the PI's
knowledge, &lt;br/&gt;Hadoop AutoAdmin is the first system to address this
challenging &lt;br/&gt;problem that will become increasingly important as a
broad class &lt;br/&gt;of users adopt MapReduce. Hadoop AutoAdmin has three
research &lt;br/&gt;thrusts. The first thrust is to understand and characterize
the &lt;br/&gt;behavior of MapReduce workloads based on a comprehensive
empirical &lt;br/&gt;study involving workloads and data from multiple
application domains &lt;br/&gt;as well as different cluster configurations on
the cloud. The second &lt;br/&gt;thrust is to develop an easy-to-use and
efficient warehouse to &lt;br/&gt;store, retrieve, and visualize the diverse
forms of workload &lt;br/&gt;monitoring data. The models and insights from these
activities will &lt;br/&gt;drive the third thrust of developing end-to-end
algorithms for &lt;br/&gt;workload management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
can have significant impact in areas of national &lt;br/&gt;importance like
security and healthcare that are inundated with &lt;br/&gt;data. Hadoop
AutoAdmin will improve worker productivity, system &lt;br/&gt;utilization, and
cost-effectiveness of cloud platforms. The &lt;br/&gt;technical contributions
will be disseminated broadly and the &lt;br/&gt;system released publicly.