* 1218483
* SHF: Small: Algorithm/Architecture Co-Design of Low Power and High Performance Linear Algebra Compute Fabrics
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Robert van de Geijn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2017
* USD 499,919.00

Until recently, the speed of a computer processors could be
increased&lt;br/&gt;by packing more transistors into a smaller area and
increasing the&lt;br/&gt;frequency. This trend is now unsustainable because of
power&lt;br/&gt;constraints, with only moderate gains going forward even when
putting&lt;br/&gt;hundreds or thousands of traditional cores onto a chip. Thus,
how to&lt;br/&gt;reduce power consumption while increasing performance is one of
the&lt;br/&gt;core concerns. It is well-accepted that specialization
(designing&lt;br/&gt;parts of the processor for a specific task) and
heterogeneity&lt;br/&gt;(designating different parts of the processor for
different tasks) can&lt;br/&gt;lead to orders of magnitude improvements in both
aspects. However,&lt;br/&gt;the question is whether such efficiency can be
maintained while&lt;br/&gt;providing enough flexibility to implement a broad
class of operations.&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging unique domain expertise, research
under this project&lt;br/&gt;addresses this question for the domain of matrix
computations, which&lt;br/&gt;are at the core of many computational advances,
both in scientific&lt;br/&gt;high-performance computing as well as in the
embedded, mobile or&lt;br/&gt;cyber-physical
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observing that the largest benefits can be
obtained through&lt;br/&gt;specialization at the foundations, this project is
aimed at&lt;br/&gt;co-designing algorithms and architectures to directly realize
basic&lt;br/&gt;linear algebra methods in an optimized combination of hardware
and&lt;br/&gt;software. By designing a specialized Linear Algebra Processor
(LAP),&lt;br/&gt;it is possible to achieve one to two orders of magnitude
improved&lt;br/&gt;efficiencies compared to traditional or proposed
computer&lt;br/&gt;architectures. The questions that the project will answer,
through a&lt;br/&gt;combination of analysis, simulation, and prototyping,
include: (1) How&lt;br/&gt;to best design such LAPs that can efficiently execute
the full set of&lt;br/&gt;linear algebra routines; and (2) How LAPs can be
scaled, networked&lt;br/&gt;into clusters and integrated with application
software running on one&lt;br/&gt;or more host processors. The broad goal of
this project is to develop&lt;br/&gt;novel, integrated linear algebra compute
fabrics that are co-optimized&lt;br/&gt;and co-designed across all layers
ranging from the basic hardware&lt;br/&gt;foundations all the way to the
application programming support through&lt;br/&gt;standard linear algebra
software packages. This project is expected&lt;br/&gt;to result in a leap in
computational science and discovery&lt;br/&gt;capabilities, thus enabling novel
breakthroughs in industry, for the&lt;br/&gt;consumer, at the national labs, in
education and by scientists in&lt;br/&gt;academia.