* 1218437
* III: Small: Entity Selection and Ranking for Data-Mining Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Evimaria Terzi, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,958.00

Expert-management portals like linkedin.com, odesk.com and guru.com are
indicative sites that allow people to advertise their work or set of skills to
the broader public. For example, linkedin features more than 120 million members
which allows potential employers, collaborators, etc. to discover individuals or
groups of individuals with the desired expertise. Similarly, review-management
sites like Amazon or Yelp collect large number of reviews about products or
services. For example, kindle has more than 30,000 reviews on Amazon. Naturally,
users cannot go over all these reviews and are helped significantly by the
identification of a small subset of reviews that is sufficiently informative.
Finally, as online social and media networks grow in importance as sources of
news and other information, there is an urgent need for tools that automatically
identify and recommend important nodes of the network, that specific users may
need to follow to fully exploit the power of online social media. In each of
these scenarios, given a collection of entities (e.g., reviews about a product,
experts that declare certain skills, network nodes or edges), the goal is to
identify a subset of important entities (e.g., useful reviews, competent
experts, influential nodes respectively).

Existing work on recommender systems attempts to identify important entities
either by entity ranking or by entity selection. Entity-ranking methods
associate a a score with each entity; They ignore the redundancy between the
highly-scored entities. Entity-selection methods try to overcome this drawback
by evaluating the desirability of a group of entities taken together; They
attempt to identify the best subset of entities, while ignoring other subsets of
entities that may be equally-good or almost as good as the best subset. Against
this background, this project aims to overcome the drawbacks of existing entity
selection and entity ranking methods through a synergistic integration of both
into a common framework that allows entity-ranking based on entity selection and
entity-selection that based on entity ranking. In the resulting framework, the
scores of individual entities are determined in part by the number of good
groups of entities they can be part of; and good group of entities consist of
entities with high scores.

The main challenge addressed by this work is how to explore the solution space
of combinatorial problems in order to identify subsets of entities that
participate in many good solutions. The resulting new practical methods for
exploring the solution space of combinatorial problems find applications related
to expert management systems, management of online product reviews, and network
analysis (including physical and social networks). The project also offers
enhanced opportunities for research-based training of graduate and undergraduate
students at Boston University. All of the research results including
publications, software, and data will be freely disseminated to the broader
research and educational community through the project website at:
http://www.cs.bu.edu/~evimaria/sel-and-ranking.html.