* 1218232
* NeTS: Small: Grapevine: Efficient Shared Situational Awareness for Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Christine Julien, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

Many of today's networks include mobile devices, users, and their applications
operating in wirelessly connected situations, where expressive and extensive
knowledge about the intrinsically dynamic operating context can significantly
enhance and enable new forms of behavior. As our capabilities to locally sense,
compute, and communicate increase, we must reexamine traditional notions of
context and context-awareness in these increasingly connected environments,
which are defined by coordination and cooperation among distributed entities. In
this light, this project addresses the following fundamental research questions:
how do we expressively identify groups of entities based on predicates over
individual entities' and groups' contexts, and how do we define, assess, and
share the context of both individuals and groups?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project diverges from existing work in its perspective on context and context-
awareness. Existing work is largely ego-centric, focusing on how to use
knowledge of a single entity's situation to impact its own personal, local
behavior. As groups become a defining force of applications in domains as
diverse as the Internet of Things, delay-tolerant networks, and intelligent
transportation systems, the notion of a shared view of the context will be of
primary importance. A second key differentiator is the project's focus on the
quality of distributed knowledge about both context and group membership. Making
these quality metrics available to applications is essential to enabling
effective decision-making based on context information.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses issues surrounding context-awareness that
pervade our everyday lives. In addition, the project includes an integrated
impact plan that uses technology transfer to engage the public and evaluate the
research. To broaden participation, the project includes design opportunities
for undergraduate students, K-12 participants, and graduate students and
researchers to participate in focused related activities.