* 1218711
* AF: Small: Efficient Approximations for Dynamic Programs and Other Topics in Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Saks, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This project supports new and ongoing research on several topics in algorithms
and computational complexity. A major focus of the project will be certain
combinatorical optimization problems, such as determining the longest common
subsequence of two data sequences, that can be formulated as shortest path
problems in special networks. The goal is to develop algorithms that provably
give close approximations to the correct answer and are significantly faster
than existing algorithms. Another goal of the project is to construct sparse
spanners for networks, which are subnetworks with few edges that preserve
(partially or approximately) the connectivity or distance properties of the
original network. A third part of the project will seek to establish inherent
limitations on the efficiency of parallel programs in the MapReduce paradigm,
which is an increasingly popular paradigm for parallel programming in which
computation occurs in a sequence of precisely defined rounds. The aim is to
establish some inherent limitations on this model by proving lower bounds on the
number of computation rounds needed for certain basic computational tasks.
Another part of the project will develop new algorithms and determine limits to
efficiency for the file maintenance problem, in which numbers are presented in
an online manner and are loaded into a linear array (possibly with gaps between
items) so that the left-to-right order of the items matches the natural order.
The cost is measured by the total number of times any item is moved during the
loading process. The aim here is to obtain better algorithms than the existing
ones using randomization, or to establish that randomization can not
significantly improve on the best existing algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
advancing the theory of algorithms and complexity, this award will increase the
set of tools available for efficient design of algorithms. The algorithmic
techniques developed for efficient estimation of dynamic programs may be useful
for practitioners developing algorithms for problems such as string matching,
which is a fundamental problem that arises in varied areas such as data
retrieval and analysis of biological data. Establishing inherent requirements on
computational resources for solving various problems can guide the search for
improved algorithms for related problems. An important part of the project is
the training of graduate students to do research in the field.