* 1218474
* SHF: Small: Cross-Layer Solutions for Sustainable and Reliable Computing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Lizy John, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Over the past decade, energy efficiency emerged as a first-order design
challenge to developers across all layers of the computing stack, from
microprocessor architects to large-scale datacenter operators. Unfortunately, in
the future, operating a system close to its efficient design point for power
will make the system susceptible to unreliability, whereas allowing margins will
make the system inefficient. Therefore, understanding the interplay between
power, performance and reliability is the next essential step for building
sustainable computing systems in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end,
research under this proposal investigates new techniques to build computing
systems that achieve both high energy efficiency and high reliability, but at a
low cost to enable broader adoption of the techniques by our society. The
investigators propose a resilient hardware/software co-designed machine
organization that eliminates inefficiencies that arise from circuit- and
architectural-level techniques that focus only on energy efficiency. The
investigators' system optimizes reliability, energy, and performance in a
coordinated manner. In this system, software continuously monitors execution and
it dynamically adapts hardware resources based on feedback. The system
automatically makes calculated efforts to characterize operational
inefficiencies, and attempts to eliminate the inefficiencies by carefully
relaxing the robustness of the system without compromising correctness. To
characterize these inefficiencies and train the system, the investigators study
and develop various algorithms, tools, and methodologies across the hardware and
software boundaries.