* 1218345
* EAGER: Transcriptome analysis of CHO cells to improve productivity and control protein aggregation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Sarah Harcum, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 03/31/2015
* USD 223,188.00

1218345&lt;br/&gt;Harcum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO
cells) are used to manufacture a majority of the therapeutic&lt;br/&gt;proteins
on the market today. In particular, CHO cells are able to express
recombinant&lt;br/&gt;glycoproteins, including monoclonal antibodies, which
require complex post-translational&lt;br/&gt;modifications. Even though CHO
cells have become the new "Escherichia coli" workhorse cell&lt;br/&gt;line,
there are still many engineering challenges that must be addressed. These
challenges can&lt;br/&gt;be calculated when assessing the cost to consumers of
glycoprotein therapeutics ($10's to&lt;br/&gt;$1000's of dollars (US) per
milligram with typical doses of 10's of milligrams).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
major production challenge for glycoproteins is protein aggregation.
Glycoproteins are&lt;br/&gt;prone to aggregation due to the size of these
molecules, incomplete glycosylation, high&lt;br/&gt;synthesis rates, and free
thiols. Fortunately, bioprocess engineers have discovered
interim&lt;br/&gt;solutions, such as, media additives that can reduce protein
aggregation in CHO cell cultures,&lt;br/&gt;but more efficient long-term
solutions are necessary to stabilize production and reduce
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research project is to
develop and enhance the toolbox for better&lt;br/&gt;understanding protein
aggregation beginning with gene expression. Factors that lead to
protein&lt;br/&gt;aggregation and conditions that reduce protein aggregation
will be investigated by interrogating&lt;br/&gt;the transcriptome profiles
developed from the transcriptome-sequencing component of this&lt;br/&gt;project.
The CHO cell transcriptome will be made publicly available and characterized
to&lt;br/&gt;promote genome-wide research in CHO cells. Transcriptome analysis
will be used to identify&lt;br/&gt;genes that affect and respond to protein
aggregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a strong conceptual
route for increasing the availability of therapeutic&lt;br/&gt;proteins and
glycoproteins to the public. The availability of this additional high quality
CHO cell&lt;br/&gt;transcriptome data to the public will allow for a
commensurate community knowledge base that&lt;br/&gt;will enable all scholars
the ability to contribute to our understanding of bioreactor process
effects&lt;br/&gt;on this host cell line. Broader impacts also include the
establishment and maintenance of a&lt;br/&gt;pipeline of educated, motivated
students, particularly those from under-represented
minority&lt;br/&gt;populations to undertake careers in biotechnology to meet
this growing demand in the US.