* 1218374
* NeTS: Small: Inter-Domain Traffic Engineering though ISP Cooperation and Competition
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This project takes a comprehensive look at inter-domain traffic engineering, and
how it can be done efficiently through cooperation as well as competition
between Internet Service Providers (ISPs), and at different timescales. Using
network flow decomposition and separate convex optimization techniques, the
project seeks to design distributed inter-domain traffic engineering solutions
that, along with effective intra-domain traffic engineering, converge to optimal
traffic flows in the entire Internet. The project also involves modeling of
traffic engineering - under competitive pricing of inter-domain forwarding by
ISPs - as a two-timescale pricing-forwarding game, and the study of existence,
computability, and efficiency of the equilibrium. The project explores dynamics
and convergence of distributed pricing updates by ISPs, and compare different
pricing strategies and models like point-to-destination pricing vs. point-to-
anywhere pricing, linear vs. non-linear pricing, and cascaded vs. non-cascaded
pricing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project considers inter-ISP interactions and
decision-making at multiple timescales that involve traffic forwarding (fast
timescale) and pricing updates (slow timescale), where decision-making on a
slower timescale may depend on that at a faster timescale. Furthermore, the
project considers both cooperative and competitive approaches through which the
Internet as a whole (and not individual ISP networks or Autonomous Systems) can
be utilized efficiently. The models and approaches considered take into account
the control and operational structure of the Internet that consists of multiple
providers seeking to maximize their individual benefits, and accordingly
considers the relevant issues like competitive efficiency. Using these models,
the project seeks to develop competitive pricing-forwarding solutions that can
converge to efficient and stable traffic flows in the entire network
(Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The issues that the project
investigates are timely, and fundamental to the efficient operation and economic
viability of the Internet in the long run. Solutions that the project is
developing will improve the overall use of the Internet bandwidth resources
through optimal/near-optimal traffic cross-provider engineering in the Internet.
Pricing strategies developed and investigated in this project will improve the
Internet's economic efficiency and viability through inter-ISP competition. For
providers, this would imply more efficient and flexible management of their
available resources, better investment in infrastructure, and higher revenue
overall. For end-users, it would imply better service at lower cost. Research
results will be used in advanced graduate coursework on network optimization and
algorithmic game theory. The PIs will also enhance the research and educational
experience of undergraduate students, by supervising undergraduate research
projects.