* 1218228
* SHF: Small: Automatic Software Architecture Recovery: A Machine Learning Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Cristina Lopes, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The widespread practice of open source development is changing the IT industry
in significant ways. Open source, these days, is a strategy that companies
consider as part of their product's marketability. In Science and Engineering,
open source has an established track record, and having the source code
available to everyone these days is as important as having the data supporting
scientific claims available, since Science and Engineering rely more and more on
software for substantiating claims. Unfortunately, undocumented source code is
as difficult to understand as raw, undocumented data; having it available
without being able to understand it is not of much benefit. Open source
projects, in particular, are notorious for their lack of documentation, since
the developers often don't have the resources to produce artifacts beyond the
code, so "the code is the documentation." This is a pervasive problem that
impacts Science the most, as it increasingly relies on software that is produced
under slim budgets without margin for documentation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to automatically recover high-
level knowledge from software artifacts in order to make software components
understandable in the absence of documentation. Recovering high-level knowledge
from software artifacts has been a long-sought goal of software engineering
research. The achievements so far have been limited. The approach taken here is
to use machine learning techniques. This approach may finally start to produce
usable solutions to this elusive problem. In pursuing the goal, this project
unveils important knowledge and tools related to open source projects. First, it
unveils knowledge about which and what kind of relations among source code
artifacts correlate with the architecture recovery process. Second, it will
produce a catalog of unsupervised learning algorithms tailored for software
component identification. This will be publicly available for others to use and
study. Third, it will produce a benchmark of software architectures of projects
from various domains. Fourth, it will produce a catalog describing the artifacts
and the learning technique which best recovered their architecture. Finally, it
will produce reusable implementations of (i) several component identification
algorithms; and (ii) structural, behavioral, and domain feature extraction. This
project combines all this knowledge and tools in a plugin for Eclipse that
supports automatic recovery of software architecture.