* 1218712
* III: Small: Pattern Learning in a Minimax Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Qiang (Shawn) Cheng, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 254,661.00

Machine learning currently offers one of the most cost-effective approaches to
building predictive models from data. However, practical applications of machine
learning have to cope with sparsity, noise, and uncertainty of data present.
Against this background, this project aims to: 1) Introduce a minimax framework
for pattern learning to unify various regularization models, and characterize a
variety of data uncertainty (e.g. incomplete data, local nonrigid displacements,
lighting variations) and the corresponding regularizations regarding their
intrinsic properties (e.g. sparsity, locality, robustness); 2) Establish new
feature subset selection methods and quantify group effects as well as
confidence levels/intervals of selecting/discarding features; 3) Construct new
methods of sparse grouping representation for resilience to labeling errors by
exploiting effective regularizations and their properties. The project aims to
explicitly model various classes of data uncertainty (distortions) within a
minimax framework, to optimize pattern learning process based on the worst
distortion(s) in a given class, and to exploit regularization properties (e.g.
sparsity, robustness).

Anticipated results of the project include: (1) New models and methods for
accounting for various classes of distortions and for finding optimal solutions
under the worst distortion(s) over a given class; (2) New methods for selecting
features with confidence analysis and for learning predictive models resilient
to labeling errors; (3) Rigorous evaluation of the resulting methods on real-
world data sets.

The new machine learning algorithms resulting from this research find
applications in many areas that rely on predictive modeling from large data
sets(e.g. medical analysis, earthquake modeling). All of the software tools
developed in this project will be made available to the scientific community,
educators and students. The project offers enhanced research-based training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, as well as outreach to
K-12 students, and efforts aimed at broadening the participation of under-
represented groups in Computer Science research and education.