* 1218176
* AF: Small: Physics Based Approaches to Quantum Information Science
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Peter Shor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2016
* USD 499,994.00

Hopefully in the near future quantum computers will be built. These devices
could outperform conventional digital computers, not by having faster operations
but by reducing the number of operations required to obtain a result. However to
date there are only a few known examples of computational tasks where this
speedup has been established. The PIs of this proposal are looking for other
ways that quantum computers could speed up computationally intensive tasks that
now challenge the limits of conventional computers. They are looking at several
specific methods for achieving quantum speedup. One such method is the Quantum
Adiabatic Algorithm, which relies on a fundamental concept in quantum physics
that tells us how to keep a quantum system in its lowest energy state. The PIs
are investigating the efficacy of this method on general optimization problems
which arise often in practice. Another method uses the physics of quantum
coherence on geometric structures to seek algorithmic speed up for search
problems. In addition to algorithms, the PIs will investigate quantum
cryptographic protocols that might be used on a future quantum internet.
Applications of these ideas might include more secure identity protection as
well as more secure financial transactions.