* 1218375
* SHF: Small: Generalizing Monotonic Data Structures for Expressive, Deterministic Parallel Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ryan Newton, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2015
* USD 377,315.00

The current trend in computer hardware is towards increasing numbers of
parallel, independent processing units (cores). This trend necessitates a
widespread transition from traditional sequential programming to parallel
programming. But because parallel programming is notoriously difficult, adoption
has been slow. A fundamental reason for this difficulty is that programs can
often yield inconsistent answers, or even crash, due to unpredictable
interactions between parallel tasks. Certain classes of programs, however, admit
strong mathematical guarantees that they will behave the same in spite of
parallel execution. This research is extending the mathematical foundation
underlying such deterministic programs. It studies a family of programming
languages that allow both parallel computations, and communications between them
in the form of restricted modifications to, and observations of, shared data.
The communication allowed is of a more general nature than previous work in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered around a variant of the
lambda-calculus that includes shared variables whose states occupy a join
semilattice and change monotonically within that lattice. A number of
deterministic programming models, both recent (Intel CnC), and older (Kahn-
MacQueen Process Networks), can be mapped into this framework. In addition to
constructing proofs of determinism for the language, this project explores
various extensions, including limited forms of nondeterminism (i.e., which admit
failures but never wrong answers). Finally this project will use its formal
language as a tool for reasoning about practical parallel programs. That is,
determinism can be demonstrated by verifying that the program's shared states
form a semilattice and state changes are monotonic.