* 1218432
* CSR: Small: Accelerating Towards the Hardware Specialization Era: A Holistic Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jignesh Patel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 387,496.00

Due to fundamental power limitations, the energy efficiency of transistors is
not improving, thus making computer chips power limited. Without significant
innovations in the ways to build microprocessor hardware, the performance
improvements that we have grown accustomed to cannot be sustained.
Specialization using accelerators, and thereby reducing power, is a promising
way forward, as evidenced by the commercial success of SIMD-accelerators and
GPUs, and by new computer hardware research concepts. Clearly there are very
many choices in this design space of accelerators, ranging from the granularity
of the work they target, the baseline processor they accelerate, compilation and
execution model, and abstraction presented to the application developer. This
wide choice introduces a fundamental problem in that tools and application
frameworks do not exist for reasoning about this wide design space. This
project's over-arching goal is to develop quantitative tools, mechanisms, and
detailed application studies covering the design space of
accelerators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides an array of techniques
for the specialization era: a novel framework to guide microprocessor designs
and application developers to reason about accelerators, architecture
mechanisms, and highly optimized applications for accelerators. The tools and
mechanisms help sustain performance improvements in future power-constrained
technology generations. The project's prototype system, simulation enhancements,
and compiler framework are released as tools for the community. The project's
focus on computational-physics applications has numerous uses that positively
impact broad swaths of society by enabling applications ranging from virtual
surgery to modeling vehicle traversal on snow terrains. The PIs continue
mentoring under-represented students and undergraduate students as part of this
project.