* 1218951
* CIF: Small: Degree of Freedom Region of Interference Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Zhengdao Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 100,000.00

For point-to-point communications, channel capacity is very
well&lt;br/&gt;understood, and there are schemes that approach the capacity
for&lt;br/&gt;most useful channel models. In contrast, the multi-user
communication channels&lt;br/&gt;are not as well understood. The channel models
are more complicated, there are&lt;br/&gt;more varieties, and many important
problems remain open. As one well-known&lt;br/&gt;example, the capacity problem
for discrete memoryless broadcast channel is&lt;br/&gt;still unsettled. As
another example, the interference channel capacity region&lt;br/&gt;is known
only in certain special cases (such as strong interference). What
is&lt;br/&gt;clear from the recent studies of such channels is that in a multi-
user&lt;br/&gt;wireless network, the key performance limiting factor is often
the interference rather &lt;br/&gt;than the noise, especially at high signal-to-
noise ratio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To alleviate this difficulty, the notion of
degrees of freedom has been used as&lt;br/&gt;a first order characterization of
the system throughput as normalized by the&lt;br/&gt;logarithm of the signal to
noise ratio. The total degrees of freedom of&lt;br/&gt;several interference
networks have been quantified. On the other hand, the&lt;br/&gt;degrees of
freedom region, which is more revealing than the total degrees
of&lt;br/&gt;freedom, is much less well understood. For most of the interference
networks,&lt;br/&gt;the regions remain unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to quantify the degree of freedom regions of a&lt;br/&gt;class of
general interference networks with multiple transmit nodes
and&lt;br/&gt;multiple receive nodes, possibly equipped with multiple antennas,
and with&lt;br/&gt;general message demands. In particular, we will study the X
interference&lt;br/&gt;network, which include interference channels, broadcast
channels, multiple&lt;br/&gt;access channels, as special cases. Through
interference alignment design based&lt;br/&gt;on vector and rational
independence, we will bound tightly the degrees of&lt;br/&gt;freedom region and
devise schemes that are optimal (or near-optimal) in the&lt;br/&gt;degree-of-
freedom sense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will advance
significantly our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;interference networks, and
positively impact the design, architecture, and&lt;br/&gt;signal design and
processing for next generation wireless networks. The&lt;br/&gt;project will
also help train the next generation of researchers and engineers&lt;br/&gt;in
the field of signal processing and communication networks.