* 1218589
* NeTS: Small: Supporting Next Generation Adaptive Multi-Lens Stereoscopic Video Streaming
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Wu-chi Feng, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This project investigates a coordinated adaptation and network streaming
framework for next generation multi-lens stereoscopic video. Future stereoscopic
cameras may be made up of multiple (more than two) lenses to provide a denser
sampling of viewpoints to ameliorate the mismatch between capture and viewing
scenario dependent display, a problem that will grow as stereoscopic devices and
displays become more ubiquitous. With an appropriate streaming system, a much
richer user experience can be delivered that is both network adaptive and
reduces the negative side-effects of stereoscopic imaging such as 3D eye
fatigue. A multi-lens stereoscopic video framework will require the confluence
of three interrelated components: compression and representation; retrieval,
streaming and adaptation; and viewing scenario dependent optimization. These
three components will act together to provide a low-latency, viewing scenario
optimized experience for stereoscopic imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
architecture in mind, this project will:&lt;br/&gt;* Investigate multi-lens
compression technologies to support efficient retrieval and viewing scenario
optimization. The compression of the multi-lens stereoscopic data needs to
achieve high compression, but at the same time, be amenable to adaptation and
subset retrieval. &lt;br/&gt;* Develop adaptive streaming techniques for the
proposed retrieval-friendly compression format. The key objective is to avoid
introducing artifacts (due to the decreased quality) that make their way into
the stereoscopic field. This adaptation layer will be coordinated with a viewing
scenario dependent optimization in order to retrieve the best data possible
while also being network adaptive.&lt;br/&gt;* Develop viewing scenario
dependent optimal display management technologies. To maximize viewing
experience and minimize negative side effects, viewing scenario dependent
optimization will select a subset of images from the array to best match the
viewing scenario. Novel view synthesis techniques may be used to help minimize
the image data retrieved, yet provide good user
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Dynamically delivering
optimized stereoscopic content according to the viewing scenario can reduce side
effects such as 3D fatigue and headaches that people have from viewing
stereoscopic content. The threaded architecture can also be used for other
multi-view systems (e.g., video sensor networks), where the display of video
requires only a subset of the camera views to be delivered. Finally, the results
from the display management work can also be combined with eye tracking to
enable free-view and free-glass stereo viewing experiences.