* 1218181
* NeTS: Small: GATE: Greening At The Edges
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Nirwan Ansari, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2016
* USD 365,987.00

This project addresses the reduction of energy consumption in optical and
wireless access networks via a series of approaches such as capacity-adaptive
network design, and energy-efficient resource allocation and traffic scheduling.
The capacity-adaptive access network stays in the 'high-capacity high-power'
mode when the network is heavily loaded with bandwidth-hungry applications such
as video streaming, and switches into the 'low-capacity low-power' mode when the
network is lightly loaded with less bandwidth demanding applications such as
voice and future smart grid traffic. The project generalizes the approaches
currently being used in data centers to communication links, and focuses on
formalizing the problem and obtaining optimal or near-optimal solutions. It will
not only improve energy efficiency of current access networks, but will also
provide insights and guidelines on how to upgrade the capacity of access
networks efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of designing capacity-
adaptive access networks introduces new requirements of 'capacity adaptive' on
the design of access networks as opposed to simply provisioning for peak
utilization. This project's energy-aware network control, resource allocation,
and traffic scheduling schemes consider an additional key performance metric,
energy consumption, in addition to network quality of service, while
conventional schemes merely consider network performance such as delay and loss.
Research results, via theoretical analysis, simulations, and testbed
experiments, will not only demonstrate improved energy efficiency of access
networks, but will also be potentially tailored for core networks, datacenter
networks, and other wireless systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the energy consumption of access equipment will not
only have positive environment impacts during normal operation but it will
provide public benefit during emergencies. Remote access equipment is currently
powered by a combination of public power, battery backup, and varying degrees of
local generation. Techniques such as those being developed by this project that
extend operation when on emergency backup help protect the public health and
safety. The project will integrate research and education through participation
of both undergraduate and graduate students in the project and by incorporation
of research outcomes into undergraduate and graduate course work. The PI will
utilize the New Jersey Educational Opportunity Program (EOP), which provides
educational opportunities to under-represented populations, as part of the
process for recruiting students into the research program.