* 1218461
* AF: Small: New Directions in Cryptography: Non-Black-Box Techniques against Non-Black-Box Attacks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ran Canetti, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 480,182.00

Traditionally, cryptographic algorithms and protocols are geared towards
protecting against attacks that interact with the designed algorithms via well
specified interfaces (such as I/O and communication). However, the increasingly
sophisticated ways in which computing devices are currently used completely
shatter the traditional boundaries between the attacker and the "private
internals" of the cryptographic algorithm under attack. Algorithms are run over
small and exposed machines that leak information on their internal state; they
are transported to other, potentially adversarial machines which may inspect all
the internal state and also misreport the result; their code is exposed and
subject to adversarial tinkering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at
developing new algorithmic and analytical techniques for dealing with this new
reality. This includes cryptographic algorithms and protocols that are resilient
to leakage from and tampering with the internal states of the host machines,
program obfuscation techniques, and techniques for verifying computation done on
untrusted machines. A basic premise of this project is that new analytical
techniques, that no longer treat the adversary as black-box, are essential.
Consequently, special effort is dedicated to developing such
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tackles a set of problems that are
central to the security of modern computer systems and consequently also to the
well-being and stability of modern society. But even disregarding practical
applicability, the tackled problems lie at the heart of our understanding of the
notion of computation, the interplay between code and data, and the ability to
algorithmically "understand" arbitrary code.