* 1218095
* AF: SHF: BCSP: Small: Genetic Design Automation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 496,980.00

Biologists and engineers are working together to develop the field of synthetic
biology. These researchers are attempting to design synthetic genetic circuits
that enable bacteria to consume toxic waste, destroy tumors, and produce drugs
and bio-fuels. While experimental methods for genetic engineering have existed
for a long time, synthetic biology adds a principled design methodology that is
supported by repositories of standard parts, high-level model abstractions, and
an automated construction process. Since these are the cornerstones of
electronic design automation (EDA) which has enabled the design of more complex
computer chips each year, it is logical that experiences with EDA will be
leveraged during the development of genetic design automation (GDA).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project will develop a
comprehensive and integrated suite of GDA tools to support efficient analysis
and design of synthetic genetic circuits. These tools will leverage and extend
standards, such as the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) and Synthetic
Biology Open Language (SBOL), to allow for the exchange of models and designs
with other researchers. Our research will develop new modeling, analysis, and
visualization methods that enable the study of the dynamic behavior of bacterial
populations. The efficiency of these tools will be enhanced using automated
model abstraction and parallel computer algorithms. PI's design tools will
exploit techniques developed for asynchronous (clock-less) integrated circuits.
PI will work with experimental collaborators to validate the research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Due to the wide applications
being proposed for synthetic biology ranging from drug production and gene
therapies to biofuels, the potential impact of this research is significant.
This research will bring together people in theory and modeling with those doing
experimental work. This project will also support the development of extensions
to standards enabling the development of ever more complex systems. These
standards as well as all software developed in this project will be released
into the public domain. The PI is committed to the integration of research with
education through the development of course materials and working with
undergraduates.