* 1218310
* HCC: Small: Automatic Simplification Methods for Tactile Graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Dianne Pawluk, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 436,161.00

Unfortunately for individuals who are blind and visually impaired, although
access to text has greatly improved with computers, the computer has also
greatly facilitated the ease of producing, storing, transmitting and using
graphical representations to convey information. This has created a serious
obstacle for the millions of people in the United States who are visually
impaired or blind, because graphics are now ubiquitous and used in many
instances as the sole information presentation method. Although presenting
graphical information in terms of tactile diagrams is one alternative that has
been proven useful, creating these diagrams remains a complex art that usually
requires participation of a trained human. This is because to be effective
tactile diagrams must be simplified; otherwise, they may be impossible to
understand. Automating this process would have advantages in terms of cost, in
terms of providing diagrams in a timely fashion (or even providing them at all),
and in terms of independence for the intended users. In this project, which
takes a first step toward this goal, the PI and her team will focus on the
automatic conversion to tactile diagrams of two kinds of graphics: photographs
and line drawings. To this end, a multi-step process is envisaged. First,
techniques to segment images without a lot of fragmentation will be examined,
modified and/or developed based on the current computer vision literature. Next,
techniques will be developed for automating the simplification process, based on
the manual steps as outlined by the Braille Authority of North America. Two main
aspects will be considered: simplifying lines/curves in the diagram, and
reducing clutter (defined as a situation where components of the graphic are too
close together or so similar that they are hard to distinguish tactually). Then,
automatic, metric rectification techniques will be explored, modified and/or
developed to remove perspective from an image and replace it with a standard
canonical view (because removing perspective seems to improve the user's ability
to understand a tactile diagram). Finally, user studies will be conducted to
evaluate the effectiveness of the tactile graphics created by the new automatic
methods in comparison to those created manually by expert tactile diagram
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The ultimate goal of this line of
research is to provide people who are blind or visually impaired with immediate
and automatic access to any desired information, and thereby to remove the
current barriers due to the graphical nature of computers and visual digital
media. Project outcomes will be useful not only to adult members of the target
communities; they will also make it possible to provide access to children's
picture books to promote development in blind and visually impaired youngsters.
The project will train at least one graduate and several undergraduate students
in understanding the needs of the target communities and developing assistive
technology for them. Results will be disseminated through the usual scientific
channels and also in presentations to relevant stakeholders including
individuals who are visually impaired, their teachers and other rehabilitation
professionals. Results from this work will also be presented in workshops to
K-12 students at the Math, Science, Innovation Center of Richmond to foster
interest in STEM fields.