* 1218298
* SHF: Small: Exploration of energy-optimized computing architectures using integrated voltage regulators
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Gu-Yeon Wei, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Mobile computing devices such as cellular phones, tablets, and laptop computers
have become permanent fixtures of modern-day life. Moreover, users have become
accustomed to consistent advances in technology that continue to improve
features and usability. For decades, such technological improvements could
largely be attributed to Moore's Law, which predicts consistent doubling of
transistor count and reductions in costs. For almost as long, people have
repeated the now well-known saying, "no exponential lasts forever," and also
predicted the eventual end of Moore's Law. It appears that the end might finally
be near, which motivates research that identifies inefficiencies and finds
opportunities at the intersection of traditionally disparate research areas to
improve performance and energy efficiency of devices that span the computing
spectrum from mobile to servers in the cloud. This project builds on existing
technologies that control the voltage and frequency of microprocessors, but
takes them to higher levels of integration and granularity.

There are several key challenges that stand to obstruct continued growth in
computing. Limitations in power budgets, whether due to high cooling costs in
high-performance computing systems or to fixed energy capacity in mobile
devices, require innovations that will allow future systems with larger numbers
of cores to dynamically adapt to time-varying needs of modern workloads.
Integrated voltage regulators provide one of the most promising approaches to
address energy and scalability constraints. Integrated voltage regulators offer
advantages of nanosecond-scale voltage transition times, more efficient current
delivery to the load at high power levels, and significant benefits in form-
factor and system-level power management. This project aims to develop a
systematic approach to answer questions surrounding the benefits and overheads
associated with embedding integrated voltage regulators in future chips.