* 1218541
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Interference Management for Visible Light Communications via Poisson Model
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Lifeng Lai, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 224,957.00

Visible light communication (VLC) is emerging as a viable alternative wireless
transmission technology that could potentially alleviate the spectrum scarcity
problem. VLC uses ordinary light sources such as light emitting diodes (LEDs) as
the communication medium, and superposes a high frequency on/off operation on
top of light sources for data transmissions. Compared to radio communications,
the advantages of VLC include several orders broader in bandwidth, very little
regulatory restrictions, ubiquitous light sources, and higher level of security
for transmissions. One of the main challenges in the design of VLC at the
physical layer is the issue of interference caused by simultaneous transmissions
of multiple sources due to diffusion of lights emitted from regular light
sources. While interference management for the Gaussian model (valid for the
strong background light noise regime) is relatively well understood, it is
mostly unexplored for the Poisson model (valid for the low background light
noise regime). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design novel interference
management techniques for VLC in the Poisson regime, analyze the corresponding
transmission rates/throughputs for VLC, and develop information theoretic
methodologies to characterize the fundamental communication limits on these
transmission rates. The proposed research is expected to make substantial
contributions to both applications and theory. On the application side, this
project is anticipated to substantially advance our understanding of
interference management for VLC, and provide important guidelines for designing
high throughput and resource efficient VLC networks. On the theoretical level,
the project will develop new stochastic calculus and information theoretic tools
to advance our understanding of Poisson channels. The PIs will also use this
project as a great platform to attract and train students from diverse
backgrounds.