* 1218764
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: A General Theory of Group Testing for Genotyping
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Olgica Milenkovic, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,920.00

Next generation high-throughput sequencing devices have brought the promise of
personalized genotyping to the field of human genomics. Advances in personalized
genotyping depend on developments of procedures for cost-efficient large-scale
association studies. Such large-scale experiments and studies face a number of
obstacles related to constraints imposed by bioengineering systems and test
subjects, including a) the restriction that tests have to be performed with
small samples of individuals? genetic material; b) the constraint that subjects
have to be multiplexed, so that genetic sequences have to be barcoded; c) the
fact that the outcomes of the tests are semi-quantitative; d) the reality that
many tests have to be performed within groups of related individuals, thereby
significantly increasing the cost of screening whole families; e) the fact that
tests have to deal with the challenge of variant discovery and individuals that
may exhibit different gene copy numbers. A natural way to overcome these and
many other obstacles is to perform genotyping via group testing.

The goals of this project include developing of a comprehensive, yet
analytically or computationally tractable general theory of group testing for
genotyping. The proposed theory will answer the unique challenges arising in
genotyping by sequencing, although parts of the theory may find independent
applications in areas as diverse as constrained multiple access channel
analysis, fingerprinting and identification coding, and error-control coding. In
particular, the investigators introduce several new models into the field of
group testing, including subjects with different types and strengths, semi-
quantitative testing, two-dimensional pooling, and Poisson probabilistic
testing.