* 1218085
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research:  Towards User Privacy in Outsourced Cloud Data Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Ming Li, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 175,000.00

The emergence of cloud computing brings a paradigm shift to the way that data is
stored, accessed and utilized. Especially, outsourcing data to the public cloud
enjoys unlimited resources with great economic savings for both data owners and
users. However, user privacy concerns have been a major hurdle for the
widespread adoption of the public cloud technology. Encryption techniques can
protect the confidentiality of users' data, however, supporting effective data
utilization such as search operations over encrypted data become a key
challenge. Existing techniques are either too computationally expensive, or lack
enough flexibility to be adopted by cloud users in practice. &lt;br/&gt;This
project aims at protecting user privacy in the cloud. It develops the tools to
provide privacy-assured, usable, and efficient data utilization services in
outsourced cloud storage systems. Specifically, it tackles the above challenges
by combining cryptography with information-retrieval techniques, and focuses on
three aspects: (1) the design of novel keyword search schemes over encrypted
data with rich functionalities, including ranked search and multi-keyword
search; (2) the design of privacy-preserving search schemes over data that are
represented using various structures, such as graphs; (3) new approaches for
protecting user privacy in the mobile cloud setting. This research also includes
a prototyping and experimentation plan. &lt;br/&gt;Ensuring user privacy is
fundamental to the success of public cloud deployment. This project also
develops curricula and teaches and supervises students. Materials of this
project will be made available online as tutorials, software packages, and
publications of general interest.