* 1218909
* CIF: Small: Fast In Vivo Optical Imaging in the Heavily and Weakly Scattering Regimes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 12/31/2017
* USD 447,205.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIF: Small: Fast In Vivo Optical Imaging in the
Heavily and Weakly Scattering Regimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kevin Webb, Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical imaging is important in
medicine because it provides unique information about human health and an avenue
for inexpensive and portable instruments for laboratory, clinical and home use.
Within a deep-tissue optical diffusion tomography framework, it becomes possible
to determine chemical and molecular information for blood chemistry monitoring
and understanding diseases. The research on faster and more accurate deep-tissue
imaging is a critical step in facilitating more widespread use of optics in
medical research and for treatment. Another important challenge for in vivo
optical imaging is access to the regime within a few millimeters of the skin,
with application to skin cancer, for example. This research involves the
development of a method that describes optical tissue properties on this near-
surface length scale and hence provides a basis for imaging. Collectively, this
work will be important in applications like the early detection of cancer,
intra-operative imaging to ensure all tumor nodules are removed during surgery,
and blood chemistry monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, various
optical diffusion tomography modalities describing scatter and absorption,
fluorescence, and fluorescence resonance energy transfer parameters are being
developed. The approach avoids a background scattering emulsion, in which the
subject is placed, by use of a laser body scan to define the geometry and an
unstructured mesh forward model based on the diffusion equation. In this work, a
multigrid method coupled to the unstructured mesh permits fast and accurate
imaging. In the weakly scattering regime, an imaging method based on the Bethe-
Salpeter equation that uses a rigorous field correlation over space and
frequency is being developed.