* 1218109
* CSR: Small: Human-Centered Synthesis of Provably Correct Controllers for Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anak Agung Julius, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Hybrid systems are a mathematical framework that has been widely used to model
engineering and natural systems whose dynamics have both continuous and discrete
aspects. Applications range from modern "fly-by-wire" airplanes to cellular
biology. A controller for a hybrid system observes the execution of the system
and issues input signals and/or trigger events in the hybrid system so as to
meet the system's goals and safety requirements. An outstanding problem is that
for complex hybrid systems existing methods for controller synthesis require
exceedingly large computational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to address the high computational demands of constructing controllers for
hybrid systems in a new way. The novelty of the approach lies in using human-
centered computing (crowdsourcing), while ensuring that the obtained controller
is correct. The expected outcomes of this project are mathematical theory and
algorithms that will enable the idea above for a wide range of problems,
including those involving nonlinear systems and random events. These results are
further implemented in simulator computer games, which will be deployed online.
The amount of computing resource that can be potentially be harvested through
crowdsourcing is very high. Earlier crowdsourcing applications such as
reCAPTCHA, FoldIt, and Wikipedia have recorded billions of hours of effort by
their human contributors. Beyond solving the controller synthesis problem, the
outcomes of this project can lead to new ways to tap into this resource for
solving new problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
include improvements in the safety of a wide range of engineered systems. The
project also has an educational outreach program involving K-12 students and
educators in cutting edge multidisciplinary research. Uniquely, the gaming theme
is an ideal vehicle to engage pre-college students in science and engineering.