* 1218338
* CIF: Small: Interference Modeling and Management for Heterogenous Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Heath, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 313,346.00

Cellular system infrastructure deployment is becoming more heterogeneous
including random deployment locations and more kinds of infrastructure. Using a
mixture of macro, pico, and femto base stations, as well as fixed relay stations
and distributed antennas, heterogeneous networks have the potential to break
through the capacity bottleneck. While holding great promise, this potential has
yet to be realized since the new infrastructure creates a different and
challenging distributed interference environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops new mathematical tools to enable a simplified analysis of
cellular systems exploiting concepts from stochastic geometry and random shapes,
to model the impact of random interference source locations, accounting for
important environmental considerations. It uses these tools to analyze and
develop interference management strategies for different proposed technologies
including small cell networks with heterogeneous interference and large cell
networks with many antennas. A main theme in the analysis and algorithms is the
use of antennas to avoid, cancel, align, and otherwise mitigate the effects of
interference -- even with limited coordination possible among
transmitters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed theory and
algorithms are expected in diverse areas. The mathematical tools and fundamental
theory will impact the understanding and design of communication systems taking
into account the network geometry. The signal processing algorithms will pave
the way for a new understanding of multiple antenna communication techniques.
Industry impact will occur through the WICAT / Wireless Networking and
Communications Group industrial affiliates incorporating research results into
their wireless networking technologies. The project will foster the training of
graduate students in course projects and will reach out to the community through
public demonstrations.