* 1218542
* RI: Small: Multi-Agent (Multi-Robot) Task Allocation with Formal Guarantees in Dynamic Environments under Realistic Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Katia Sycara, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This proposal aims to develop algorithms for decentralized task allocation among
multiple intelligent agents in uncertain environments with a focus on provable
performance bounds. Four task settings and their combinations are to be
considered: (1) constraints among tasks (e.g., disjoint task groups, precedence
relations among tasks); (2) constraints among agents (e.g., maintenance of a
communication network); (3) constraints among groups of agents (e.g., requiring
a group to include agents with specialized skills); (4) on-line arrival of
additional tasks. Existing algorithms for task allocation that have provable
performance bounds usually do not consider the realistic constraints stated
above. On the other hand, approaches that consider some of the constraints above
do not have performance bounds. Furthermore, current algorithms often assume the
existence of a centralized coordinator (e.g., an auctioneer in market-based
approaches) and may not be scalable. Thus, there is a gap between the existing
literature and the practical requirements in multi-robot applications. Hence,
there is a need to design distributed task allocation methods that take into
consideration practical constraints and have formal performance guarantees. The
evaluation plan will use simulated and real robots in search and rescue
contexts. The project will use the USARSim environment with approximately 50
simulated robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical techniques upon which
this project will rely to develop algorithms for task allocation will depend on
the problem characteristics. When there are constraints among tasks, the project
will use techniques from combinatorial optimization and linear programming. For
tasks where each task can be performed by multiple agents, the project will use
concepts from cooperative game theory and coalition formation in conjunction
with integer optimization techniques. For dynamically arising tasks, the project
will explore the use of stochastic programming techniques with the key idea
being use of the dual of the integer program model of the task allocation
problem to design "bidding rules" for agents that ensure a performance guarantee
for the overall system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of application domains
-- including emergency response, homeland security, environmental monitoring,
hazardous waste cleanup and manufacturing -- stand to benefit from the task
allocation techniques proposed in this project. Results from this project will
enable application domains to more fully reap the benefits of emerging robotic
technology by providing techniques that allow robots to autonomously and
efficiently coordinate and allocate tasks among themselves. Graduate students
will play a major role in conducting the proposed research. Additionally, this
project will provide research opportunities to undergraduate students both
within Carnegie Mellon University and from other institutions through the
Robotics Institute Summer Scholar program.