* 1218520
* CSR: Small: Storage Architecture for the Next Generation of Smart Mobile Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 453,000.00

Mobile computing is sweeping the world. Recent studies are pointing to the
permanent storage in mobile computing platforms being a weak link. Due to
considerations of power and physical footprint, flash has been the storage
technology of choice hitherto in mobile platforms. Flash and other newer storage
technologies, such as PCM and STT-RAM, have their own idiosyncrasies both from
the point of view of architecting them and integrating them in the operating
system. In this project, we focus on the system software and hardware issues, in
an integrated fashion, in the construction of high-performance storage
architecture for mobile platforms. We will analyze the source of storage-related
performance bottlenecks on mobile platforms at different levels of the software
stack using a combination of measurement, simulation, and real implementation on
existing and emerging mobile platforms. We will propose solutions both at the
system software and architecture levels for advancing the state-of-the-art in
storage for mobile platforms, and conduct detailed quantitative evaluation of
our solutions. This project with its focus on advancing the state-of-the-art in
mobile storage technology can have unexpected economic and societal impact. We
intend to make the research artifacts from this project (traces, workloads, and
software) available to the broader research community through open source
efforts. Despite technological advances, system software has lagged
significantly behind the hardware in delivering the expected performance. The
vision behind this project is an attempt to bridge this gap for the storage side
of the system software stack through an integrated hardware/software approach.