* 1218717
* NeTS: Small: Toward Distributed Decision Making in Cognitive Radio Ad-hoc Networks Based on Bilevel Equilibrium Programming
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Gesualdo Scutari, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This project is motivated by the lack of theoretical understanding of
distributed control strategies to jointly optimize cognitive radio network
functionalities at multiple layers of the networking protocol stack. When
physical layer parameters are considered, the resulting optimization problem is
often nonconvex, and therefore cannot be solved efficiently in general even
through centralized algorithms. The objective of this project is then to look at
the cross-layer design of cognitive radio multi-hop networks from a different
and novel perspective. The problem of jointly optimizing the sensing parameters,
multiple-access scheme, routing, and rate control is formulated as a bi-level
equilibrium problem, which can be solved efficiently and in a distributed way.
Successful completion of this research will provide the community with a family
of novel distributed algorithms that naturally implement vertical and horizontal
decompositions across the network. This would represent a major departure from
well-understood decomposition algorithms for network utility maximization
problems that are known to suffer from slow convergence speed.

The project will contribute to the development of novel algorithms and tools
that will lay the foundation for the next generation of cognitive networking
technology. The impact of the proposed technology to today's society can be as
broad and as strong as the potential applications of ad hoc networks; for
example, search-and-rescue operations, on-demand communications infrastructure
deployment, and intelligent transportation highways and vehicles. The proposed
research is integrated with an educational plan designed to train the next-
generation of networking professionals, as well as promote cross-fertilization
of academic research with industry needs.