* 1218287
* NeTS: Small: A Dual-Objective Platform for Internet Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Fabian Bustamante, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2016
* USD 415,999.00

Poor visibility into the network hampers progress in a number of important
research areas, from network troubleshooting to Internet topology and
performance mapping. While the problem has been long recognized and has served
as motivation for several efforts to build new or expand existing experimental
platforms, capturing the edge of the Internet at sufficient scale remains an
elusive goal. At its roots, the problem is one of incentives - in most of the
commercial Internet the goals of those hosting the platform and the
experimenters that use it are not the same. This effort explores a new model for
Internet experimentation platforms that addresses the incentive problem by
explicitly aligning the objectives of the experimenters with those of the users
hosting the vantage points. The exploration is done in the context of Dasu, a
system for Internet Service Provider characterization and Internet
experimentation. The effort investigates (i) the challenges and opportunities
offered by these types of platforms, (ii) how such platforms can support easy
extensibility while remaining secure, and (iii) how to facilitate the design and
deployment of experiments from the Internet edge while reducing the impact on
both nodes? resources and the underlying network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The effort will offer the general Internet community with immediate
benefits through a unique view of a user's ISP service levels. It will produce a
set of algorithms, monitoring protocols, software systems, and tools that, by
not requiring the deployment and maintenance of additional infrastructure, can
immediately benefit their users, making a significant impact on society-at-
large. The effort will provide the research community with access to an
experimentation platform capable of capturing the diversity of the commercial
Internet. It will make significant contributions toward a better understood,
more transparent Internet and offer a much-needed testbed for evaluating the
effectiveness of measurement techniques, tools and networked systems deployed at
the edge of the Internet. Research findings and outcomes will be made available
as publications, datasets and openly released software. The project will have a
direct impact on education in communication, network and distributed systems.