* 1218058
* CGV: Small: Visualization by Sketching, Analogy, and Computational Creativity
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Arthur Erdman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 448,056.00

The goal of this research project is to transform the way that data
visualizations are designed and created to enable more effective, creative, and
accessible ways of communicating scientific information using computer graphics.
The project enables artists, scientists, engineers, and others to rapidly
design, generate, and iteratively refine visualizations of today's most complex
datasets. The approach combines novel computational tools that enhance
sketching, analogical reasoning, and other creative human design tasks with
underlying scientific data and 3D displays. The results include new tools,
algorithms, and guidelines, which are evaluated experimentally through
challenging applications to biomedical engineering, such as visualizing
multidimensional imaging and modeling data to understand interactions between
proposed new medical devices and human tissues. These results are significant
because they lead to new understandings of how computation and human creativity
can be most effectively combined in general, and specifically, how they can be
combined to help scientists visualize and understand complex multidimensional
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the work lie in educational
efforts integrated with the experimental research and broad applications of the
new methods developed. Students from local art and design colleges are educated
in scientific methods, opening up new career paths in the sciences for these
visual experts. Hands-on educational research demonstrations are conducted in
the local community. Through specific applications, the work yields insights
that can improve and accelerate science, engineering, and healthcare. Project
results, including new curriculum developed, open source software, videos,
publications, and demos, will be disseminated on the project web site
(http://ivlab.cs.umn.edu/visualization-by-sketching).