* 1218505
* CSR: Small: Understanding and Modeling the Trade-Offs in Data Centers for Next-Generation Sustainable Management
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Sandeep Gupta, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 466,000.00

The success of cloud computing as a business model has led to several commercial
cloud services for storage, data mining and searching, and multimedia content
delivery. As cloud services penetrate emerging markets -- notably the smart-
phone market -- conventional utility services such as television are becoming
?cloudized.? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the economy becomes more dependent on the
efficient operation of cloud data centers (DCs), there?s an increasingly urgent
need to design ?green? and energy-adaptive management software that optimizes
the operation of a geographically distributed set of data centers under varying
workload and energy conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-physical, proactive
and predictive decision making is essential for a DC operating system that
efficiently predicts, e.g., the workload and the power consumption when running
multiple jobs on the same server and makes decisions, e.g., for redistributing
the servicing virtual machines among varying number of available DCs,
electricity cost, percentage of renewable energy supply and capacity of energy
storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing the scientific and
engineering challenges involved in decision making of such DC management arising
from an array of complicating factors -- e.g., server heterogeneity, cyber-
physical interactions between DCs and their environment, varying workload and
electricity pricing -- and trade-offs -- e.g., energy-delay, time-accuracy, and
cooling-computing . The project is developing a Green cyber-physical Data Center
Simulator, GDCSim, for studying the tradeoffs in practical scenarios with
several complicating factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project aims to enable a
more sustainable cloud computing and to train engineers for a greener economy.
The project findings are available through ASU-IMPACT lab?s website
(http://impact.asu.edu/).