* 1218973
* NeTS: Small: Coordinated Advance Reservation for Grid over Optical Networks (CARGONET)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Vinod Vokkarane, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 01/31/2014
* USD 305,169.00

This project will design algorithms for the advanced scheduling of
communications and computation resources. A growing number of scientific
computing applications require reliable services involving large amounts of
data. These services may range from the simple transfer of a large data set to
the complex execution of a collection of interdependent tasks that have varying
requirements with respect to processing, storage, and communication. The support
of such services requires a robust computing and network infrastructure that is
capable of providing dynamic on-demand provisioning of bandwidth and scientific
computing resources. The basis of this infrastructure is a collection of
scientific computing resources that are interconnected by optical networks. Many
on-demand provisioning techniques for optical networks focus on immediate
reservations, in which resources are reserved and used immediately following a
request; however, immediate reservations may be unable to guarantee the
availability of resources with high probability, particularly if a significant
amount of resources are required for an application. Advance reservation
mechanisms enable dedicated resources to be reserved by an application in
advance with the task not starting execution until it is possible to guarantee
the availability of the needed resources. Advance reservation also allows more
efficient use of resources and may be applied to both optical network resources
and scientific computing resources in a coordinated environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create a holistic multi-layer coordinated
framework to support the coordinated advance provisioning of Grid and optical
network resources. Specific goals of the project include 1) the development of
theoretical bounds and algorithms to support generic advance reservation of
optical network bandwidth resources by considering the time, space, bandwidth,
and destination domains, 2) the design of a novel delayed allocation algorithm
for supporting advance reservation requests, 3) the design and evaluation of
coordinated Grid and network resource scheduling algorithms that incorporates
different domains of flexibility, such as lightpath switching and supports
enhanced services, such as anycasting, and 4) the design and implementation of
the proposed advance reservation and co-scheduling algorithms on the nation-wide
Energy Sciences network using the OSCARS framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The integrated outreach and group mentoring program will
promote female students' recruitment and retention in computer science and
engineering disciplines. The implementation of the CARGONET algorithms on the
OSCARS framework will assist in conducting efficient resource allocation of
optical and Grid resources.