* 1218145
* AF: Small: RUI: A new and improved algorithm for fitting RNA backbone in crystallographic data
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Xueyi Wang, Northwest Nazarene College
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 187,934.00

Accurate details in 3D structures of RNA molecules are important for
understanding RNA function, which can in turn help us understand biological
systems, develop new medicines, and improve human health. One issue in RNA 3D
structure analysis is that the structures obtained from biological experiments
often contain errors and need to be corrected. The main reason for the errors is
because RNA 3D structures are highly complex. While there are existing automatic
tools for obtaining protein 3D structures from experimental data, such tools are
not yet available for RNAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previously the PI developed a
program called RNA Backbone Correction (RNABC) that uses geometric algorithms
and robotics to search for error-free RNA structures. While RNABC has been used
to correct structural errors in existing RNA structures and has been integrated
into the MolProbity web service for RNA structure validation, further
advancement is needed. Research shows that RNABC corrects errors in 40% to 80%
of RNA structures tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new and
improved computer program that scientists can use to correct structural errors
and obtain accurate details of RNA 3D structures. The goal is to correct errors
in over 80% of RNA structures and maintain the same running time. The new
program will combine methods in machine learning, data mining, robotics and
numerical analysis to search for error-free RNA structures. The project will
advance algorithmic research in multiple ways and help us better understand the
details of RNA structures. This project provides research opportunities to
students interested in computer science, mathematics, and biology, and helps
educate the next generation of scientists.