* 1218208
* SHF: Small: Modular Reflection
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jeremy Siek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 250,000.00

As the internet and mobile devices become increasingly important parts of our
society, the need for web and mobile applications has grown. Recent advances in
software frameworks have drastically reduced the amount of code needed to
develop such applications. From a programming languages perspective, the key
enabling technology is reflection, that is, the ability of a program to
introspect and to modify itself. Unfortunately, reflection comes at a heavy
cost: it can delay the detection of bugs, it reduces the effectiveness of bug-
finding tools, and it reduces the speed of applications. The goal of this
research project is to preserve the benefits of reflection while eliminating the
disadvantages, thereby improving the reliability and speed of web and mobile
applications.

The key observation that underlies this research is that uses of reflection in
software frameworks are governed by implicit conventions. If those conventions
could be made explicit, then automated software tools will be able to
effectively reason about reflective code. This research will create a rich
specification language for making those conventions explicit, it will
investigate algorithms for inferring specifications from existing application
code, and it will develop tools for checking the conformance of web-mobile
applications and frameworks with respect to specifications.