* 1218079
* CIF: Small: Distributed Informative Sensor Selection  via Sparse Covariance Factorization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ioannis Schizas, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 205,662.00

Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are widely used in applications such as
environmental monitoring, surveillance and health monitoring of large
structures. A major challenge when using WSNs is their limited life expectancy.
However, in practice the phenomena of interest in a sensed field are quite
localized and affect a small number of sensors. This property of locality
induces sparsity in sensor data statistical descriptors such as the covariance
matrix. This project involves the development and analysis of efficient
algorithms that uncover sparse structures in the sensor data covariance, and
determine in a distributed fashion which sensors acquire informative
measurements and have to remain active. Identifying the `informative' sensors
can lead to significant energy savings. The research focuses on the novel
utilization of covariance sparsity in developing distributed informative sensor
selection algorithms that have the ability to adaptively learn the statistical
behavior of the sensed field, without relying on a priori known data models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators consider the design and performance
analysis of a generalized sparsity-aware framework that is capable to analyze
the sensor data covariance matrix into sparse factors. Norm-one regularization
mechanisms are employed to estimate and identify the support (nonzero entries)
of the unknown sparse covariance factors. The factors' support is used to
identify the informative sensors. A novel blending of the sparsity-based
factorization techniques with distributed optimization tools is also studied to
obtain distributed algorithms that enable sensors to collaboratively learn the
underlying sparse covariance structure, even with noisy inter-sensor
communications and overlapping sources. The research also involves adaptive
implementations that track online the set of informative sensors in non-
stationary settings formed by mobile sources, using stochastic approximation
toolboxes properly tuned to exploit sparsity.