* 1218904
* AF: III: Small: Space-efficient Frameworks for Multi-pattern Matching in Text Streams
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sukhamay Kundu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 184,261.00

Multi-pattern matching is the problem of finding whether and where a set of
patterns appear in a data stream. An example of such a problem is scanning
Internet traffic for malware signature patterns. Important considerations in
multi-pattern matching are the amount of memory required to store the patterns
and the speed with which the stream can be scanned through. Storage space can be
reduced either by compressing the patterns or by approximately 'sketching' them.
This project aims to advance this field by seeking ways to enable multi-pattern
search with (1) minimum possible space, (2) fastest possible time, and (3) high
accuracy. The project combines theoretical advances with practical
implementations. Theoretical approaches involve sketching, streaming, hashing
and succinct data structures. Practical goals include developing faster
hardware-based implementations and cache-aware implementations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-pattern matching is central to applications such as
computer virus detection, network intrusion detection and information
extraction. It resides at the cross-section of several fields of computer
science, including theory, networking, databases and bioinformatics. Recent
development of tools in pattern matching such as succinct data structures and
streaming algorithms make this an exciting time to advance the state-of-the-art
in this field. Several research opportunities for undergraduate students will
evolve from this project. Results will be disseminated through publications in
conferences and journals.