* 1218916
* AF:Small: Combinatorial Algorithms to Enable Derivative Computations on Multicore Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alex Pothen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Derivatives are required in numerous contexts in computational science and
engineering, including in algorithms for nonlinear optimization and nonlinear
differential equations. This project targets the current state-of-the-art
technology for computing derivatives, Automatic Differentiation (AD), and its
adaptation to multi-core architectures. Algorithms and software from this effort
will be useful to the high-performance computing and computational science and
engineering communities. Advances in AD technology will directly contribute to
improved methods for uncertainty quantification and sensitivity analysis, both
of which play crucial roles in high-fidelity predictive computer simulations for
scientific applications of national interest. Modules based on parts of this
project will be included in suitable graduate courses. As part of this project,
the Principle Investigators will visit and give seminars describing this
research at a four-year undergraduate college in Indiana to motivate students to
pursue graduate studies in science and engineering.

Automatic (or Algorithmic) Differentiation (AD) is a modern technology of
growing importance for evaluating derivatives accurately and efficiently, but it
generates a number of combinatorial problems for which efficient algorithms
remain to be found. Multi-core computing platforms, by bringing substantial
computing power to the desktop, are well positioned to accelerate innovation and
discovery in science and engineering, as long as they are furnished with
suitable enabling algorithms and software. Focusing on general-purpose
combinatorial abstractions, this project seeks to accelerate progress on both
fundamental AD algorithms and those needed to enable derivative computation on
multi-core platforms. The specific goals are to: (1) Develop graph-based,
symmetry-exploiting models and algorithms for efficient computation of Hessians
via AD, (2) Develop combinatorial algorithms to support efficient computation of
large, sparse Jacobian and Hessian matrices using AD on multi-core
architectures, and (3) Develop combinatorial algorithms for concurrency
discovery in irregular computations on multi-core architectures. Many of the
targeted combinatorial problems are NP-hard to solve optimally, and fast
algorithms that yield near-optimal solutions will be emphasized. To ensure that
the algorithms would run correctly, reliably and in a scalable manner on the
rapidly evolving multi-core platforms, careful attention will be paid to
programming models, algorithm and data structure design, and memory management.
Suitable large-scale nonlinear optimization problems will be used to guide the
algorithm development effort and as a vehicle for demonstrating impact.