* 1218393
* III: Small: Dynamic Social Network Mining: Feature Extraction, Modeling and Anomaly Detection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Aidong Zhang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This project develops a general framework for anomaly detection in dynamic
social networks that evolve in both links and nodes. The framework includes
first capturing the information of timestamps of dynamic networks by
transferring them into carefully selected graph kernel feature spaces. A dynamic
modeling method is then designed to learn the dynamism on the target dynamic
social network. Anomaly detection methods are finally developed to mine abnormal
nodes in the dynamic network. The main innovation of the approaches is to
represent dynamic networks by bags of attributes, including graph kernel
features to epitome details in each timestamp, learned latent variables for
dynamism of networks and user specified features to turn the direction of
attributes representation towards aimed tasks. Based on this representation, the
project designs innovative methods based on latent support vector machine and
transfer learning to detect abnormal nodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
provides a clear understanding of evolution patterns, including both normality
and abnormality in dynamic social networks. The approaches developed in this
project help identify various abnormalities in our life, including detecting
spammers in websites, monitoring potential dangerous activities in crime
networks, identifying malicious source of infection in disease networks, and
many others. The successful modeling of such network dynamics can provide
scientific basis for appearance and disappearance of human relationships,
improve the prospects for uncovering potentially undiscovered evolution patterns
in social networking process and help develop qualitative and quantitative
algorithms for more applications.