* 1218756
* RI: Small: GraphLab 2: An Abstraction and System for Large-Scale Parallel Machine Learning on Natural Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Carlos Guestrin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 10/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

With the growth of the Web and improvements in data collection technology in
Science, datasets have been rapidly increasing in size and complexity,
necessitating comparable scaling of machine learning algorithms. However,
designing and implementing efficient parallel machine learning algorithms is
challenging and time consuming. To address this challenge, we recently released
GraphLab, a framework providing an expressive and efficient high-level
abstraction satisfying the needs of a broad range of machine learning
algorithms. The performance of our system has attracted significant attention,
receiving thousands of downloads from many universities and
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, GraphLab only addresses batch
processing in multicore settings. In this project, we are developing GraphLab 2:
addressing the much more challenging online and distributed settings, tackling:
1) Cloud-based distributed machine learning. 2) Natural graphs, with very high-
degree vertices that are not amenable to graph partitioning methods. 3) Online
tasks, where data and queries are streaming over time. 4) Off-core computation,
since huge problems may not fit into memory, even across the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key contributions of the project is the
continual dissemination and transfer of our technology. Our open-source software
releases will continue to enable large-scale machine learning applications in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our ambitious broader impact
goals, beyond theory and systems, include the development of a new curriculum
focused on preparing students for the industrial and scientific needs in this
field. Our proposed courses include "Machine Learning on the Web" and "Cloud
Computing for Big Machine Learning and Data Mining."