* 1219869
* Understanding Technology Appropriation in Intercultural Global Work
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Pamela Hinds, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The relationship between the design and use of collaborative technologies for
global work is understudied. Although we know that cultural contexts shape how
people perceive and use technologies, technologies that facilitate coordination
and collaboration across national boundaries seem to demand that workers use the
technologies in compatible, if not similar ways. The goal of our study is to
build theory of how people appropriate a technology in different cultural
contexts and how different ways of appropriating a technology affect
collaboration across national boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
pivots on a quantitative and qualitative longitudinal field study of a knowledge
sharing system in close collaboration with an architecture and design firm that
is designing and deploying a knowledge sharing system across 17 locations in 10
countries. We will interview and observe workers in three countries as they use
this new knowledge sharing system. In six additional locations we will also use
diaries, surveys and digital traces automatically generated by the system to
document usage patterns and workers' evolving attitudes toward and appropriation
of the technology. The project will advance our understanding of the
possibilities and problems that arise when deploying collaboration technology
for global use. It will extend knowledge of how work practices, particularly
those intertwined with technology use, converge or diverge when workers span
national boundaries and cultural contexts. It will also advance our
understanding of and, therefore, enable theory development about the factors
that promote convergence or divergence of use and how these are interwoven with
differences in cultural expectations about and understandings of productivity
and client satisfaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is currently known about
how to best structure and manage globally distributed work. The default has
generally been to impose "best practices" across locations, but this has met
with limited success because "best" does not necessarily translate across
cultural contexts. Our research will provide guidance so that organizations can
make more principled decisions regarding the organization and management of
global work and, as a result, sustain higher performance. This work will also
contribute to public and student awareness of the opportunities and challenges
in global work.