* 1219619
* Regional Survey and the Trajectory of Complexity in the Magdalena Lake Basin, Jalisco, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Verenice Heredia, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 201,463.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Christopher Beekman and Dr.
Verenice Heredia will use modified regional archaeological survey methods to
investigate the emergence of social and political complexity in the central
valleys of Jalisco, Mexico.

There are relatively few areas in the world in which complex sociopolitical
systems emerged independently and established themselves as regional powers.
Archaeologists and other social scientists are extremely dependent upon these
examples for developing broader theories about the origins of politics. The
Teuchitlán culture of western Mexico is one of the most recent case studies to
be identified, and it contradicts many of the assumptions about how these
processes begin. It therefore provides a counter-example to the comparative
literature that will allow archaeologists to critically evaluate existing models
in ancient Mexico and beyond.

Prior research has documented a political system in which power was shared by
elite families (ca. 300 BC - AD 500) instead of being concentrated in the hands
of a single quasi-divine ruler, as known elsewhere in ancient Mexico and many
other areas of the ancient world. The valleys of central Jalisco therefore
provide a fresh point of comparison outside the canon of better studied
trajectories from highland Mexico and the tropical lowlands of eastern
Mesoamerica. The project examines the independent emergence, expansion,
collapse, and reorganization of social complexity in a corner of Mesoamerica
that has received comparatively little attention despite its potential for
filling a gap in known variations on social complexity.

The project is co-directed by American and Mexican archaeologists, and joins
their independent and ongoing research lines within this new and important zone.
This research will be conducted through integrated archaeological and
geomorphological survey of the Magdalena lake basin of highland Jalisco. The
archaeological survey will establish the location and chronological sequence of
settlements from the Early Formative period through the Spanish Conquest (1500
BC - AD 1600). A geomorphological survey by Dr. Kirk Anderson will evaluate the
fluctuations of Lake Magdalena over time, providing an integrated assessment of
climatic changes and the ancient use of lake resources. Project members will map
the internal organization and architectural forms of sites located, a procedure
which allows an analysis of the specific political institutions present and the
degree of centralization that occurred.

This project continues international collaborations with researchers from the
Colegio de Michoacán, and builds a framework within which graduate students from
both the United States and Mexico will receive training in laboratory and field
methods. The project takes a long term view towards archaeological conservation,
by raising community awareness of cultural remains and training graduate
students. The greatest threat to archaeological sites is lack of interest, and
project members will give talks at the local level to raise community awareness
and appreciation for archaeology. Training graduate students produces
archaeologists who are capable of carrying out future studies that will aid in
data and site conservation, which the western Mexican states as a whole sorely
need.