* 1219753
* Interactions between Stimuli and Spatiotemporal Activity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Bard Ermentrout, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 584,300.00

Ongoing activity in the nervous system and how it impacts sensory and other
inputs is the subject of much recent experimental activity. In particular, it is
clear that the intrinsic interactions between neuronal circuits in absence of
inputs can have a strong impact on how the system responds to incoming stimuli
even at the large scale cognitive level. Thus, nonlinear dynamics methods will
be applied to problems in theoretical neuroscience dealing with this question.
Various forms of spatiotemporal activity are observed in experiments which
include spatially localized activity, oscillations, and propagating waves.
Perturbation and numerical methods will be used to analyze the dynamics of these
patterns when subjected to various stimuli such as spatially local short lasting
perturbations, correlated broad-band inputs, and moving or oscillatory stimuli.
One type of persistent activity observed both in behaving animals and in reduced
experimental preparations is the cortical up-state. We will study a new model
for this state in order to understand how it propagates across the cortex as
well as its ability to induce spontaneous pattern formation. A new class of mean
field models for spiking neural activity will be developed in order to study how
perturbations affect large networks of coupled neurons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How we perceive the world is governed both by the sensory
inputs with which we are constantly bombarded, by ongoing activity in the brain,
and by our previous experience. This activity as well as the natural wiring of
the nervous system shapes the spontaneous behavior of our brains and this
spontaneous activity strongly modulates the sensory inputs. Here we use
computational and mathematical models of neurons (the cells that make up the
brain) to understand what kinds of spontaneous behavior are possible, how this
depends on the wiring and how this activity interacts with sensory inputs. The
ongoing and evoked behavior is carefully controlled by a balance of positive
(excitatory) and negative (inhibitory) influences. The loss of this balance can
disrupt normal behavior and lead to diseases such as epilepsy and schizophrenia.
Mathematical models of the nervous system provide a way to test hypotheses put
forth by experimentalists and to also suggest new experiments based on the
predictions of these models.