* 1219004
* NeTS: Small: Towards Exposing and Mitigating End-to-End TCP Performance and Fairness Issues in Data Center Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Dongyan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

While TCP was designed to work in any environment, it has a long history of
problems whenever introduced in newer environments (e.g., wireless networks,
satellite networks, high-capacity networks) that it was not explicitly designed
and tested for. A similar new frontier that challenges TCP is the data center
and cloud environments that have become popular in recent times. This project
will conduct research on exposing end-to-end challenges that TCP faces in the
modern cloud computing and data center environments and propose solutions to
address them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, it focuses on three major
issues surrounding TCP in data center and cloud environments: First, in
virtualized cloud environments, when multiple VMs share the CPU, CPU access
latency for each VM (i.e., the interval during which a VM waits for the CPU) is
in the order of tens/hundreds of milliseconds and can be orders of magnitude
higher than the typical sub-millisecond network RTTs. This high RTT causes
significant reduction in TCP throughput. Second, in multirooted data center
networks, under certain conditions, TCP connections sharing a common link
exhibit severe unfairness. Finally, in data center networks today, equal-cost
multipath routing (ECMP) is often used to split traffic across multiple paths,
but it can potentially cause significant load imbalance. Researchers have
refrained from suggesting packet-level multipath routing in the past because of
its ability to cause reordering that may reduce TCP throughput. It is however
not clear whether this poor interactions with multipath routing exists even
under symmetric topologies such as fattrees, or more generally, multi-rooted
tree topologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this
project is to comprehensively investigate these afore-mentioned three major
issues discussed above, propose new solutions to address the problems, and
finally, validate these solutions and hypotheses using real prototype
implementations and through extensive evaluations. (1) To address TCP's
performance deterioration in virtualized cloud environments, the project will
explore a new approach called transport function delegation, where certain TCP
functions are delegated to the driver domain or hypervisor. (2) It will conduct
extensive experimentation using real testbeds to expose, and characterize the
unfairness issue, and also propose and evaluate classic solutions (e.g., RED)
and a new routing algorithm called equal-length routing to mitigate this
problem. (3) It will revisit the conventional wisdom that fine-grained multi-
path traffic splitting protocols interact poorly with TCP, in the context of
data center networks which have regular topologies such as multi-rooted trees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impact of this research
comprises of the following: (1) It will help improve the key aspects of TCP such
as performance and fairness in data center and cloud environments, that will
benefit all data center systems and applications. (2) Results of this research
will be transferred to industry. (3) Results of this research will be integrated
into courses such as operating systems, computer networks, and cloud computing.
It will also provide training to graduate students and several Ph.D. theses are
expected to come out of this research. (4) It will include participation of
minorities (under-represented minorities and women).