* 1219027
* SHF: Small: Interactive Refactoring for Multicore Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Daniel Dig, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

In the multicore era, a major programming task is to make existing sequential
programs parallel. One approach to parallelizing an existing sequential program
is to rewrite it from scratch. However, the most common way is to parallelize a
program incrementally, by changing the existing code. Each small step can be
seen as a behavior-preserving transformation, i.e., a refactoring. While
refactoring is more economical than rewriting, it is still tedious because it
requires changing many lines of code, and it is error-prone and non-trivial
because programmers need to ensure non-interference of parallel operations.

This project aims to significantly enrich educational resources and programmers'
toolset for refactoring sequential programs for parallelism and improving the
performance of already parallel programs. The PIs plan to pursue research
activities in three areas: (1) mining refactorings by studying the evolution of
widely used open-source programs; (2) automating refactorings for parallelism
that programmers frequently use; and (3) suggesting refactorings that offer
several candidate programs with different trade-offs in terms of performance or
thread-safety. This project has the potential to revolutionize how programmers
parallelize software, to educate them about successful parallelization
techniques, and to significantly reduce the cost and increase the quality of
their code.