* 1219023
* III: Small: Issues in the Management of GeoMultimedia Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 538,108.00

The growth of the Internet has led to a dramatic increase in the rate at which
information is generated and delivered. This is especially true for the news
cycle which has become instantaneous and often resulting in social networks,
most notably Twitter, being the medium of choice to deliver late breaking news.
This is usually in the form of links to more details which include news articles
and multimedia data (news photos and videos). One problem lies in identifying
reliable news gatherers which is done by noting if they are the first to report
on a topic in contrast to being a re-poster and their frequency. Other issues in
providing access to news content involve making the news automatically indexable
(instead of by human tagging) both by content (regardless of the language of
creation and the nature of the media) and by the location of the content (i.e.,
geotagging) rather than the location or affiliation of its creator. In the case
of location, the challenge lies in devising language-independent geotagging
techniques. Machine learning based methods are investigated and are expected to
work better than rule-based methods due to a reduced reliance on language-
specific rules and a greater reliance on examples. Access to the images is
facilitated by indexing them by the words associated with the news articles
containing them. This indexing technique is meant to be used as a filter for
finding similar or near-duplicate images where the similarity is based on image
features. The access by location is facilitated by the use of a map query
interface. This is important as it corresponds to enabling the use of spatial
synonyms thereby permitting a wider range of queries to be posed. A novel aspect
of the research is the incorporation of non-English content which is facilitated
by the use of computerized translation services which will be evaluated on their
ability to capture the content on the basis of clustering similar articles in
different languages rather than on the basis of factors such as proper grammar,
etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In today's rapidly changing world, the tools that are
developed in this project will make this information more accessible as users
are enabled to focus on a geographical area of interest as well as have access
to content in their own language. This is of utility to a number of
organizations and attempts will be made to collaborate with potential users on
tailoring the tools for their needs. In addition, the project will provide
research experience to undergraduate and graduate students who will be involved
in developing some of the components. These tools are also a step in the growth
of the nascent field of computational journalism. The project web site
(http://www.cs.umd.edu/~hjs/geomultimedia.html ) will provide access to results
of this and related research.