* 1219200
* HCC: Small: Towards more natural and interactive brain-computer interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Virginia de Sa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 422,396.00

Brain computer interfaces (BCIs) translate basic mental commands into computer-
mediated actions. BCIs allow the user to bypass the peripheral motor system and
to interact with the world directly via brain activity. These systems are being
developed to aid users with motor deficits stemming from neurodegenerative
disease, injury, or even environmental restrictions which make movement
difficult or impossible. One popular class of EEG-driven BCI systems is based on
imagined movement. In these systems the user interacts with a computer through
motor imagery such as the imagination of hand vs. tongue movement. But the
ability of users to control such a BCI is very variable, and all the factors
involved are not fully understood. For example, EEG signals can change
drastically from offline training to online use. Unfortunately, drift in EEG can
lead to loss of control of the BCI, which leads to user frustration and further
drift of EEG signals from their training baselines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's goal in this project is to create a more robust BCI system by specifically
addressing loss of control and system drift. Her hypothesis is that explicitly
training on a signal that incorporates a user's satisfaction and, more
importantly, dissatisfaction with the current performance may result in a more
natural interface, and thereby lead to a reduction in loss of control and
improved system usability and performance. The research will be carried out in
three stages. First, active and passive EEG signals of dissatisfaction and
satisfaction will be analyzed in a simulated online setting. Next, a real-time
online system that recognizes dissatisfaction vs. satisfaction to control 1-D
cursor movement will be constructed and system performance compared to that of a
standard left/right motor imagery system. Finally, the best working parts of the
dissatisfaction/satisfaction system will be integrated with the more standard
left/right system, to create a better hybrid system. The (dis)satisfaction
signals will be based on actively controlled motor imagery signals, interpreted
emotion, and detection of error-like signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project has the potential to vastly improve the robustness of EEG-
based BCI systems, by responding to natural signals of satisfaction and
dissatisfaction, by being resistant to drift, and by naturally taking advantage
of frustration which is a common cause of loss of control. By training the BCI
to recognize frustration the PI expects to turn this typically negative trait
into a positive. The project will support and train an under-represented
minority graduate student and a post-doc in this important interdisciplinary
area, and it will create projects for under-represented REU participants as well
as for high school students through the PI's partnerships with the NSF Temporal
Dynamics of Learning Center (TDLC, where she is a member of the faculty
governing and admissions committee for the REU program) and the Preuss School (a
charter school for low income students with no college educated parent). All
software written for EEG signal processing and analysis, as well as data from
the experiments, will be made available as add-ons to EEGLAB which is
distributed by co-PI Makeig.