* 1219080
* CSR:  Small:  Automated Software Fault Localization via Static and Dynamic Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Vikram Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 490,001.00

This project aims to improve tool support for software debugging, by providing
automatic assistance in the identification of root causes of a software failure
using static and dynamic program analysis techniques. A flexible diagnosis
framework first identifies candidate root causes of a failure and then uses a
broad, open-ended series of diagnosic "filters" to narrow down the most likely
root causes. A key innovation is that the system automatically generates
"passing" and "failing" inputs for diagnosis that are close to the original
failing input, making it less likely that root causes are missed. The work
develops two approaches for this difficult step, based on concolic testing and
on string rewriting using the application's input grammar, and investigates
various types of program properties ("likely invariants") for effective
localization of various classes of bugs. Candidates are then winnowed using
novel filters based on existing and new program analyses to pinpoint root causes
with few false positives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will significantly
increase programmer productivity by reducing manual debugging effort and improve
reliability and security by reducing the time to fix critical software failures.
A fully-automated diagnosis tool based on the widely-used LLVM compiler will be
publicly distributed for developers to use. It will also be used for teaching
debugging techniques and program analysis techniques in university classes.