* 1219180
* SHF:Small: Automatic Generation of Hardware Threads on Programmable Fabrics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Walid Najjar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 415,999.00

The gap between the speed of processors and that of memory has been widening for
decades and will continue to widen with current technology forecasts. This major
obstacle to high-performance computing is traditional overcome using techniques
that exploit data locality in memory, such as cache memories. However, a very
important class of applications commonly referred to as irregular applications,
do not exhibit any locality. Examples of such applications include: (1) sparse
linear algebra, widely used in science, engineering, medicine, finances,
economic modeling etc; and (2) graph algorithms, used in the modeling and
analysis of large data such as social networks and the ab-initio construction of
genomes from sequenced material etc. Hardware supported multithreaded execution
has been shown to mask the latency to memory, and hence can boost the effective
parallelism, by suspending a thread waiting for the result of a memory operation
and resuming it when the results are available. By doing so the utilization of
the computational units is raised to near 100% resulting in a tremendous speedup
of the computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at generating
customized hardware for multithreaded execution on configurable devices such as
FPGAs. FPGAs (Field Programmable Gate Arrays) are integrated circuits on which
arbitrary digital hardware circuits can be configured and reconfigured under
software control. Toward this goal, CHAT (Customized Hardware Accelerated
Threads) is being developed as a tool that generates a custom multithreaded FPGA
processor design tailored for a particular application, based on the C
programming language specification of the application. Preliminary results show
a potential speedup greater than 10x over traditional memory hierarchy
approaches for some irregular applications. The technical deliverables of this
project will be: (1) an open-source distributed version of CHAT implemented on
high-performance machines with FPGA accelerators; and (2) a detailed analysis of
the performance benefits of various compile-time optimizations on various
applications.