* 1219015
* III: Small: Parametric Statistical Models to Support Statistical Hypothesis Testing over Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Vishwanathan Swaminathan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 491,841.00

Graphs provide a natural representation of real-world networks e.g. world-wide
web, biological networks, social networks. There is a growing body of work on
both models of network structure and algorithms to automatically discover
patterns (e.g., communities) in the structure. However, statistical methods for
assessing the significance of discovered patterns or distinguishing between
alternative models have received less attention.

Robust statistical models, which can accurately represent distributions over
collections of graphs, are critical for principled quantitative investigation of
networks and their properties. Specifically, since sampling distributions
(either analytical or empirical) can be used to determine the likelihood of a
given sample, statistical models facilitate hypothesis testing and anomaly
detection (e.g., graphs with low likelihood can be flagged as anomalous).
However, unlike metric spaces the space of graphs exhibits a combinatorial
structure which poses significant theoretical and practical challenges which
need to be overcome for accurate estimation and efficient inference.

This project investigates the interplay between choice of model representation,
parameter estimation, and sampling/inference to develop statistical models that
can accurately estimate (parametric) probability distributions over the space of
graphs (i.e., graph populations). Speicifically, the project focuses on a novel
probabilistic graph model that generates graphs by quilting together a set of
subgraphs sampled from simpler basis graph models and the application of the
resulting model to (i) explore and define graph classes, (ii) detect anomalies
and assess their significance, and (iii) investigate graph dynamics and formally
characterize notions of temporal stationarity and dynamic evolution.

The proposed work will advance the state of the art in probabilistic models, and
rigorous statistical methods for analyis, of graph structured data. The proposed
work also contributes to research-based training of graduate and undergraduate
students at Purdue University. All of the software, publications, and data
resulting from the project will be freely disseminated to the larger research
and educational community.