* 1219891
* Experimental Investigations of Carbon in Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Jie Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2014
* USD 318,745.00

Experimental Investigations of Carbon in Earth?s Core&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Previous studies proposed that the global carbon
cycle involved Fe3C or Fe7C3 as a dominant component in the solid portion of
Earth?s core, even though critical data to test the hypothesis of carbide-rich
inner core are still missing. Experimental results on the phase relation of the
Fe-C binary system are limited to 70 GPa. Sound velocity data are only available
for Fe3C, under conditions up to 68 GPa at 300 K and up to 47 GPa at high
temperatures. Density measurements on Fe3C have reached ~ 200 GPa in pressure,
but high temperature data are scarce. In particular, experiments are needed to
assess the effects of magnetic transition near 70 GPa on the thermoelastic and
vibrational properties of the iron carbides, and to quantify the influence of
temperature on their magnetism, density and sound velocities. It is proposed to
investigate the compression and melting behavior of iron carbides up to the core
pressure regime and ~ 3000 K using multi-anvil and diamond anvil cell pressure
devices. Specific goals include: [1] determine the partial phonon density of
Fe3C and Fe7C3 using the nuclear resonant scattering method; [2] establish the
thermal equation of state of Fe3C and Fe7C3 using the synchrotron X-ray
diffraction methods; [3] determine the eutectic composition of the Fe-C binary
system using a combination of in situ X-ray diffraction and focused ion beam
FIB-based quench analysis methods. The proposed activities will provide new data
on the phase relations, densities, and sound velocities of candidate iron
carbides to core pressures and high temperatures, thus enabling a stringent test
of inner core models involving carbon as a major component. The expected results
will advance our understanding of Earth?s deep carbon cycle, a central and
timely issue in solid Earth research. The investigations will establish
stepping-stones toward an ultimate model of core chemistry by elucidating the
role of magneto-volume and anharmonicity in the thermodynamics and lattice
vibration of potential core materials. Key constraints on the carbon content of
the core will complement geochemical, seismological, and geodynamic studies to
expand the frontier of deep Earth research. This work will also contribute to
astrophysics and planetary science on the pathways of carbon from star birth to
planet differentiation, and to materials science and condensed-matter physics on
the behavior of carbon-based materials and strongly correlated systems under
extreme environments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The lead PI is
committed to teaching and training at high school to postdoctoral levels through
course offerings, lectures, and tutorial sessions (e.g., for the Michigan Math
and Science Scholar program and at the Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth
Research Summer Schools). The proposed experiments will train a graduate student
to tackle fundamental scientific problems using the state-of-the-art
experimental techniques in the high-pressure research laboratories at U.
Michigan and the Advanced Photon Source (APS) at the Argonne National Laboratory
(ANL). The proposed activity will enhance the infrastructure for research and
education through collaborative projects at regional and national facilities
including the Geophysical Laboratory, APS, and National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network (NNIN). The project will produce calibration standards
for the community to support carbon-related research. The proposal will involve
female researchers and provide partial support for Dr. Chen as a new PI. The PIs
will continue to actively disseminate research results broadly through
publications, national and international meetings, the Internet, and news media.