* 1219470
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Abrupt Environmental Change on North Pacific Human Ecosystem Dynamics using High Resolution Zooarchaeological Records from Coastal Washington
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Michael Etnier, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 226,862.00

This project will examine community response to abrupt environmental change
through analysis of animal remains as they reflect subsistence practices and
environmental conditions, from Tse-whit-zen, a previously excavated Lower Elwha
Klallam village on the northwest coast of Washington, with occupation beginning
around 2700 years ago and intensifying between about 1800-100 years ago. This
time period spans several high-magnitude earthquakes, the Little Ice Age and
Medieval Climatic Anomaly, and a gradual increase in sheltered intertidal
habitat. The research team will explore how these events affected animal
resources and different people within households and larger communities over
time, using predictions drawn from foraging theory. The extraordinary integrity
of the deposits, the detailed geoarchaeological field recording of deposits, the
large and rigorously collected faunal samples from 7 time periods, and
volumetrically comparable samples of birds, fish, shellfish, and mammals at Tse-
whit-zen offer a high-resolution record of past human use of animal resources
that is unparalleled in the North Pacific. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project will provide models, methods and results of direct relevance to scholars
working on Arctic systems and processes, given the parallels and direct linkages
between the Northwest Coast and areas to the north. In both regions, boat-mobile
foragers with maritime subsistence focused on fish, shellfish, and marine
mammals, have adapted to complex, dynamic coastlines affected by periodic
environmental, geomorphic and climatic changes. Global circulation patterns link
the North Pacific and Arctic Oceans and migratory species bridge the two areas.
Our project also provides an ideal comparative case study for the Global Human
Ecodynamics Alliance, an NSF funded initiative developed to link Arctic Polar
Ecodynamics to the broader global context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
be valuable to the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe who were integrally involved in the
excavation of the Tse-whit-zen site, are concerned about the future of the site
and the collection. The researchers will share faunal data, publications and
professional insights with tribal educators, wildlife managers, and cultural
specialists involved in planning a museum. They will also be collaborating with
local and state governmental agencies that will develop educational materials
from our results, to meet a growing need to prepare the public for future
earthquake-related events. The researchers anticipate that their work
documenting fine-scale animal response to earthquakes, climate change, local
shoreline change, and human exploitation strategies for several ?species of
concern? (e.g. salmonids, ground fish, sea mammals) will assist current wildlife
management efforts.