* 1219400
* The Recovery of Introspection: An ethnography and history of experimental psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Emily Martin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 60,779.00

Dr. Emily Martin of New York University will conduct research studying how three
innovative experimental psychology labs are changing how they study human
behavior. In most experimental psychology labs, elicitations of subject's
introspections were abandoned after psychology and anthropology split apart at
the turn of the 20th century. Recently, however, some labs have begun to use
introspections to understand behavior. Dr. Martin will investigate how these
psychologists are attempting to do so, and will thereby contribute to the
anthropology of science, the anthropology and psychology of subjectivity, and
science and technology studies.

The project will employ a range of social science research methods in three
laboratory settings in different parts of the U.S., including participant
observation, interviews, and close attention to what counts as data for the
psychologists, as well as an ongoing survey of media coverage of this science.
The researcher will follow experiments in each of the three labs, carefully
chronicling how topics such as rumination, insight, attention, or choice
develop.

Through the general interest magazine, Anthropology Now, and through a series of
public lectures, Dr. Martin will produce and disseminate new knowledge about the
process of research in these innovative labs. This anthropological analysis will
help give the public a more accurate understanding of how science advances. The
research was co-funded by the Cultural Anthropology Program, the Science,
Technology, and Society Program, the Social Psychology Program, and the
Perception, Action, and Cognition Program.