* 1219142
* RI: Small: Semantics-Based, Weakly-Supervised Coreference Resolution
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Vincent Ng, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2018
* USD 347,410.00

This research seeks to push the frontiers of coreference resolution research via
achieving two objectives. First, it addresses the Winograd Schema Challenge by
examining a class of difficult-to-resolve anaphors whose resolution requires
commonsense knowledge involving the roles played by the participants in an event
and their causal relationships. It adopts a deep text-understanding approach to
this problem. Specifically, it ventures into unexplored areas of coreference
research, including the use of script-like knowledge and sentiment analysis, as
well as an examination of the role of discourse connectives. Second, it enables
the acquisition of coreference resolvers for a substantially larger number of
natural languages and domains than is currently possible. One of the major
obstacles to the deployment of coreference technologies across a large number of
languages and domains is the high cost associated with coreference-annotating
data in a language and domain. It investigates two cost-effective approaches to
data annotation, one involving translation-based projection and the other
bootstrapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As coreference is an enabling technology for
many traditional and emerging text-processing applications, the project has the
potential to improve these applications. Through the construction of a multi-
lingual, multi-domain coreference resolver and the availability of annotated
data produced in the course of this investigation, the project may stimulate
research in under-studied languages and domains by a broader community of
researchers. Equally importantly, the use of commonsense knowledge in the
resolver mimics the human coreference resolution process, bringing artificial
intelligence researchers one step closer to building an intelligent agent that
can truly understand natural language.