* 1219948
* Ocean Acidification, Hypoxia and Warming: Experimental Investigations into Compounded Effects of Global Change on Benthic Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joan Bernhard, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,837.00

The average sea surface temperature (SST) has increased over the last 100 years,
rising atmospheric partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) is lowering the pH
of the oceans, and the extent and intensity of low-oxygen bottom waters is
growing, at least in certain regions. The biological impacts of these ongoing
changes -- warming, acidification, and hypoxia -- have each been studied
independently, but few studies have explored the possible interactions among
these stressors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, led by a scientist from
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, studies the compounded effects of
ocean acidification, hypoxia, and warming on an assemblage of benthic
foraminifera collected from the continental shelf off New England. Foraminifera
are an ideal organism for this work because they (1) are relatively small,
allowing experimentation on statistically significant populations; (2) have both
calcareous and non-calcareous representatives; (3) are relatively short-lived so
experiments include a major portion of their life cycle; (4) include aerobes and
anaerobes; and (5) provide a fossil record allowing comparisons across time.
Laboratory culturing experiments will be used to determine the response of
benthic foraminifera, in terms of survival and growth, to co-varying parameters
of pH and oxygen, and to explore the influence of increased temperature on these
responses. The researchers will examine the relative effects of higher pCO2,
lower [O2], and higher temperature (T) on both calcareous and non-calcareous
benthic foraminifera. In addition, they will examine the pre-Industrial benthic
foraminiferal assemblage at the field site, and will compare that assemblage to
those produced in the experiments under pre-Industrial (lower than current day)
and elevated pCO2 levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global warming, ocean
acidification, ocean hypoxia ("dead zones"), and their effect on marine flora
and fauna, are of considerable societal interest. Funding of this project
supports a Post-Doctoral Investigator, summer research projects of two
undergraduate students, and provides a first seagoing experience for
approximately ten additional undergraduate students. Also, at least one local
high school student will be recruited each year to conduct an affiliated
climate-change science fair project.