* 1219199
* RI: Small: Efficient Learning Algorithms for Modeling Natural Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael DeWeese, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,999.00

The ability to accurately model such complex phenomena as the natural scene
statistics inherent in stacks of photographs or movies, or the collective
behavior of hundreds of simultaneously recorded neurons in the cerebral cortex,
would be transformative for our understanding of the natural world and of human
thought. The insights gained would not only enhance our understanding of the
brain and the sensory stimuli it can process, but they would confer practical
advantages as well -- leading to improvements in automated speech recognition
and meaningful analysis of real-time video, for example. The various data needed
for these studies is coming online at a rapid pace, but these large and complex
data sets defy traditional modeling and analysis techniques. Unfortunately, the
complexity and size of many recently acquired corpora in biology, physics, and
engineering domains render them incapable of being fit by powerful mathematical
models unless they are constrained by strong and unjustified assumptions about
the data. This, coupled with the general difficulty of developing general
purpose machine learning algorithms has driven most contemporary scientists and
engineers to focus on algorithms tailored to narrow problem spaces rather than
tackling the more general machine learning problem. Fortunately, some
researchers have continued to push for general learning algorithms with
capabilities more similar to human intelligence, but they have typically had to
rely on ad hoc assumptions or uncontrolled approximations in order to make
progress on this daunting problem. This proposal is to further develop a
recently introduced machine learning technique, called Minimum Probability Flow
learning, so that it is capable of fitting exceedingly general parametric models
to much larger data sets than has ever been possible before. In addition, this
proposal is to develop novel, complimentary methods for sampling efficiently
from a model distribution once the parameters have been fit to data, so that the
models can be understood and meaningfully compared with one another. These
techniques will be used to study the statistical structure of natural scenes by
fitting a new and powerful mathematical model to a database consisting of a
large number of photographs. The program proposed here is highly
interdisciplinary, drawing ideas and approaches from physics, engineering,
computer science, and systems neuroscience.