* 1219639
* CAREER: Novel Optimization Methods for Cooperative Data Mining with Healthcare and Biotechnology Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/31/2011,07/31/2012
* Wanpracha Chaovalitwongse, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2012
* USD 52,548.00

ABSTRACT 0546574 Wanpracha Chaovalitwongse Rutgers University New Brunswick

CAREER: NOVEL OPTIMIZATION METHODS FOR COOPERATIVE DATA MINING WITH HEALTH-CARE
AND BIOTECHNOLOGY APPLICATIONS

There is an urgent need to advance and apply quantitative and qualitative
approaches to the study of epilepsy and brain disorders. As uncontrolled
epilepsy poses a significant burden to society due to as- sociated healthcare
cost, this project is aimed at the development of an automated seizure
prediction system and brain abnormal activity classifier. To achieve this goal,
optimization-based data mining (DM) approaches will be developed to
quantitatively analyze the brain activity through electroen- cephalogram (EEG)
data. The proposed DM techniques will excavate hidden patterns/relationships in
EEGs, which will give a greater understanding of brain functions (as well as
other complex sys- tems) from a system perspective. Specifically, a new DM
paradigm for the seizure prediction and brain activity classification will be
developed based on novel optimization-based DM techniques for feature selection,
clustering, and classification. The proposed research will contribute to the
computer science, engineering and medical communities along the following four
lines: (1) the development of novel mathematical models and optimization
techniques for DM problems and time series analysis, (2) the implementation of
statistical techniques to detect patterns from selected features/clusters for
predicting seizures and classifying normal and epileptic EEG activity, (3) the
utility of detection theory and the experimental designs to assess and validate
the efficacy, robustness, and uncertainty of the proposed DM paradigm as well as
fine-tune the optimal parameter setting, (4) the extension of the fundamental
research findings in optimization and DM to other cross-disciplinary research,
which will constitute a new avenue of research in optimization-based DM and time
series analysis. The proposed research is very crucial to decision making
processes in real world problems. Success of this research will advance the
state-of-the-art in the field of optimization in DM, and have a greatly
significant impact on medical research. The research scope in this proposal
touches upon several emerging optimization and DM problems, which are driven by
ever growing computational power. The proposed research has shown a broad impact
on many research fields including computer science, operations research,
computational biology, and logistics. The scope of this project itself will
broaden opportunities and enable the participation of all citizens women and
men, underrep- resented minorities, and especically persons disabled by
epilepsy. Success of this proposal in seizure prediction research will relieve
the anguish from this life-threatening disease and improve the life quality of
at least 2 million Americans (14 millions worldwide), who are currently
suffering from epilepsy regardless of race, age, or gender.