* 1219455
* Collaborative Research: Acheulean Hominin Behavior at Elandsfontein, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2017
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2017
* USD 116,951.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. David Braun and Naomi
Levin, together with an international team of colleagues, will conduct two field
seasons of archaeological research at Elandsfontein on the west coast of South
Africa. The team brings together specialists from the U.S., South Africa, U.K.,
Australia, and Germany to study the environmental adaptations of Acheulean
populations that were ancestral to modern humans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the distinctiveness of humans relative to
other species is among the most important goals of the behavioral and cognitive
sciences. Humans implement a set of behavioral strategies that allow for broad
yet stable and flexible responses to novel situations. This flexibility directly
relates to human traits that include complex communication, reliance on socially
learned strategies, and extraordinary levels of cooperation. It has been
suggested that these features reflect the dynamic environments in which humans
have lived over the last million years. The current understanding of the
interplay between human adaptability and environmental variation has developed
almost entirely from late Pleistocene contexts (i.e., sites less than 130,000
years old). We know relatively little about the adaptive versatility and
environmental context of preceding Middle Pleistocene (900 to 130 thousand years
old) populations, however, because there are a limited number of archaeological
sites of this age with adequate contextual information. Elandsfontein is a
unique site where it is possible to explore the relationships between Acheulean
behavior and environmental variability in the Middle
Pleistocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to evaluate
whether Acheulean hominins at Elandsfontein employed specific technological
strategies in response to heterogeneous environments. This research will require
intensive excavations to document the archaeological sites, the age of the
artifacts and fossils recovered, and their environmental context. The field
research will be integrated with laboratory studies on the recovered materials
(e.g., fossils, artifacts, sediments) to build a detailed picture of how
Acheulean hominins at Elandsfontein interacted with the environments in which
they lived.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the antiquity of distinctively human
behaviors is well documented, explaining the origin of these behaviors is
impossible without a comprehensive understanding of the behavioral variability
in ancestral populations. The results of the research at Elandsfontein will
directly assess this current inferential shortfall by generating data on how the
behavior of some of these ancestral populations (Acheulean hominis at
Elandsfontein) related to environmental diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide a series of measurable broader impacts to an international
community in both student training and community outreach. The research will be
integrated into a field course that trains American and South African
undergraduates in archaeological field methods. The project also will generate
research opportunities for students (graduate and undergraduate) at American and
South African universities. Research efforts will be coordinated with the West
Coast Fossil Park to expand the awareness of the importance of heritage in South
Africa. This project will help preserve one of South Africa's most important
paleontological and archaeological localities, which is currently owned by a
mining enterprise and potentially subject to commercial excavations.