* 1219186
* SHF:Small: Benchmarking of Transient and Intermittent Errors and Their Application to Microarchitecture
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Michel Dubois, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 399,999.00

Computing infrastructure has been a driving force for our socio-economic
progress in the past several decades. From drug discovery to space exploration,
every scientific and engineering domain relies on computer systems to accurately
analyze complex datasets. Historically, computational accuracy has been taken
for granted in all these disciplines, but this notion is changing. While rapidly
shrinking transistor dimensions lead to exponential power and performance
benefits, the trend is also creating several unwanted side effects in computer
system reliability. There are two types of errors that will become prevalent in
the near future: (1) multi-bit soft errors where alpha particles and neutrons
cause multiple bits to flip at the same time, and (2) intermittent errors that
occur due to stress accumulation over the lifetime of a computer. Thus it is
critical to benchmark the impact of these errors on the lifetime of a computer
chip. Only when the impact is accurately measured is it possible to judiciously
deploy solutions to improve reliability. Since any protection scheme comes with
a cost, it is necessary to understand when a particular protection scheme being
considered, such as parity or single-error-correcting double-error-detecting
code, is too much or too little. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents two
solutions for benchmarking multi-bit soft errors and intermittent errors. This
project will develop a unified methodology to benchmark the impacts of single-
bit and multi-bit soft errors on caches protected with an arbitrary protection
scheme, such as an inter-leaved, block-level or word-level error correcting
code. Such a benchmarking framework will significantly enhance a computer
designer's ability to objectively evaluate the performance, power, and
reliability tradeoffs of various protection schemes proposed for protecting
caches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research also develops a methodology to
benchmark the vulnerability of an instruction set architecture (ISA) to
intermittent errors. Each instruction in an ISA specification is enhanced to
quantify the amount of stress that it is expected to cause on the underlying
microarchitecture of a chip. The stress level information from the ISA is
combined with operating conditions of the chip to continuously monitor
intermittent error probability during application execution. Any unwanted
degradation in chip reliability is then tackled by software exception handlers,
which trigger redundant execution of vulnerable code.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader societal impact will result from these research
solutions. Benchmarking is essential to objectively evaluate the cost-benefit
tradeoffs of various solutions currently being proposed to tackle reliability
concerns. Without benchmarking, building a system to meet reliability
specifications is a guessing game. By providing the right set of tools to
initiate just-in-time error correction and recovery mechanisms, a computer
designer can significantly lower the cost of providing reliable computations.