* 1219646
* Factionalism, Trade Goods, and the Colonial Process in Peten, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Timothy Pugh, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 262,003.00

With National Science Foundation funding, Dr. Timothy W. Pugh and a team of
international scholars will investigate how European trade goods that flowed
into the Maya world transformed indigenous political systems before the Spanish
conquest by weakening central authority and increasing factionization. This
research will involve two seasons of archaeological excavation and laboratory
analysis in Petén, Guatemala. Team members will include professors and students
from the United States and Guatemala.

Contact and colonialism are often imagined as indigenous vs. settler/colonist
relationships, but cultural entanglements are rarely, if ever, so
straightforward. Both native and interloper groups can include factions whose
varied intentions play critical roles in the power relations that emerge during
situations of contact. During such entanglements, factional struggles transcend
boundaries, as factions compete with one another while possibly allied with
outsiders. Competing factions have varied perspectives and goals in the
aftermath of conquest. It is through such divergent objectives that one might
gain a glimpse of the agency involved in the colonial process. This project will
investigate these complex negotiations of power, as they are manifest in
material culture at two sites in Petén, Guatemala: Nixtun-Ch'ich' and Muralla de
Leon. The project will pay particular attention to the shifting role of European
material culture in the Itza socio-political system from the Contact period
(A.D. 1525-1697) through the early Spanish Colonial period (A.D. 1697-1750), and
the effect of Spanish conquest and subsequent colonialism upon Maya social
organization and political power.

Through the examination of the practices of restriction and redistribution of
European items, the work will illuminate something of the value of these
objects. The study of restrictions of use and redistribution by Maya elite of
iron, glass, and other European objects will reveal how colonial objects can be
strategically appropriated and rejected in the course of contact. The project
will reveal how contact and conquest transforms internal social relations
leading to factionization, the creation of new alliances, and transformation of
power networks.

The research will make a number of broader impacts including the training of
both U.S. and Guatemalan students. Dr. Pugh has a longstanding relationship with
Centro Universitario del Petén (CUDEP) and will support CUDEP students' efforts
to complete research practicums and theses at various levels. This particular
impact is critical as students from Petén do not have the resources to undertake
and complete their research without external collaborations. Graduate students
from The Graduate Center of the City University of New York, Southern Illinois
University Carbondale, and other universities will also be supported and will
conduct advanced research leading to graduate degrees. Qualified undergraduates
from Queens College will also have the opportunity to participate in the project
and learn about archaeological methods and research design.