* 1219554
* RAPID: Natural Laboratories in the Chilean Fjords: Studying Reproduction and Development in Emergent Deep-Sea Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Rhian Waller, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2014
* USD 78,457.00

Intellectual Merit

The northern Patagonian fjords lie on the interface between the high Andes
Mountains in the east and the South Pacific Ocean, formed thousands of years ago
through erosive glacial activity and tectonic sinking. Around 12,000 years ago
the icefields in the Chiloé Interior Sea began to open, leaving behind over
15,000km2 of fjords, channels and gulfs. The waters within the fjords are
influenced by strong tides, large volumes of freshwater runoff, and upwelling of
deep-ocean waters as well as steep climatic gradients from north to south. This
dynamic environment has resulted in extremely high biodiversity and endemism,
yet this region is one of the least studied areas of the world. It was just a
few years ago that deep-sea corals were found inhabiting this region at
unusually shallow depths (less than 10m) and in extremely high densities
(greater than 1500 individuals per m2). One species in particular, Desmophyllum
dianthus, is one of the most widespread hard corals in deep-sea habitats around
the globe, yet there have been no ecological studies because of the difficulty
in sampling at depths below traditional SCUBA sampling. Cold-water corals are
important structural engineers, creating habitat for thousands of associated
invertebrates and fish, forming the principle foundation of many benthic
ecosystems. These shallow fjord communities present a unique opportunity to form
baseline data on ecological and population processes, acting as an accessible
window into a deep-sea ecosystem. In recent years environmental and
anthropogenic pressures in the northern Patagonian fjord region have mounted
(particular from intense salmon farming) leading to a situation where these
unique ecosystems may be lost before they can be documented and fully
understood. Reproduction is a fundamental ecological process for which every
species on the planet needs to undergo to survive through time, and is essential
information to understanding recruitment, recolonization, population
connectivity and recovery from damage. This project will study the reproductive
ecology of the primary cold-water coral in this region, D. dianthus. This
project will leverage research funded through a National Geographic Global
Exploration Fund grant to establish year-long monitoring sites in three
locations within the fjords. RAPID funding from NSF will add a significant
ecological study to the National Geographic study.

Broader Impacts

The delicate and unique coral-based ecosystem of these fjord systems are
threatened by increased fishing, tourism and intensified logging in conjunction
with climate change. This project will contribute to and understanding of how
anthropogenic influences are affecting basic life history processes in an
important habitat forming species in the region and will provide a basis for
more in-depth studies of the region's benthic resources. The broader impacts
also include undergraduate training through a 5 week internship to process
samples in the Waller laboratory and a public outreach component consisting of a
blog website, daily Twitter updates from the field from the PI's "Online
Expeditions" site and National Geographic website coverage. This project will
also foster international collaborative work with Chilean researchers from the
Fundación Huinay, their intimate knowledge of these ecosystems is an integral
part of this project. Samples will also be supplied to other collaborators for
population genetics and paleo-climate analysis.