* 1219780
* Technical Assistance Workshops to Broaden Participation in the National Science Foundation's Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,207.00

The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network has received support from the
National Science Foundation (NSF) to offer a proposal development workshop for
50 Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) faculty from
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) who intend to submit proposals to the NSF's
Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program. The project's overall goal is to
increase the number of MRI awards to MSIs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Achieving the project's overall goal will provide STEM faculty at MSIs
with state-of-the art instrumentation with which to conduct research that will
lead to new knowledge and applications. As a result, this group of grantees can
increase their scholarly productivity; integrate their research findings into
the courses they teach; and provide their students with hands-on experiences
using the acquired or developed instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Increasing the participation of MSIs in the MRI Program will enrich the
education program and research opportunities at institutions that play a major
role in the production of minority STEM baccalaureate degree recipients and that
disproportionately produce minority graduates who earn STEM doctoral degrees.
MRI-supported instrumentation at these institutions will improve students'
access to a high quality STEM education provided by faculty actively engaged in
research and will better prepare them to successfully pursue STEM graduate
degrees or join the Nation's STEM workforce. Instrumentation, obtained through
MRI awards, will significantly enhance STEM education at these institutions
through expanded undergraduate and graduate research opportunities and increased
faculty scholarly productivity.