* 1219647
* Collaborative Research: Non-peridotite Melting in Plume-influenced Extensional Environments: Lithological Heterogeneity of the African Superplume and African Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Tyrone Rooney, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2015
* USD 255,284.00

Intellectual Merit. This project seeks to determine the source lithology (e.g.,
peridotite, pyroxenite) of mantle melts that contributed to Oligocene Ethiopian
continental flood basalt volcanism that preceded development of the East African
Rift. Infiltration of mantle melts can play a central role in the initiation and
evolution of lithospheric thinning by weakening and focusing strain. Thus,
understanding the composition, and in particular the mineralogy, of the sources
of mantle melts is critical to constrain the conditions attending melt
generation. Non-peridotite lithologies such as pyroxenite in an upwelling plume
or metasomes within the lithospheric mantle are potentially fertile mantle
sources capable of producing significant volumes of magmas. In contrast typical
peridotite lithologies may not produce significant melt under these conditions
(i.e., smaller degrees of mantle decompression, or lower values of mantle
potential temperature). Moreover, mantle underlying the study area is
characterized by significant seismic attenuation, which has been attributed to
the presence of an African superplume upwelling of hot mantle material. The
proposed study aims to investigate the relative contributions of lithospheric
vs. plume-like mantle as primary magma sources. Specifically, mantle source
lithologies (i.e. peridotite versus pyroxenite) will be evaluated via
geochemical characterization of a well-preserved 2000 m thick section of flood
basalts from the western Ethiopian Plateau that has never before been studied.
The possible contribution of enriched lithospheric mantle to melt generation
will be assessed through a parallel study of unusual Si-undersaturated rocks
erupted in a Miocene shield volcano, for which preliminary data imply magma
derivation from ancient African lithospheric mantle. The analytical program will
involve measurement of major and selected trace elements, Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf isotopes,
and minor elements in olivine, and will be interpreted within a temporal
framework to be established by new Ar/Ar geochronology and paleomagnetic studies
designed to constrain the timing, duration, and eruptive rates of these
deposits. Together these data will provide new insights into processes of basalt
generation. Broader Impacts. The data resulting from this project will offer the
first petrologic insights into the origin of the geophysically-deduced
compositional component of the African superplume and will be directly relevant
to ongoing geophysical projects ongoing in the region. This project will support
the early career research of Tyrone Rooney (Ph.D., 2006), and fosters
international collaboration through interactions with researchers at Addis Ababa
University. The project represents a new collaboration between scientists at
five US institutions (Rooney-MSU, Herzberg-Rutgers, Kappleman/Holt-UT Austin,
Spell-UNLV, and Konter-UTEP), all of whom will contribute to the analytical
measurements, interpretations, and modeling. The project utilizes and extends
the applications of state-of-the-art analytical facilities at Michigan State
University (laser ablation ICP-MS), Rutgers University (electron microprobe), UT
Austin (paleomagnetic lab), UNLV (Noble gas MS), and UTEP (MC-ICPMS). The
project also will support mentoring of a Ph.D. student from MSU through the wide
range of collaborative interactions at the five US institutions and researchers
in Ethiopia.