* 1219789
* Fiftieth Anniversary YAMABE MEMORIAL SYMPOSIUM
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Anar Ahmadov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 28,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1219789&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Albert Marden, Anar Ahmadov, Tian-Jun Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2012 Yamabe Memorial Symposium will be held from Friday through Sunday noon,
October 5-7, 2012, at the School of Mathematics, on the Minneapolis campus of
the University of Minnesota. This year is the fiftieth anniversary of the Yamabe
program. Each biennium, the geometry group of the School of Mathematics decides
on a theme for the Symposium. The theme for this year is Geometric Analysis. The
principal speakers will be Huaidong Cao, Lehigh University Jean-Pierre Demailly,
Grenoble, France Benson Farb, University of Chicago Robert Hardt, Rice
University Misha Kapovich, University of California, Davis Conan Leung, Chinese
University of Hong Kong Natasa Sesum, Rutgers University Ben Weinkove,
University of California, San Diego Together they represent a wide spectrum of
the topic. As an essential complement to the talks, the participants will have
considerable opportunity to have discussions with the speakers and with each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematicians today make extensive use of the
internet to explore previous work, and especially to communicate quickly and
easily with collaborators. Yet in spite of this internet dependence, in fact
because of it, attendance at symposia and conferences is a regular occurrence in
the life of a productive mathematician. It helps in keeping abreast of the
"larger picture" of what is going on, what new discoveries are being made, and
what new avenues are being explored. It helps to cement collaborations,
friendships, and establish new mathematical contacts. Private discussions often
inspire new ideas, new roads to follow, and new collaborations, Human to human
contact is as essential among mathematicians as it is in human activity at
large. The National Science Foundation is the principal funder of such symposia
and conferences which encompass the great breadth of the mathematical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Details of the Yamabe Symposium are at
www.math.umn.edu/yamabe.