* 1219254
* III: Small: Modeling, Querying and Mining of Dynamic Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ambuj Singh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 514,318.00

Many applications generate data that can be modeled as graphs: Biological
networks, social networks, ecological networks and food-webs, among others.
Traditional graph theory and most current research in graph modeling, querying,
and mining concentrates on problems where the graph structure is inherently
static and does not change with time. But networks in the real world are dynamic
in nature with a wide range of temporal changes. While the topology of networks
such as social networks and transportation networks undergoes gradual change (or
evolution), the content (information flow, annotations) changes more rapidly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Against this background, this project aims to develop a
set of scalable querying and mining tools for dynamic graphs by integrating
techniques from databases, data mining, and algorithms. The first research
thrust examines inherent properties for characterizing dynamic graphs,
specifically the dynamic reachability structure of nodes. It also investigates
high-fidelity methods for generating dynamic graphs based on these properties.
The second research thrust aims to develop summarization techniques for dynamic
graph structures. These techniques can be used to compress large graph datasets,
to make predictions about future values, and to query information cascades under
partial observation. The third research thrust aims to develop techniques for
mining significant dynamic subgraphs under different constraints of connectivity
such as fixed subgraph structure, connected subgraphs, and smooth subgraphs. The
goal is here to find anomalous patterns in dynamic graph datasets using a
statistical characterization of background behavior. The final research thrust
reconsiders the first three research thrusts from the point of view of content
and topic models in order to understand the relationship between content of a
message and its flow in a network. The developed methods will be evaluated using
a number of real-world data sets including email datasets such as Enron, re-
tweeting activity data sets on Twitter, Facebook wall posts, and transportation
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important result of this work is a
theoretically well-founded and empirically verifiable framework for modeling,
querying and mining of dynamic graphs. Aspects of dynamic behavior in which both
the structure of networks and their content (information flow, annotations,
etc.) change will be considered. The study of such dynamic networks and how
information flows through them is essential to developing a theory of dynamic
networks and their evolution. This work helps answer questions such as power-law
applies to dynamic behavior, whether content of a message can predict its flow
and vice versa, whether anomalies in a dynamic network can be mined effectively
by building either an empirical summary or a generative model. Robust open
source tools based on the developed algorithms will be released for research,
academic and non-profit endeavors. The research is expected to yield new
techniques in graph algorithms, graph databases, and graph mining, and realize a
collection of tools that can be used by scientists, and ultimately lead to a
theory for dynamic graphs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed
project will integrate research and education by introducing the results of the
project into a graduate seminar, and a graduate course on information
management. The project will support a postdoctoral researcher and train
graduate students. The project offers enhanced opportunities for research-based
training of graduate and undergraduate students, including members of under-
represented groups e.g., females in Computer Science at the University of
California at Santa Barbara. For high school students, the CNSI Apprentice
Research Program at UCSB brings in high school students every summer. The open
source implementations of algorithms resulting from this work will be freely
disseminated to the community.