* 1219833
* Collaborative Research: Sensitivity of Regional Climate Due to Land-cover Changes in the Eastern United States Since 1650
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Roger Pielke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2015
* USD 144,624.00

This project uses model simulations to study the effect of land use and land
cover change on the climate of the eastern US since the mid-1600s. The project
is based on a new dataset, the "Reconstructed Historical Land Cover and
Biophysical Parameter" dataset, which uses 36 land-cover categories to describe
landcover over the eastern US (east of the 97W meridian, which runs through
Kansas) for four representative years: 1650, 1850, 1920, and 1992. The period
from 1650 to 1920 saw extensive deforestation and conversion to cropland, which
was followed by partial reforestation from 1920 to 1992, all of which is
captured in the historical land cover dataset. The change from forest to
grassland or cropland can affect climate in several ways. For example, the
higher albedo of crops and grasses, which are lighter in color than forests and
thus reflects back more incident sunlight, could cause a reduction in surface
temperature. The historical land cover dataset also documents a reduction in
wetlands, which could be consequential for rainfall. Simulations using a land-
atmosphere regional climate model are used to assess the impact of the different
land surface conditions on climatic conditions (primarily temperature and
rainfall) in the eastern US climate.

Research on the climatic effects of land use and land cover change is of
societal as well as scientific interest, as it can help us to identify human-
induced climate changes which are likely to require strategies for adaptation
and mitigation. In addition to the societal value of its research findings, the
project will have educational broader impacts through the outreach activities of
the principal investigators at local middle and high scools. The project will
also support a graduate student, thereby providing education and traning for the
next generation of the scientific workforce in this research area.