* 1219787
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Intersection of Core Values and Political Identities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Adam Berinsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2014
* USD 13,969.00

This project considers individuals' multiple, and sometimes competing,
identities and how these various identities influence one another in politically
relevant ways. More specifically, it seeks to explain how people develop their
core values (which are often rooted in their religious beliefs) and to
understand how these values shape and are shaped by political identities. The
project brings together previously disparate strands of research in political
science and sociology to advance an intuitive theory about the foundations and
effects of political attitudes. The project presents a theory about the
reciprocal relationship between political attitudes and core values based on the
timing of the various stages of an individual's socialization.

The theory will be tested using both observational statistical analysis and
experimental methods. First, by exploiting natural experiments it is possible to
estimate how political identities and events affect values and beliefs. The
second part of the project includes a series of experiments. The experimental
component tests potential causal mechanisms to determine under what conditions
political identities and religious values are linked.

The intellectual merit of the research is associated with its contributions to
three bodies of academic work: theories of 1) social identity, 2) socialization
and development, and 3) polarization. Political scientists know very little
about how different sets of values-like religious and political beliefs-
interact; however, the answers have important implications for the contemporary
political arena. As moral issues assume a more prominent role in American
politics, understanding the interplay between different identities and belief
structures will be of great interest.

The broader impacts of my research relate to how individuals engage within
society as a whole. If, as much research has shown, community engagement and
civic participation serves as an avenue for political mobilization (Rosenstone
and Hansen 1993; Verba, Schlozman and Brady 1995), then those who are more
active in their communities will be more politically engaged and effective. In
short, the relationship between social life and political life may encourage
participation.