* 1219557
* Integrated Future Internet Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2016
* USD 483,103.00

This research is intended to build on, complement, and enhance the NSF future
Internet architecture programs through cross-cutting and integrative comparative
analysis of architectural proposals. Over the last 6 years, the National Science
Foundation has created a series of programs focused on new Internet architecture
and the embedding of networking into the larger social context: these include
the Future Internet Design (FIND) program, the Network Science and Engineering
(NetSE) program, and Future Internet Architecture (FIA) solicitation. This
sequence of programs address a bold objective?to look into the future and
challenge the research community to design the global network that the world
will need fifteen years from now. In the current stage of the overall program, a
number of teams have been funded to develop integrated proposals for the design
of a future Internet. Each of these projects can be expected to produce a
coherent justification for one or another approach to the architecture of a
future network, but the overall outcome of the project should be much more than
that: it should also result in overarching insights into design preferences and
alternative approaches, general lessons about network system design, and a more
systematic rationale for designing networks and concluding that one response to
requirements is preferable to another. The FIA project should push the frontiers
of principled network design, and this phase of the programs has laid the
foundation for this exciting step.

This award addresses these larger project goals through a program of research
that is complementary to the current awards, by looking across the projects (and
other relevant architectural work) to seek more integrative and overarching
conclusions. The challenge is difficult, given the diversity of goals and
requirements that might be posed for a system as complex as the Internet, as
well as the diversity of design approaches. In contrast to much of computer
science research, this agenda is focused on comparative analysis, not
engineering design. As appropriate, the research will be done in collaboration
with the individual projects through cross-project studies on specific topics
related to network design. The investigator will seek to involve others in the
broader community who have given thought to high-level issues in network
architecture, and will carry out his own research into principals and methods
for network design. The investigator will also participate in the FIA PI
meetings, since those meetings will explore specific topics in a cross-project
way.

Intellectual merit: This NSF program should contribute to the long-rang goal of
making network architecture design more methodical and systematic, and less an
art; this research sets that goal as its highest-level objective. This research
has the goal of discovering and articulating fundamental insights and
conclusions with respect to issues in network design, results that arise from
looking across the various different projects with their different approaches.
Topics will include core network functions such as addressing and forwarding,
dealing with important requirements such as security and availability, new areas
of architectural study such as information-centric networks, and the relation
between architectural design choices and larger social, economic and contextual
requirements.

Broader impact: This research will provide a structure and direction for future
research in network design, and provide a new and more principled way of
teaching about networks. Most courses in networking today deal with the subject
by teaching large numbers of facts: the formats of headers, operation of
protocols, and so on, with less emphasis on the ?why? of design. Prior working
papers of the investigator have been used in at least one advanced course on
network architecture, and one ambition of this research is to develop materials
suitable to the teaching of network architecture. The outcomes of this research
can also help with the transfer of results from the FIA program into the
commercial world. The investigator will also continue to provide support to the
community toward the program goals.