* 1219629
* Society Developmental Biology Annual Meetings 2012-2014 Conference:   July 19-23, 2012 Montreal Canada, 2013 Mexico and 2014 Washington State
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Ida Chow, Society For Developmental Biol
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 75,000.00

The Society for Developmental Biology has held annual meetings since its
founding in 1939 and they have become the major conference to attend to learn
about the latest findings in developmental biology. This three-year award will
support three annual meetings: in Montreal, Canada (2012), in Cancun, Mexico
(jointly with the 17th International Congress, 2013), and at the University of
Washington, Seattle, (2014). The meetings attract an increasingly international
audience, especially now that technological advances provide cross-disciplinary
approaches to probe previously unresolved mechanisms. They cover questions that
have fascinated scientists as well as many lay people for centuries: How does
the genome of a fertilized egg specify all the different cell types and organs
in the adult? What are the environmental (macro and micro) effects on the
development and maintenance of organisms? The meetings are timely, describing
major progress toward understanding developmental processes at the genetic,
cellular, and systems biology levels. Speakers at the platform (plenary and
concurrent) sessions, as well as authors of posters discuss topics from the core
of developmental biology and report on exciting and important new advances. The
meetings also traditionally provide an important venue to share and discuss
unpublished data. Essential training is provided, as students and postdoctoral
fellows have ample opportunity to discuss their results with their peers and
with senior investigators. SDB meetings also provide a forum to educate
practicing scientists and trainees to communicate with non-specialists,
especially in regard to issues such as the "debates" appearing in news media and
political circles concerning teaching evolution, human cloning, and stem cell
research. This is important because developmental biology represents a
significant opportunity for understanding evolution and preservation of species,
and for contributing to the well being of our planet and its biodiversity.