* 1219065
* CIF: Small: Exploring the Limits of Interference Networks under Practical Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Aria Nosratinia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 458,808.00

As the number of wireless devices and their prevalence in our lives increases,
and as the wireless infrastructures progress from micro-cells to pico-cells and
even femto-cells, the interference dominated regime of operation becomes ever
more important, and its management ever more critical, for the wireless
applications of tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interference alignment is an
exciting recent development in wireless communication theory that addresses the
fundamental problem of interference. The basic idea is to coordinate
transmissions in a network so that interfering sources will overlap and
concentrate instead of infesting the entire signal space, thus opening up clean
signal space at each receiver and allowing a much larger throughput than
previously thought possible. However, interference alignment also requires
conditions that, in the current state of engineering knowledge, are impractical.
Among them are the requirement of global channel state information, and a
phenomenon known as bandwidth expansion that has to do with the resolution of
observations and the geometry of spaces which must be "bent" to overlap the
interference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due in part to these issues, the practical
impact of interference alignment on wireless communication remains a question of
intense interest. The proposed activity addresses this question via (1)
investigating methods that can reduce the requirement of channel state
information; (2) investigating methods that can reduce bandwidth expansion and
delay; and (3) exploring practical applications where interference alignment can
have the most positive impact. This project has the potential to significantly
impact the long-term prospects of a wide array of wireless communication devices
and networks, including cellular, femto-cells, unlicensed bands, and vehicular
networks.