* 1219996
* International Workshop on the Role of Higher Education: Fostering P-20+ Community Engagement through Knowledge Production, Human Capacity Building, Innovation and Social Cohesion
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Ira Harkavy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 01/31/2016
* USD 48,348.00

The workshop is the first in a series of international collaborative workshops
for academic representatives from three countries, the U.S., China, and South
Africa, to discuss the role of higher education. As centers of discovery,
learning, innovation, and societal well-being, it is imperative that
institutions of higher education in the 21st century foster P-20+ community
engagement through knowledge production; human capacity building, including
broadening participation and integration of research and education; and
innovation and social cohesion. The organizing committees are ethnically diverse
and multidisciplinary. More specifically, the participants comprise individuals
with substantial national and international experience combined with years of
local engagement and expertise, such that the proposal will contribute to
collaborations that draw upon many fields and cultures. This international
collaboration is necessary because STEM challenges are affected by both national
and global conditions; opportunities to learn across cultures and societies
would increase understanding of global conditions and national
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will contribute to preparing and
engaging a diverse STEM workforce, investing in new STEM fields and shifts in
existing fields, and increasing international partnerships and collaborations.
This workshop would help launch an ongoing, global learning community focused on
STEM diversity. It would also help build trusting relationships over time;
create an honest interchange for ongoing learning, sharing, and adapting each
others' approaches; develop creative and innovative solutions globally and
nationally; and, ultimately, help significantly reduce inequalities and increase
diversity in STEM among partnering societies and around the world.