* 1219062
* CSR: Small: Cache Design for Solid-State Drives and Its Application in Data-intensive Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Miaoqing Huang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2015
* USD 246,000.00

Solid-State Drives (SSDs) are capable of providing much higher data access
bandwidth than the hard disk drives (HDDs). However, the typical configuration
of SSDs as emulating HDDs in computer systems significantly limits their impact
for data-intensive applications. The objective of this research is to develop
new use paradigms of SSDs in data-intensive applications on a Reconfigurable
Polymorphous Processing Architecture (RPPA). RPPA consists of three major
components: (1) heterogeneous processors such as CPUs and custom processing
units, (2) data storage devices such as SSDs and DRAMs, and (3) a reconfigurable
interconnect. The interconnect can be adaptively reconfigured as desired to fit
the data communication and access pattern between the processors and the data
storage devices to maximize the performance for various applications such as
image processing and image registration. The direct output of this research has
two folds. First, novel and application-specific use paradigms of SSD for
various data-intensive applications are demonstrated. Second, the methodology
and the infrastructure to develop the RPPA for exploiting the performance
potentials of SSDs are established. The results of this project can transform
the way SSDs are used in future computer systems for data-intensive
applications. The integration of research results into several related CSE
courses, such as computer organization and embedded system, provides hands-on
experience in application-specific platform design to undergraduates, especially
minority and women students.