* 1219850
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Composition and Cooling Rate on Fe XANES Glass Calibrations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Molly McCanta, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2016
* USD 103,451.00

Magmas are probes of the physical conditions and chemistry of the Earth?s
interior. Exploring the mineralogy of these erupted melts provides insight into
the continuing geologic evolution of the planet. In addition to basic
geochemistry, parameters such as temperature and pressure are important to
quantify to constrain the conditions present within the Earth. Of equal
importance to the above physical parameters is oxygen fugacity (fO2), a measure
of the oxidative environment a magma crystallized under. Of all the elements in
magmas, iron is the only major rock-forming element that commonly exists in
multiple valence states. Thus, accurate knowledge of the valence state
(Fe3+/Fe2+) provides the best proxy for the amount of oxygen that was present
when the minerals crystallized, and allows for estimation of magmatic oxygen
fugacity. The oxygen fugacity of a magma is one of the principal parameters,
along with temperature, pressure, and water content, that determines a magma?s
crystallization path, as well as the composition of the resulting minerals. In
order to decipher the origin of any igneous rock, it is essential to first
understand the compositional differences, phase changes, and crystallization
sequence variations that can be caused by magmatic processes in a closed system
at a given fO2.

Oxybarometers have been developed to quantify the fO2 of a magmatic system using
the chemistry or partitioning behavior of multivalent elements such as iron
within a mineral (e.g., FeTi oxides, pyroxene) or glass. The best-calibrated
methods for evaluating Fe3+/Fe2+ are wet chemistry and Mössbauer spectroscopy,
both of which use utilize bulk samples that obfuscate small-scale variations. Fe
XANES allows for in situ Fe3+ measurements in glass, but there are significant
analytical issues primarily related to changes in melt structure arising from
composition and cooling history. Therefore composition-specific calibrations and
sophisticated multivariate analysis techniques are necessary for robust
microanalyses of Fe3+/Fe2+ in glasses. The goal of this proposal is thus to
provide a broad range of independently-analyzed Fe3+/&#931;Fe standards for
glasses spanning a broad range of geologically-feasible conditions. The
investigators propose a wide ranging series of experiments under carefully
controlled fO2 conditions with the resulting products subjected to multiple
analytical techniques to quantify Fe3+. The results of these experiments will
provide a robust calibration of the Fe XANES technique for a wide range of
geologically-relevant compositions and cooling histories.