* 1219540
* Collaborative Research: Testing and Refining Ceramic Rehydroxylation Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jaroslaw Drelich, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 79,725.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Timothy Scarlett, Kostalena
Michelaki and Carl Lipo from Michigan Technological University, Arizona State
University and California State University-Long Beach respectively will lead an
interdisciplinary and multinational team of collaborators to investigate the
newly discovered Rehydroxylation Dating Technique (RHX dating) for fired-clay
ceramic artifacts. The technique works by measuring the mass of water that has
bonded with clay mineral crystals in a ceramic fragment, then measuring the
temperature-dependent rate at which that ceramic sample reabsorbs and bonds with
water, and finally using those measures to calculate each fragment's age (or
time since last firing). If it proves reliable and accurate, this new dating
tool could revolutionize archaeological practice around the world.

The researchers will collaborate with counterparts at Tel Aviv University, as
well as teams of faculty and student researchers at the Universities of
Manchester, Edinburgh, and Bradford. The faculty and student research teams will
engage in a series of "blind" RHX dating tests on the same set of carefully
chosen samples. The international teams will determine if experimental results
can be independently replicated by different labs currently doing RHX research,
including statistical evaluations of rates of error and repeatability, measuring
the effects of temperature and humidity on the RHX process, and examining the
possible effects of artifact storage conditions on dating outcomes. Ultimately,
the combined results of these experiments will allow the collaborators to refine
the model that best describes the rehydration/rehydroxylation process.

This new dating technique, if proven valid and reliable, will effect substantial
changes on archaeological practice. Studies of ceramic technology and practice
are central to archaeological research into larger questions of human
adaptation, cultural processes and change, colonization, and trade and exchange.
With a comparatively minor initial investment, almost any archaeology lab in the
world could set up the relatively inexpensive instrumentation and begin
producing RHX dates for ceramic samples. The technical staff would not need a
great deal of advanced training or support. This technique, if proven, will
provide an inexpensive tool that can be widely available for scientists around
the world.

This project will have broad impacts on teaching, training, and learning in
archaeological science. Drs. Scarlett, Michelaki and Lipo have built their
research collaboration by creating discovery-based, hands-on learning
opportunities for multidisciplinary teams of graduate and undergraduate
students.