* 1219829
* VOSS: Collaborative Research:  Impact of In-Process Moderation on Open Innovation Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Arvind Malhotra, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2015
* USD 91,356.00

Increasingly, firms and organizations are creating structured challenges to spur
innovation and address both economic and societal issues. Open innovation
virtual organizations are formed to respond to a "challenge call" describing the
need, providing specifications for desired solutions and setting a deadline for
submissions. Usually, this challenge call is delivered on a public forum with an
invitation to those with expertise to share their solutions and an incentive for
the best solution. In addition, a cyberinfrastructure is established to support
the development and delivery of solutions. Solution proposers often participate
in an online discussion forum where a social infrastructure is established with
norms governing forum behavior. At the end of the challenge, an award is
announced to the best solution provider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The incentives
provided in most challenges inhibit knowledge sharing among contributors and
collaboration is rare. Consequently, there is limited potential to involve
diverse and unexpected innovation sources in solution development. This project
will develop a sociotechnical cyber infrastructure that manages the tensions
inherent in open innovation virtual organizations to encourage collaboration
among open innovation participants while mobilizing the energy and focus created
by the competition of the open innovation challenge. Through a series of open
innovation natural experiments we will compare various interventions aimed at
informing participants about collaborative ways to contribute and identify
effective techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Challenge calls can be an effective
innovation technique applying science and engineering to important societal
issues. These new platforms are being used to find solutions for such diverse
problems as developing an economical low energy use lightbulb, focused drug
discovery, and reducing barriers facing returning veterans in higher education.
However, the methods currently used in challenges discourage the kind of
collaboration that would be needed to leverage diverse ideas and generate
greater innovation. This project will develop methods to encourage collaboration
among challenge participants and help public and private sector organizations
find new and creative solutions to complex problems.