* 1219154
* SHF: Small: Bit-level Formal Verification: Keeping Pace with Industrial Needs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Robert Brayton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 450,000.00

More and more devices are being designed to process data in digital form
including TVs, phones, cameras, music, computers, software, avionics, and
encryption devices. Verification is the process of ensuring that designs are
correct and that the devices do what is intended. A design error can have
important consequences, from having to recall millions of devices resulting in
the loss of time and money, to a failure in a mission or safety critical
application, possibly causing loss of life. Simulation is the most easily
applied method of verification, but it is inherently incomplete and cannot give
strong guarantees for correctness. Formal verification is a powerful supplement,
or sometimes alternative, to simulation-based approaches. It can produce a
mathematical proof of correctness, or expose subtle bugs in a design not
uncovered by simulation. Formal methods have seen great progress in the last
decade, allowing them to scale up to larger problems where they can replace
simulation. Similar progress in the next decade would have a significant impact
in not only keeping design costs down and better guarantying safety in critical
applications, but also in improving design reliability and enhancing quality by
allowing aggressive logic optimization techniques to be applied and successfully
verified, a current stumbling block in power optimization. This project proposes
to research the fundamental algorithms of formal verification with the goals of
(i) innovating new methods in formal verification, including new algorithms and
better data structures; (ii) implementing and evaluating these in a common,
industrial-strength system, and (iii) promoting the results to the academic,
governmental, and industrial communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although, the
focus of this proposal is on the formal verification of micro-electronic systems
and software, the core techniques used in formal verification are very general
and can immediately impact many other application areas, such as cryptographic,
biologic and health-care systems. Improved scalability of the techniques may
well open up wider applicability in new domains such as synthetic biology,
software synthesis and areas where safety is a critical issue such as automotive
and aviation control systems. In addition, the enhanced ability to verify
equivalence of hardware and software systems encourages the use of advanced
synthesis techniques, resulting for example in improved speed, power, and area
utilization in micro-chips.