* 1219212
* RI: Small: Making sense of incomplete sensor data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Friedrich Sommer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 427,097.00

This project focuses on how to reveal the whole from only partial measurements.
Often, physical variables can only be incompletely measured. For example, the
state-of-the-art techniques to record brain activity (multi-electrode recordings
of local field potentials or fMRI measurements) give only a partial account of
the activity patterns of large numbers of neurons. In the course of this
project, Fritz Sommer, Ph.D., and his collaborators from the University of
California, investigate and develop methods for recovering complex multi-
dimensional data structure from incomplete measurements. In the general case,
when measurements are made (or "subsampled") at a rate lower than a mathematical
limit called the Nyquist limit, the original signal cannot be fully
reconstructed. However, the recent theory of compressed sensing (CS)
demonstrated that subsampling below the Nyquist limit can be lossless if the
signal to be compressed has sparse structure. The established theory of CS
explains when full recovery from incomplete measurements is possible and
provides efficient algorithms for full data reconstruction. This result is
extremely relevant because many important classes of sensor signals, such as
natural images and sounds, have an approximately sparse structure.

The current project explores whether the principle of CS can allow
reconstruction of data structure from measurements that subsample an unknown
signal in an unknown fashion. Standard CS cannot reconstruct the signal in such
situations because the algorithm requires knowledge of how the signal was
subsampled and what its structure is. Dr. Sommer and his team plan to develop
methods for data reconstruction that can be performed with the subsampled data
alone. The idea is to combine CS, a principle about measuring a signal with
sparse structure, with sparse coding (SC), a principle for learning efficient
representations of signals with sparse structure. Preliminary results suggest
that this combination of methods, called adaptive compressed sensing (ACS), can
indeed "learn" the map for recovering the full data from the subsamples alone
(Isely et al. 2011). The team will investigate under what conditions a similar
result holds for the large class of real-world sensor data that are not exactly
sparse but can be well-approximated by sparse representations. Also being
developed are methods on how to draw inferences and make decisions based on
incomplete measurements. In particular, a pilot investigation in collaboration
with Dr. Bosco Tjan's lab at the University of Southern California will explore
whether ACS can be applied to improve the decoding of fMRI data.