* 1219220
* CSR: Small: Scalable Fine-Grain Lineage for Debugging Data-Intensive Workflows
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Alin Deutsch, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

This project addresses the next major impediment to the continued
adoption&lt;br/&gt;of "big-data" analytics---the management of their life cycle,
which&lt;br/&gt;includes debugging, tuning, and auditing. Today, data-intensive
analytics&lt;br/&gt;are improving operations across multiple industries,
translating terabytes&lt;br/&gt;of raw data into useful data analysis. Taking
advantage of big data will&lt;br/&gt;be necessary to sustain competitive
advantages for areas ranging from power&lt;br/&gt;generation, to retail, oil
exploration, manufacturing, various scientific&lt;br/&gt;disciplines, and
national security. However, the extreme scalability of&lt;br/&gt;these data
processing architectures hides inefficiencies and
obfuscates&lt;br/&gt;performance analysis, creating both obvious and hidden
costs to their&lt;br/&gt;adoption. Tuning and debugging large data-intensive
workflows is currently&lt;br/&gt;a black art that mostly consists of tedious
manual analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to dramatically alter
how data scientists design and&lt;br/&gt;debug their analytics to sidestep this
authoring and deployment bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the PI's are
developing scalable, efficient architectures&lt;br/&gt;for capturing fine-grain
data lineage, information that tracks the use of&lt;br/&gt;data through the
analytic pipeline, from a range of data-intensive scalable&lt;br/&gt;computing
(DISC) systems. Such lineage serves as a basis for
discovering&lt;br/&gt;inefficiencies and suggesting optimizations via step-wise
debugging, fault&lt;br/&gt;tracing, anomaly detection, and lineage-driven data
cleaning and data&lt;br/&gt;mining. The development and open-source release of
such lineage-capture&lt;br/&gt;and analysis platforms promises to dramatically
accelerate the adoption of&lt;br/&gt;big-data analytics.