* 1219274
* AF: Small: Theory of Molecular Programming: Computability and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* David Doty, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 425,000.00

The ability of scientists and engineers to organize and control matter at the
nanoscale is rapidly improving as ever more complicated molecular systems are
being built. It is becoming clear that a systematic approach is needed to guide
molecular engineers as to the kinds of systems that are useful to construct and
are capable of interesting behavior. Consider the state of computer science in
the 1940's, at the dawn of the information revolution. A handful of special-
purpose, error-prone computers had been built. Alan Turing and others had just
initiated the theoretical study of computability theory, which tells us what
computers can do given unlimited resources. It was to be 20 years before the
advent of computational complexity theory, the study of what computers can do
given limited resources. Researchers find themselves in a similar position today
in molecular computing. Experimental work in this area is becoming more and more
sophisticated. DNA strand displacement has been used to construct a logic
circuit, whose components are free-floating DNA strands and complexes, capable
of computing square roots. DNA tile assembly has been used to implement cellular
automata capable of growing into fractal patterns and counting in binary. DNA
origami is enabling precise control and placement of a variety of molecular
structures and systems. The PIs believe that molecular programming will
ultimately allow fabrication and control of nanoscale and macroscopic artifacts
whose nanoscale parts are arranged with nanoscale precision, that these
artifacts will have complexity comparable to that of biological organisms, and
that molecular fabrication paradigms will be inspired by biological growth and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigation of precisely what feats are
possible and impossible to implement with molecular systems, using rigorous
mathematical models, is a primary aim in this proposal. Work will focus on the
tradeoffs between various resource bounds that arise uniquely from molecular
programming. These include number of distinct molecular species, number of bond
types, amount of fuel molecules consumed, and time or volume required for
assembly/computation. Molecular resources such as molecular motion, rigidity,
randomness and nondeterminism will be studied. Today, a proper understanding of
which tasks are efficiently executable by chemistry is totally absent. The major
goals of this project are to develop this understanding and provide a
theoretical foundation for the systematic development of molecular
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes funding for summer
undergraduate students, and the PIs will act as advisees for senior-year
undergraduate projects. Additionally, the PIs will be involved in teaching
students that are not traditionally associated with computer science so that
future molecular engineers can be exposed to methods and practices needed for
designing complex nanoscale chemical systems. Students will learn the theory of
molecular programming and be part of a new generation to work in this exciting
field. The proposed research will be complemented by educational and outreach
activities with underrepresented minorities from local K-12 schools.