* 1219059
* SHF:Small: Data Triggered Threads for Removing Redundant Execution and Increasing Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Dean Tullsen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

As high-performance general-purpose processors advance further into the chip
multiprocessor era, with ever increasing core counts, the industry faces two
huge challenges. The first is how to effectively use that hardware parallelism
when much of the available software does not parallelize easily. The second
challenge is managing the power and energy consumed by these processors. Given
constrained power, we can only scale performance if we improve the performance
delivered per Watt. &lt;br/&gt;Data-triggered threads (DTT) is a new programming
and execution model designed to address both of these issues. Any conventional
architecture that exploits parallelism does so by initiating new parallel
computation based on control flow ? that is, execution (i.e., the core?s program
counter) reaches a fork instruction or maybe a pthread create call. DTT instead
spawns a new thread when data in memory is changed. The programmer specifies a
function that is not attached to a set of call sites (a place in the program
where the function is called), but rather is attached to a variable or even a
field in a data structure type. When that variable is modified by the program, a
thread in another core (or multithreading context) is automatically spawned to
execute the data-triggered thread, containing code that depends on the changed
data.&lt;br/&gt;Data-triggered threads provide two key advantages over
traditional mechanisms for describing parallelism. The first is that the
dependent computation becomes available immediately, as soon as the source data
is modified. The second is that the dependent computation need only be executed
if the triggering data is actually modified ? in many cases it is not. This work
exploits a huge new opportunity to eliminate redundant computation. In the C
SPEC benchmarks, 78% of loads are redundant (meaning the same load fetches the
same value as the last time it went to the same address). The computation which
operates on those values is often also redundant. Researchers in computer
architecture and related areas have been working to reduce the power consumed by
each instruction, and have made steady progress. It is far preferable, though,
to just not execute those instructions ? no power or energy optimization will
beat that.&lt;br/&gt;This research is exploring a number of opportunities to
exploit this new execution model, including: (1) Data triggered threads via
architectural support, (2) software-only data triggered threads, (3) data
triggered threads to complement existing parallel applications, (4) automatic
generation of data triggered threads in the compiler, and (5) programming
experience with data triggered threads ? how does DTT code written from scratch
differ from programs modified to use DTT, what kind of code will novice
programmers produce, and how does that impact the architectural and software
runtime implementations.&lt;br/&gt;Generation-to-generation performance scaling
of processors is critically important to the national and world economy ? not
just to hardware vendors, but also the software industries that sell products
every time someone upgrades their system. The data triggered threads programming
and execution model represents solutions to the two key barriers to performance
scaling. It addresses the parallelism crisis by giving the programmer a new way
to express parallelism. It addresses the power problem in the most effective way
possible ? by not executing computation that does not need to be done.