* 1219836
* Public Observatory Project -  Transition Phase
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* David DeVorkin, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2014
* USD 210,000.00

AST-1219836

This award provides critical support to continue operating the Public
Observatory at the National Air and Space Museum (NASM) beyond the initial two-
year period of construction, opening, and initial operation, and to keep it
viable until it can become a permanent fully endowed education and public
outreach feature on the National Mall.

Visitors look through a fully professional telescope and an array of smaller
specialized solar telescopes and have their experience enhanced and deepened by
activity-based programming included in the observatory, adjacent to it, and in
the Museum proper. NASM staff have successfully tested programs that
synergistically combine the planetarium, the observatory, gallery tours and
discovery stations, using support from several sources, including previous NSF
awards. This has led to the Observatory becoming part of a major capital
campaign to ensure its longevity. The present bridge award will support daytime
and evening programming at the Observatory, increasing daily informal access by
the public. It will also provide an effective training ground for undergraduate
science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET) students to act as
mentors and guides, learning to communicate the excitement of their science.

The heightened positive visibility of an SMET facility on the National Mall
makes the clear intellectual statement that astronomy is part of our culture,
and the Public Observatory is a physical personification of the Smithsonian's
goal to improve science literacy in the Nation. The Observatory also makes
visible the national observatory system, and symbolizes the merit-based
philosophy of that system. In these first two years, trained astronomy
educators, interns, paid student Explainers and a host of volunteers enabled
over 100,000 looks through telescopes by tens of thousands of people, in all
categories imaginable from casual tourists to professional astronomers to local
families to foreign travelers, to school and day camp groups.