* 1219653
* Geochronology of Bedrock-hosted Secondary Iron Oxides and Shallow Crustal Fluid-flow and Brittle Deformation Histories
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Peter Reiners, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,539.00

Bedrock-hosted secondary Fe-oxide minerals are practically ubiquitous in faults,
fractures, and localized high porosity zones in shallow crustal rocks. Unlike
primary minerals, their formation is usually the result of reactions associated
with fluid migration long after formation of the host rock. Radioisotopic dates
and compositional information preserved in secondary Fe-oxides have the
potential to reveal much about the timing and dynamics of regional fluid flow
histories, as well as processes that create high permeability zones, like
brittle deformation, in bedrock. Despite their potential, bedrock-hosted
secondary oxides have proven difficult to date by radioisotopic means. However,
new results show that, in many cases, (U-Th)/He dating provides apparently
reliable and geologically consistent dates suggesting significant potential for
this approach. This project will develop methods for radioisotopic dating and
geochemical characterization of bedrock-hosted secondary iron-oxide minerals and
focuses primarily on (U-Th)/He geo- and thermochronology of hematite and
associated iron-oxide minerals in these environments, combined with
characterization of trace element and oxygen isotopic compositions of the
minerals. The goal is to use dates and compositions of these secondary phases to
constrain the timing and conditions of brittle deformation that created the
voids in which the minerals formed, and understand the timing and conditions of
fluid flow that resulted in their precipitation. This project develops these
approaches in a range of geologic settings, primarily in the western U.S., where
results can be compared with other geologic and geochronologic
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dates and compositions of secondary iron-
oxides have the potential to improve the understanding of the timing and
conditions of a wide range of important processes ranging from brittle fault
movement, to groundwater migration, to atmospheric conditions, to ancient
episodes of bedrock exposure. This project will also provide support for
continued community use of the Arizona Radiogenic Helium Dating Lab, and support
for a summer student workshop on low-temperature thermochronology, allowing
visiting students to perform analyses and learn how to use and interpret
thermochronology in geologic research.