* 1219585
* Isotopic Investigations of Ancient Maya Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* T. Douglas Price, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 96,546.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. T. Douglas Price of the University
of Wisconsin-Madison, together with American and Mexican colleagues, will use
cutting-edge methods for the analysis of ancient human skeletons to study
patterns of human movement and cultural change over time in the ancient Maya
civilization in northern Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico. The research focuses on
the dramatic changes that took place there between roughly 500 and 1000 AD. This
area witnessed substantial population movement for a variety of reasons
including colonization, warfare, and climate change. These changes likely
involved the movement of outsiders into this region. Questions concerning
population mobility, conquest, colonization, and trade are paramount. This
project is designed to identify the non-local individuals who came to this area
and to better understand patterns of movement and interaction across ancient
Mexico.

Movement will be assessed by measuring the isotopic composition of human teeth.
Tooth enamel forms during early childhood and its chemical composition remains
largely unchanged through life and after death. These isotope ratios vary
geographically across Mesoamerica and can provide a signature for place of
birth. The researchers will measure strontium and oxygen isotope ratios in
approximately 400 samples from a series of archaeological sites in the northern
Maya region and compare these values among the sites and with similar
information from elsewhere is Mesoamerica. They will also examine the remains of
some 40 sacrificial victims from the Sacred Cenote at Chichén, seeking
information on place of origin for this unusual group of individuals. This
information will allow the identification of individuals of non-local origin and
in some cases will suggest their place of origin.

The goal is to determine rates of movement and differences related to age, sex,
and/or status, in order to characterize patterns of mobility in this region.
Where possible, the research will investigate chronological changes in mobility.
This will allow one to put available information from major centers like Chichén
Itza and others in comparative context and consider the commonalities and
distinctions among these centers. The research will provide insight into how
human mobility effected cultural change in the Maya region in the past.

The project provides an opportunity to resolve important archaeological
questions about human migration in a major culture area of the New World,
including the rates and sources of movement into important centers, the place of
origin of certain individuals, relationships between different groups, and
differences in migration based on age, gender, and status. The project is
international and multidisciplinary. The study will demonstrate the application
of new scientific methods to old archaeological questions and involve a number
of archaeologists in discussion of the results. It is anticipated that at least
one PhD thesis, and the instruction of a number of students in laboratory work
and preparation of samples will result from this project. Student training is an
important goal. Publication of the results of the study will provide important
information for future studies and increase understanding of ancient
Mesoamerica.