* 1219542
* INTERNATIONAL: The energetic cost of an acidic, warm environment - Changes in lipid consumption of Pocillopora damicornis larvae
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 01/31/2016
* USD 12,090.00

This award provides funding to support dissertation research in Taiwan by Ph.D.
candidate, Emily Rivest, in her study of the impact of ocean acidification on
propagation of ocean corals. Ms. Rivest will undertake joint research with
colleagues at the National Museum of Marine Biology and Aquarium (NMMBA) in
Taiwan, where she will spend three months conducting experimental tests on the
effects of acidity and temperature rise on the physiology, metabolism and
survival of coral larvae, specifically Pocillopora damicornis larvae in the
planktonic state. The study ranges from the analysis of the whole organism to
its genetics and molecular biology. The systematic studies will produce data
that can enhance understanding of the changing energy costs of larvae duration
under varying stress conditions, which is relevant to sustainability of coral
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the great dangers of global climate
change involves the combination of rising ocean temperatures and rising acidity,
which results from increased atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide. These
increasingly stressful conditions can impact negatively on the sustainability of
coral reefs, which are critical to ocean ecology. The results of this study can
quantify the risks to coral survival and perhaps guide methods of remediation.
Also, the project will enhance the student?s international relationships for
future research collaborations.