* 1219369
* Collaborative Research:   Super-Alfvenic propagation of energy released during magnetic reconnection in the Earth's magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* James Drake, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,872.00

Magnetic reconnection plays a fundamental role in magnetotail dynamics,
reconfiguring magnetic topology to release stored magnetic energy. The nature of
the energy propagating away from the reconnection site has implications for our
understanding of transient magnetotail phenomena such as bursty bulk flows,
dipolarization fronts and substorms. While bulk ion flows accelerated by
reconnection have been measured directly by spacecraft and have been linked to
the generation of aurora the propagation speed of this energy is limited to the
Alfvén speed and there is evidence that energy must propagate faster than the
Alfvén speed to account for substorm onset. Less well understood, however, are
super-Alfvénic flows of energy associated with kinetic electron dynamics which
tend to occur near the magnetic separatrices. The quadrupolar magnetic fields in
this region associated with Hall dynamics have been shown to be the
manifestation of a kinetic Alfvén wave (KAW) that propagates super-Alfvénically
parallel to the magnetic field and generates substantial Poynting flux
associated with energetic electron streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigation will study the basic physics mechanisms controlling the super-
Alfvénic propagation of reconnection energy with focus roughly on the mid-tail
region. The study will use kinetic particle-in-cell simulations (PIC) and
satellite observations of reconnection from the Cluster and THEMIS spacecraft.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This should be a significant step towards understanding
the causal relationships between reconnection onset and transient magnetotail
phenomena such as bursty bulk flows, dipolarization fronts, and substorm onset.
However the potential benefit of this research extends beyond magnetotail
research because propagation of reconnection energy is an important problem for
a wide range of natural plasmas and laboratory plasmas.