* 1219397
* 2012 Summer Bioengineering Conference, Puerto Rico during June 20-23, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Dawn Elliott, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 04/30/2013
* USD 31,225.00

1219397&lt;br/&gt;Elliott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bioengineering Division (BED)
of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers hosts the annual Summer
Bioengineering Conference (SBC). The 2012 SBC, to be held June 20-23 at the el
Conquistador Resort in Fajardo, Puerto Rico, will be the 14th installment of
this conference. The budget request of $25,000 to NSF is to aid in reducing
student registration fees and for educational activities including an
internationally renowned plenary lecturer, educational workshops, and student-
focused grand challenges. The conference format will be six parallel sessions of
oral presentations. All technical presentations will be two-page extended
abstracts and compiled in a CD format, distributed to all registrants. The
primary purpose of this conference is to promote state-of-the-art research,
collaboration, and scientific discourse in the broad field of bioengineering
with a focus on cutting edge biomechanics encompassing molecular to tissue and
organism-level approaches. This conference highlights and encourages student
participation to advance the education and career aspirations of these future
leaders of bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The SBC is
an extremely high quality scientific and intellectually stimulating
interdisciplinary meeting. It is the premiere meeting for bioengineering with a
focus on biomechanical engineering. The theme of this year's conference is The
Art and Science of Imaging as it applies to biomechanical engineering. Medical
imaging is fast becoming an essential tool, both for making fundamental
discoveries and for translating them to routine clinical use. This year, for the
first time, SBC will highlight Imaging as a way to educate and inspire our
attendees to consider the use and integration of imaging in the biomechanical
engineering disciplines. An outstanding plenary lecture will be given by Dr.
Mark Henkelman (University of Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children). Dr.
Henkelman is an internationally recognized pioneer in magnetic resonance flow
and motion imaging. Dr. Henkelman's lecture will be designed to introduce our
audience to the state of the art in human and small animal imaging and its
applications to various areas of biomechanical engineering research. Six
workshops will be presented: 4D Phase Contrast MRI for Hemodynamics, Solid
Mechanics over Hierarchical Scales by Noninvasive Imaging, Bringing Assistive
Devices to Market, Tips for Tenure in Bioengineering, Teaching Cell &amp; Tissue
Engineering, and Biotransport Education. We will also have three Challenges:
Undergraduate Design, Grand Challenge in Predicting Knee Loads, and
Computational Fluid Dynamics Challenge. Challenge sessions highlight student
achievements in engineering design and modeling and rapidly advance the field
through simultaneously encouraging competition and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to the direct
impact this conference will have on the bioengineering community, it will serve
an important cross-fertilization role. It is expected to have bioengineers,
engineers from other disciplines, cell and molecular biologists, biochemists,
biophysicists, and other scientists participating. In that manner, this
conference will have a much broader impact than if it were to be attended by
just the biomechanics community. Technical content of the meeting will be
available to multiple societies and the public at large via a CD and the
conference web site. Importantly, we expect that more than 50% of the attendees
will be students and postdoctoral researchers. This will provide a broad impact
for the current times as well as for the future, as these students will benefit
by participation in the meeting and through the material presented by the
plenary speakers, workshops, and challenges.