* 1219499
* Found In Transition: An Archaeology of Village Life in Siin (Senegal) Before and After Atlantic contacts (AD 1300-1700)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Francois Richard, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 170,858.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Fran√ßois Richard and an
international team of researchers will conduct two field seasons of excavations
in the province of Siin (Senegal) between January 2013 and July 2014. The
project is a collaborative effort combining U.S. and Senegalese archaeologists
to examine the centuries immediately preceding and following the advent of
Atlantic contacts in Senegal in 1444. The Atlantic era is one of the most
intensely researched stretches of human history and a defining moment in
Africa's past, yet it is also a relatively poorly understood period. The
"transitional period" (AD 1300-1700) connecting Iron Age societies to the early
centuries of global encounters is particularly obscure in West Africa. This is
in part because knowledge of the period rests on a small corpus of testimonies
left by European navigators, which offer a limited purview of African societies
at the time of contact and say little about them before that. Archaeology can
redress these difficulties, by offering empirical glimpses of the African past
before the advent of documented history and generating independent evidence to
complement historical records during the Atlantic era. When confronted with
other sources, archaeological datasets can point to gaps or inconsistencies in
historical understanding, and craft a richer portrayal of African
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Siin provides a compelling point of entry
into questions of historical transitions in Senegambia, the area of Africa with
the longest record of contacts with Europe. Between 1300-1700, the region
witnessed momentous events, involving massive population migrations, the
development of a centralized kingdom, and the incorporation of the region into
global circuits of exchange. Despite its small size, the Siin polity was deeply
implicated in the historical processes that fashioned the Senegambian past, and
its turbulent history is poised to cast critical light on the political,
economic, and cultural transformations that accompanied African communities'
transitions into the Atlantic era. This history has left significant material
traces in the form of ancient villages and other vestiges of past social life,
which are readily amenable to archaeological analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
investigate the question of Atlantic transitions in Siin, the research team will
gather archaeological information about the ways in which village communities
negotiated transformations in regional economies. This will be implemented
through large-scale excavations at two sites, Diohine (S260) located in the
hinterland and Mbissel (S106) situated on the coast. These two sites were
selected on the basis of initial archaeological testing, which revealed well-
preserved village remains, with multiple occupations spanning the period of
interest. Excavations will focus on exposing broad horizontal surfaces to reveal
relations between different components of the sites. Particular attention will
be given to residential contexts, trash middens, and activity areas. The goals
for this phase of the project are to get a better understanding of six
dimensions of village experience during the "transitional period": 1) Occupation
histories and social space, 2) trade, 3) domestic and craft production, 4)
consumption practices, 5) technology, and 6) ritual life. Collected artifacts
(local ceramics, tobacco pipes, metal objects, stone tools, beads, imported
goods), their contexts of recovery, and changing distributions over time and
space will help to address these multiple questions. Specialized compositional
analysis of ceramics will provide additional information about the source of
pottery and its circulation. A pilot program to test the feasibility of soil
chemistry data will be implimented. Collectively, these different strands of
evidence will provide invaluable data on village life in Siin, given the
complete absence of thorough, long-term, extensive excavation programs in the
region. They will enable the compilation of village profile in the area between
AD 1300 and 1700, and permit an investigation of rural trajectories in times of
global entanglements. As currently planned, the first phase of the project will
begin in January 2013 and consist of excavations at Diohine. The second phase
will take place the following year, and move the seat of excavations to Mbissel.
In both contexts, excavations will be complemented by extensive mapping within
the sites' immediate peripheries. This work, which is designed to situate
occupation histories in broader spatial context, will expand previous mapping
and survey work conducted at the sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to
broader impacts, the study will foster new understanding about an obscure yet
foundational period of African history, which has never been the object of
systematic investigations in Senegal. This, in turn, will provide the basis for
major revisions in historical portrayals of Senegal and Atlantic Africa, and key
contributions to scholarly research on indigenous people's long-term engagement
with global economic expansion. The project will also be a forum for cross-
cultural collaboration and learning between Senegalese, European, and American
students and professionals, and consultation with the rural communities of Siin
about their past. In addition to the published materials that will come out of
this research, we will also disseminate results to broader publics, and plan on
staging an exhibit at the National Art Museum in Dakar.