* 1219570
* TWC: Small: Collaborative Research: Enhancing the Safety and Trustworthiness of Medical Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 325,000.00

Personal healthcare systems based on wearable/implantable medical devices are
being increasingly deployed for a variety of diagnostic, monitoring, and
therapeutic applications. A consequence of the increased functional complexity,
software programmability, and wireless network connectivity of such devices is
that they are now vulnerable to security attacks that have plagued general-
purpose computing systems. Recent demonstration of security attacks on
commercially deployed systems has raised medical device security concerns
significantly. Unfortunately, medical devices come with extreme size/power
constraints and unique usage models, making it infeasible to simply borrow
conventional security solutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
developing a non-intrusive medical security monitor that snoops on all wireless
communication to/from medical devices and uses multi-layered anomaly detection
to identify potentially malicious transactions. While formal methods have been
previously used to check for implementation flaws, they are not geared towards
verifying the safety behavior of the medical device software in its interactions
with the real world, which can expose logical flaws as well. The work
investigates these interactions by transforming properties specified at the
real-world interfaces (sensors and actuators) into program properties against
which the medical device software can be verified. The findings will be
disseminated through conferences and journals. The hardware and software
developed will be placed in the public domain, and disseminated to the industry.
The knowledge developed will be integrated into various courses. Undergraduates
will be encouraged to perform independent research on this topic. Fellowships
and outreach programs will be leveraged to encourage participation of female and
minority students.