* 1219627
* Oceanographic Technical Services, R/V Oceanus, 2012-2016
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2018
* Daryl Swensen, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2018
* USD 3,690,726.00

Oregon State University proposes to support technical services on R/V Oceanus, a
177? general purpose research vessel as part of the US Academic Fleet scheduled
by University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). The vessel is
owned by the National Science Foundation. The proposal requests support for both
basic and specialized services. For basic services, they will provide one or two
shipboard technicians on each cruise of R/V Oceanus to support seagoing research
projects and to maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified users items from
their pool of shared-use research instrumentation. As part of specialized
services, they will continue to operate and maintain the NORCOR facility, a
shared use coring facility available to all operators. The SWAP program, which
was previously funded under this program as a specialized service will be
discontinued. Budget constraints have made it impossible for the Program to
continue to support this endeavor. It will be supported, to the extent possible,
through basic services. The budget included with this report is for the first
year of a 5-year continuing grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under
criterion two, providing infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel
and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The support of maintenance and operation of shared-use
instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.