* 1219635
* Connecting RMBL to the Larger World
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 118,733.00

The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) is awarded a grant to enhance
its research and education programs installing a set of radios to bring
increased bandwidth to the station. A 501c3 organization, RMBL advances the deep
scientific understanding of nature that promotes informed stewardship of the
Earth. Each year RMBL hosts 200 student researchers and scientists from 100+
institutions, providing access to protected research sites and the research
facilities needed to serve as a bridge between field sites and their home
institutions. Research at RMBL has provided critical insights into a range of
ecological and evolutionary questions, including evolution, stream ecology,
climate change, population dynamics, behavioral ecology, and mutualisms.
Additionally, research at RMBL has informed policy on management of streams,
water and air quality, and climate change. This grant will pay for installation
of a series of radios that will bring bandwidth to the station. Currently RMBL
obtains internet through a fiberoptic cable on a system operated by Qwest. This
cable provides a T1 line, with a capacity of 1.5 Mbps. Given the large number of
scientists and students hosted at RMBL, this bandwidth is woefully inadequate.
By installing radios linking the station to a local service provider's Optical
Carrier- 3 Internet Connection, the station will be able to substantially
increase bandwidth on a cost effective basis when compared to alternate
solutions.

This project will increase RMBL's ability to document and understand a changing
world. Currently only a small percentage of the information collected by
scientists makes it into the public domain. By increasing bandwidth to the
station, RMBL will be able to more effectively support the students and
scientists work at the station, as well as increase the flow of information from
the station to the larger world, including information from RMBL's automated
sensors and data collected by scientists. This grant will support education
activities. Both undergraduate and graduate students work directly with research
scientists, including students funded through NSF's Research Experience for
Undergraduates program. Increased bandwidth will help students do background
work for their research projects, as well as support teaching them how to make
their data publicly available. For more information about RMBL, please visit the
website at http://www.rmbl.org/.