* 1219505
* Chicoloapan Viejo: a Rural Perspective on the Organization and Decline of the Teotihuacan State
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Sarah Clayton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 179,837.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Sarah Clayton and
colleagues from the U.S. and Mexico will investigate the regional organization
and decline of an early urban state from the perspective of daily life at
Chicoloapan Viejo, an ancient rural settlement in the southeastern Basin of
Mexico. Chicoloapan Viejo was occupied for nearly two thousand years, through
the rise and dissolution of the successive Teotihuacan, Toltec, and Aztec
states. Its longevity and location on the regional margins of these societies
make it a strategic site for advancing knowledge of the sociopolitical and
economic relationships among urban capitals and rural communities. This study
concerns rural domestic life during the period associated with the height and
collapse of Teotihuacan (100 BC-AD 650) and the subsequent reorganization of the
region during the Epiclassic period (AD 650-850). As a powerful, multiethnic,
urban society without precedent in North America, Teotihuacan is among the
world's most fascinating early states, and yet a little is currently known of
its administration of the regional population. For example, were rural
populations relatively self-sufficient, economically, or tightly linked to
regional exchange networks that included or were managed by the capital? Were
rural households socially organized like those of urban Teotihuacan, and how did
they change after the collapse of the state? Did this dramatic political
transformation significantly disrupt social and economic practices among rural
settlements, as it did in the capital, or were rural households resilient?

The research questions central to this study necessitate basic information
concerning household economic practices and social organization. Two seasons of
excavation involving the lateral exposure of domestic architecture and activity
areas will be conducted, each followed by one year of analysis of spatial data,
excavated artifacts, faunal and archaeobotanical remains, and floor sediments.
Data from contexts including middens, house floors, and burials will permit an
examination of diversity among households in social, economic, and ritual
practices as well as changes in these practices through time.

This research advances knowledge of the earliest urbanized sociopolitical
landscapes by providing needed information concerning rural life. The
longitudinal view offered by this project contributes important information
about how early states such as Teotihuacan met the challenges of regional
administration and why they fell apart. This research is timely, as the
investigation of ancient rural communities is increasingly hampered by the
destruction of archaeological sites caused by Mexico City's urban sprawl.
Chicoloapan Viejo itself is imminently threatened by the construction of new
roads and houses, and it is one of only a few remaining archaeological sites
where questions of rural organization in the ancient Basin of Mexico may be
investigated.

This project provides opportunities for graduate students from multiple
institutions to generate data for use in their own doctoral dissertations and to
contribute to future research in the region. Scholarly interaction between the
U.S. and Mexico is supported through collaboration with Mexican colleagues.
Finally, the project contributes to the conservation of small archaeological
sites in the Mexico City area by increasing local awareness of archaeological
resources and cultural heritage.