* 1219537
* EAGER: Marine biopolymers as tracers of major biogeochemical processes: Using proteomics and antibody-sensor technology
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Monica Orellana, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2015
* USD 299,802.00

Recent advances in proteomics, biomarkers and biosensor technology sciences
enable new approaches to understanding major biogeochemical processes. This
project will examine the physicochemical reactivity of a model protein "RuBisCO"
in seawater, and will quantify RuBisCO along ocean transect Line P (48째39.0' N,
126째40.0' W to 50째00' N, 145째00' W) in the North Pacific Ocean. The project will
use two independent methods that complement and validate each other: immune-
sensors and multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) mass
spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical analyses have shown that a significant fraction
of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the ocean is in the form of proteins.
Proteins are a rich source of biological information and their amino acid
sequence provides a direct link to the coding DNA of an organism. Identification
of proteins in DOM opens a window to understanding the complex sources and
dynamics of biopolymeric material. Furthermore, proteins represent the catalytic
potential and reactivity of an organism and, collectively, of an ecosystem. Most
importantly, the information also provides a direct link between biological and
phylogenetic presence and biogeochemistry. The distributions of proteins that
are specific to major processes (e.g., RuBisCO to carbon fixation, nitrogenase
to diazotrophy) can be used to infer information that has been hidden until now.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have recently demonstrated the deep distribution
of RubisCO in the North Pacific and discovered this enzyme to be at high
concentrations throughout the water column (to depths &gt;3000 m) underlying
highly productive equatorial and subpolar systems, and low concentrations under
the oligotrophic subtropical gyre. This single protein represents ~2% of the
largely unidentified dissolved organic nitrogen pool at depths &gt;1000 m. The
deep distribution of RuBisCO shows that hydrographic fronts in the surface ocean
affect the distribution of recently-produced organic matter thousands of meters
below the ocean surface, and the enzyme traces the transport of deep organic
matter by the deep ocean circulation away from regions of input. These findings
suggest that the identification and quantification of additional biomarker
proteins will provide a powerful approach to understanding the associated
biogeochemical pathways. While potentially transformative, the protocols need to
be explored and validated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study , the PIs will
compare and validate their previous findings by understanding the
physicochemical reactivity of RuBisCO (and therefore other proteins) in seawater
samples in order to fully interpret and exploit the information held in protein
distributions; and they will quantify RuBisCO at Line P in fresh samples using
two independent and different methods that complement and validate each other:
immunosensors and multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry in a
coastal to open ocean transect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteomics is in its infancy in the aquatic
sciences and this research will help drive its development.Merging the sciences
of proteomics with biogeochemistry will leverage both. The Sorcerer II Global
Ocean Sampling (GOS) expedition predicted more than six million proteins in the
GOS database, almost twice the number of proteins present in the current
databases, adding an enormous diversity to the known protein families. Using
immunosensors coupled with S/MRM proteomics will provide information on the
cycling of RuBisCO as an actual biopolymers in the DOM pool. Current methods use
hydrolysis which solely examines single amino acids but erases the chemical
history of the proteins and the link between biology, phylogenetic presence, and
biogeochemistry. Protein immunosensors will allow in situ tracking of marine
proteins, their biosynthesis, transformation, and degradation in unconcentrated
seawater. Furthermore, understanding the formation, degradation, and
preservation of proteins in the DOC/DON (dissolved organic carbon/nitrogen)
pools will elucidate their role in global carbon and nitrogen cycling and will
greatly advance our knowledge of marine biogeochemistry.