* 1219067
* SHF:  Small: Incremental Inductive Verification: A New Direction for Model Checking
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Fabio Somenzi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 496,992.00

Hardware and software computer systems are integrated into many aspects of our
society, including medicine, transportation, financial markets, and
communication. Thus, the correctness of a computer system can be critical for
financial or even human safety reasons. Formal verification is a methodology for
finding errors and certifying that a system is free of errors. It complements
testing, which in practice can neither cover every possibility nor declare the
absence of errors. Because of the increasing complexity and prevalence of
computer systems in recent years, significant improvements in algorithms for
formal verification now have an immediate impact in computer system development,
which in turn decreases design costs, accelerates development, and results in
safer equipment.

This project builds on the success of the IC3 algorithm for verifying invariance
properties of digital hardware. IC3, introduced only two years ago, is already
used widely by hardware manufacturers and electronic design automation
companies. It is reported that it can, in practice, find deep bugs that are
difficult to find with testing, or obtain proofs that no other algorithm can
find. But achieving the next significant gain in performance requires moving
beyond the bit-level analysis that IC3 performs and instead considering designs
at the word level, that is, at a level in which whole registers are sometimes
considered rather just than their component latches. This project addresses this
challenge by developing a multi-domain version of IC3, as well as abstract
domains, for reasoning about equality, uninterpreted functions, and arithmetic
properties of circuits. A second component of this project is to extend the
incremental, inductive verification (IIV) methodology, of which IC3 was the
first instance, to analyze properties expressed in CTL and CTL*, which are
logics for expressing branching-time behavior. Increased expressiveness allows
analyzing more aspects of a design. A final component is to exploit the natural
parallelism of IIV algorithms through a distributed implementation.