* 1219390
* The Vulnerable North? Risk and Resilience in Alaskan Coastal Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Karen Hebert, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2015
* USD 242,429.00

A substantial body of research suggests that the circumpolar and subarctic North
is vulnerable to a range of threats, from climate change to economic crisis. Yet
less is known about how these assessments square with Northerners? own
perceptions and experiences of vulnerability. This three-year qualitative
research project examines how different groups of actors in Alaskan coastal
communities form knowledge about environmental and economic risk. It further
probes how engagement with risk knowledge affects the modes of social action
that contribute to resilience. The project?s two research sites are both rural
fishing regions with mixed Alaska Native and non-Native populations, but each
with a somewhat different risk profile: Bristol Bay in southwest Alaska is
embroiled in controversy over the proposed Pebble mine, while Sitka in southeast
Alaska is home to considerable scientific research on shifting ecosystems,
likely due to climate change. In each site, a team of researchers will use
ethnographic methodologies, including participant-observation and semi-
structured interviews, to determine how knowledge about risk is developed,
circulated, received, and used by community residents across generations and by
resident and non-resident experts and advocates. The research supported by this
award will contribute to scholarship on risk and provide a basis for more
appropriate design and communication of measures to mitigate risk and promote
resilience. It will also connect natural and social science research topics,
partner with local organizations, and engage stakeholders in knowledge
production. Community members and graduate students will be a part of mentored
research teams in each study fieldsite.