* 1219028
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Resilient Network Design for Massive Failures and Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* James Sterbenz, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2017
* USD 219,000.00

Society increasingly depends on networks in general and the Internet in
particular for just about every aspect of daily life. As the Internet increases
its reach in global scope, services traditionally implemented on separate
networks are increasingly subsumed by the Internet, either as overlays, via
gatewayed access, or as a replacement for legacy networks. With this growing
dependence on and integration of services in the Internet, come increasingly
severe consequences of disruption in networked services.

This collaborative project conducts systemic research on fundamental
understanding on network design for massive failures or attacks such as power
blackouts and natural disasters, as well as attacks against the physical, and
protocol infrastructure by intelligent adversaries. The novelty of the work is a
systemic approach to designing resilient and survivable networks by developing a
network topology generation, design, and analysis methodology that incorporates
a number of critical factors, with an optimization formulation that incorporates
geodiversity. Methodologies will assess vulnerabilities of existing networks and
to propose modifications to make them more resilient and survivable.
Furthermore, a novel approach is taken to understand resilient transport for
massive failures in a traffic-engineering framework so that applications can
exploit the structural diversity introduced in the network.

Broader Impact: The research aims to gain new understanding on how to design and
deploy resilient networks, with emphasis on surviving massive disruptions as a
result of large-scale disasters and coordinated attacks. The specific techniques
and mechanisms may be applied to improve the resilience of the current Internet
and its parts to better serve society, as well as to help drive the deign of the
Future Internet. The research will advance the state-of-the art in network
science and engineering. The principal investigators will make all results,
including analytic and simulation models and source code, publicly available to
the research community on a public wiki. Results will be disseminated in
conferences, journal papers, and books. The project will support the research of
two Ph.D. students with an effort to recruit students from under-represented
groups. The project results will contribute to the education of other students,
with direct input and class project participation in several courses at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, including a senior undergraduate and graduate
special topics courses on Science of Communication Networks and Resilient and
Survivable Networks at both The University of Kansas and the University of
Missouri-Kansas City.