* 1219357
* Ship Operations R/V Point Sur 2012 - 2016
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* James Harvey, San Jose State University Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2017
* USD 5,337,341.00

This award will fund the first of five years of operation under a renewal of the
NSF Cooperative Agreement, OCE- 0505385. Ship awards will be renegotiated each
year and is based on the number of days of ship time in support of NSF funded
research programs. R/V Pt. Sur, a NSF-owned research vessel, is operated as part
of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research
fleet by Moss Landing Marine Laboratories. In 2012, Pt. Sur anticipates
operating 102 days, of which 72 days will be in direct support of NSF peer-
reviewed sea-going work.

R/V Point Sur has been successfully operated by Moss Landing Marine
Laboratories (MLML) since 1986. MLML is located in Central California on the
Monterey Bay at the head of the deep undersea Monterey canyon and has unique
proximity to a wide variety of coastal, canyon and offshore study sites along
the Central CA coast The R/V Point Sur continues to serve scientists from
institutions around the world as well as institutions associated with the
Monterey Bay Crescent Ocean Research Consortium (MBCORC).

During 2012 the R/V Point Sur will provide ship time for several research and
marine science educational programs funded by the National Science Foundation
(NSF), the Office of Naval Research (ONR), the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute (MBARI), the Army Corps of Engineers, MLML and consortium campuses of
the California State University system. This proposal requests the funding
necessary to support the NSF portion of our operation that amounts to 63 days
out of a total schedule of 95 days at sea. These NSF days encompass 4 discrete
cruises. Two of these cruises are repeat users of the vessel (Bishop and McPhee-
Shaw) while the remaining cruises will be new. The first of these cruises will
take the ship off the coast of Oregon for CTD and mid-water trawling operations.
The second cruise represents a transit from the vessels homeport to Punta
Arenas, Chile. This transit is part of a larger project that involves science
support at Palmer Station, Antarctica. This represents one of the longest and
most logistically challenging cruises the vessel has ever undertaken. Funds have
been included in the current proposal to help prepare the vessel for this work.

Broader Impacts: The Moss Landing Marine Laboratories continues to be successful
in advancing the California State University's Center for Integrative Coastal
Observation, Research and Education program (CI-CORE,
http://www.mlml.calstate.edu/cicore/) and the Alliance for Coastal Technologies
program (ACT, http://www.actonline.ws/). As a key partner in both these efforts
MLML has been funded (at no cost to NSF) to provide instrumentation for the
underway measurement of surface water parameters (temperature, salinity,
fluorescence, oxygen, and turbidity) from a number of our vessels. As part of
the CI-CORE program these data will be formatted and made available on our web
site for educators, scientists, policy makers and the public. Various other
Federal, State and private supported work is also included in the schedule. The
MBARI maintains several moored arrays near the mouth of the Monterey Bay and
offshore that will be serviced using the R/V Point Sur. MLML will use
approximately 10 days of ship time in support of class cruises and thesis work
for the California State Universities (CSU) providing graduate and undergraduate
students valuable field time to gather data for class projects. These classes
include physical, chemical and biological oceanography, geology, ichthyology,
benthic ecology and marine mammal behavior. Several CSU instructors have taken
advantage of these class cruises by using them to help educate junior college
and high school students as well. In the past weve also opened the R/V Point Sur
to local middle school students and their parents for dockside tours and
informal talks about the local ocean environment.