* 1219020
* AF: Markov Chain Algorithms for Problems from Computer Science, Statistical Physics and Economics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Dana Randall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 279,139.00

The PI's research explores fundamental relationships between physical systems
and the efficiency of algorithms, looking at applications in Economics,
Nanotechnology, Computing and Physics that can benefit from this joint lens. For
instance, the Schelling model of segregation was developed in the economics
community in 1971. In this model, residents within a community assess their
personal comfort with the racial distribution in their local neighborhood and
they are more inclined to move if they are dissatisfied. Schelling showed that
even if every member of the community is satisfied with having half of their
neighbors be of the opposite race, even small preference for one's own race
leads to global segregation. Thus, micromotives can bring about macrobehavior
without any centralized influence. The PI will explore variants of this model
for 2-dimensional models using insights from computing and physics.

The PI will also consider natural stochastic processes occurring in the context
of self-organizing lists and nanotechnology. The first is a fundamental question
about biased permutations arising from list update algorithms for minimizing
total search costs. The problem can be modeled as a question about permutations
under nearest-neighbor transpositions in which items are biased to be put in the
correct order. The second is a nanotechnology problem concerning growth
processes arising in the context of tile-based self-assembly, where tiles are
constructed from DNA. The rates of convergence of these two sampling algorithms
are closely related, and the PI has developed new approaches to try to better
understand their convergence properties.

Last, the award addresses fundamental questions at the interface of computing
and physics. Determining the mixing time of Markov chains is often the vital
step in proving the efficiency of many approximation algorithms based on random
sampling. One of the richest sources for sampling problems is statistical
physics, where the state space of the Markov chain represents the states of a
physical system and sampling lends insight into the thermodynamic properties of
the model. By exploring parallels between phase transitions in both fields, the
PI will address fundamental questions about physical systems while searching for
better approaches to sampling.