* 1219315
* Checking and Correcting the Timescale for the Archaeology of the East Mediterranean-Near East in Later Prehistory & Protohistory: Investigating the Scale of a Radiocarbon Offse
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* A. J. Timothy Jull, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 204,681.00

With National Science Foundation (NSF) support, Drs. Sturt Manning and Timothy
Jull, together with a postdoctoral scholar, other colleagues, and US students,
will collect and analyze tree-rings from southern Jordan, Europe and North
America in order to investigate and establish what is the appropriate
radiocarbon timeline for archaeological and environmental dating in the southern
Levant and east Mediterranean region. This issue is critical for determining the
correct timeframe for Biblical Archaeology - and so early Biblical history - as
well as the timeframes and histories of the other important ancient cultures of
the Near East and east Mediterranean region. Over the last two decades there has
been much unresolved debate on this topic.

Radiocarbon (14C) is the main science-based method used to most date sites and
finds in the ancient Near East and eastern Mediterranean in the period before
about 500 BCE (before the historical civilizations of ancient Greece and Rome).
Radiocarbon dating has become increasingly precise in recent years, and employs
sophisticated analytical approaches. As a result there have been active and
vigorous debates over key topics like the exact dating of early Israel and the
precise timeframe of early Biblical history, among others. These debates have
serious implications for how we interpret and understand the early history of
these civilizations and have profound effects on a number of fields centered on
the history and culture of the world of the Hebrew Bible and its contemporaries.
But, as precision and resolution have increased, some previously disregarded
issues relevant to radiocarbon dating such as, the potential relevance of
differences in the growing seasons of plants in different areas - start to
become critically important if the correct high resolution chronology is to be
achieved.

Using known-age tree-ring samples - precise to the calendar year - from the east
Mediterranean and southern Levant, and comparing these with known age tree rings
from Germany, Ireland and the North America, in the context of a carefully-
designed program of high-resolution accelerator mass spectrometer (AMS)
radiocarbon analysis capable of resolving radiocarbon levels to within about 3
parts per thousand, this project will investigate and quantify what is the
appropriate radiocarbon calibration dataset for the southern Levant and east
Mediterranean region (and quantify the nature and scale of any growingseason-
related offset). This will provide the basis for archaeological, early
historical and environmental chronologies in the Near East and east
Mediterranean to be both accurate as well as precise.

The project will develop existing collaborative research on tree-rings in Jordan
by the Cornell Laboratory in partnership with the American Centre of Oriental
Research (ACOR) in Amman, Jordan, and will involve a postdoctoral scholar, a
graduate student, and undergraduate students in the Cornell laboratory. The
radiocarbon work on known-age tree-ring samples at the University of Arizona
Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) Laboratory, will provide an important
opportunity to test and develop the accuracy and precision of this key US
facility central to NSF sponsored radiocarbon-based work across several fields
from archaeology to a range of the environmental and geological sciences.