* 1219116
* NeTS: Small: WaveCube: A Scalable, Fault-Tolerant, High-Performance Optical Data Center Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Yan Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

There are two approaches to preventing localized bottlenecks in datacenter
networks: 1) building an over-provisioned network capable of supporting worse-
case dataflows, or 2) providing rapid (microseconds to millisecond) on-demand
provisioning of links, usually optical, between communication hotspots in the
datacenter. This projects studies and prototypes the second approach via a novel
interconnect design for datacenter networks (DCNs) with good fault-tolerance and
scalability features, termed WaveCube. In particular, optical wavelength
selective switch (WSS) technology is used to achieve cost savings while
implementing multipathing and dynamic bandwidth scheduling for improved
performance. The WaveCube topology is a multi-dimension cube with fiber carrying
multiple wavelengths (Wavelength Division Multiplexing or WDM). WDM dramatically
cuts down on the number of fibers needed in a datacenter but gives rise to a
wavelength assignment problem. Thus the project will study wavelength assignment
algorithms needed to provide connections via multiple WSSs taking into account
fault-tolerance and performance. The project will compare WaveCube wiring
complexity to that of other suggested approaches. The project will also study
the performance of WaveCube-based data centers under a variety of processing
loads, some derived from actual measurements and some
synthetic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The PI will create
undergraduate datacenter networking courses. The PI also describes a plan to
increase participation of underrepresented minorities and women in the proposed
research activities and had previous demonstrations of such outreach via work
with programs such as AGEP, REU, CRA CREW. The PI's are collaborating with an
industrial organization.&lt;br/&gt;