* 1219007
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Accurate Prediction of Protein Interaction Sites by Integrating Sequence, Structure, and Network Data
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Yu Xia, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

Proteins are the main building blocks and functional molecules of the cell, yet
the biological function of most proteins encoded in genomes are not well
characterized. Recent advances in structural genomics have generated a wealth of
data regarding the three-dimensional structure of individual proteins. At the
same time, proteins rarely act alone in the cell; rather, they form complex
networks of protein-protein interactions and other types of biomolecular
interactions from which intricate yet robust cellular behavior emerges.
Identifying amino acid sites that are involved in these biomolecular
interactions is an essential first step towards understanding the molecular
basis of protein function. Despite their biological significance, these amino
acid sites mediating protein-protein interactions are difficult to elucidate
experimentally. Computational algorithms are needed to accurately predict these
sites.

Intellectual Merit. The objective of this proposal is to develop novel
computational algorithms that integrate a wide spectrum of publicly available
protein sequence, structure, and network data to accurately predict amino acid
sites mediating protein interaction. In particular, two new algorithms will be
developed to accurately and efficiently identify amino acid residues on the
surface of proteins that evolve more slowly than expected, as well as short
sequence motifs that are enriched among non-homologous proteins with a common
interacting partner. These amino acid residues and sequence motifs are strong
candidates for mediating protein interactions. An innovative and unifying
feature of this proposal is that both algorithms will take into account the
powerful spatial constraints on these amino acid sites imposed by the three-
dimensional structure of proteins.

The proposed work is significant in that it addresses a fundamental question in
molecular systems biology: identifying amino acid residues and sequence motifs
that mediate biological networks. The execution of this proposal will provide a
set of algorithms, tools, and datasets that maximize the impact of high-
throughput approaches on systems and network biology research, which can be used
by researchers to address a wide variety of questions ranging from biomedical to
evolutionary. Finally, this proposal develops a novel computational paradigm
that integrates a wide spectrum of biological data (protein sequences, protein-
protein interaction network graphs, and protein three-dimensional structures) to
predict amino acid sites mediating protein interaction with high accuracy. These
novel algorithms for fundamental problems in computational biology contribute
directly to the core mission of the NSF CISE/CCF program.

Broader Impacts. The proposed research will further strengthen the
interdisciplinary ties between the PI in the Boston University Bioinformatics
Program and the collaborating experimentalists in the Boston University School
of Medicine. These ties provide invaluable opportunities for cross-disciplinary
research experiences for both graduate and undergraduate trainees.

The educational plan aims to bridge traditional teaching and mentoring methods
between biology, chemistry, and computer science at the K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate levels, and to bring the latest research findings and methods to the
classroom. He will continue to play a key role in the curriculum development and
improvement of the Bioinformatics Program at Boston University.