* 1219165
* SHF Small: Language Support for Variation Maintenance
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Martin Erwig, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 497,728.00

Managing variation is an important part of software engineering. Many existing
software projects can already generate a huge number of distinct programs that
run on different platforms and provide different feature sets. Research on
software product lines and feature-oriented software development has provided
processes and tools for the development of massively configurable software,
suggesting that the variability of software systems will only continue to grow.
A currently largely unsolved problem is how to systematically transform
variation representations to support the creation, refactoring, and migration of
variation, as wall as the analysis and querying of variation-rich software
repositories. The objective of this research is to investigate the systematic
transformation of variation structures and develop language support for it.

The following technical approach is pursued. First, gathering variation
programming tasks will provide a basis for the understanding of the nature and
extent of variation transformations, and assembling a catalog of such tasks will
aid the design, evaluation, and comparison of variation languages. Second, the
definition of the syntax and semantics of a transformational choice calculus,
which extends the (representational) choice calculus with computational
features, will support the investigation of formal properties of variation
programming. Third, the development of a variation type system facilitates the
characterization of different kinds of changes and evolutions of variational
structures. Moreover, the development of a variation module system will provide
an interface between low-level details required by the intricate scoping and
binding issues of the choice calculus representation and a more high-level,
declarative view of variations. Finally, the design of a domain-specific
embedded language for variation programming will allow the easy description of
transformations of variation structures in software artifacts. It also supports
the experimentation with variation transformations. Since the scope of this
research extends beyond professional software and covers also end-user
programming systems, such as spreadsheets, the developed methods will be
applicable in a wide variety of contexts and can thus empower millions of users
to handle variation in a more systematic way.