* 1219016
* CGV: Small: RUI: Analyzing subspace structure for group level image understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Lopamudra Mukherjee, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 231,313.00

The massive growth in the number of images being generated today has fostered a
new direction in computer vision research. Images today are almost never
generated independently, rather manifest as collections. Therefore, instead of
thinking of images as individual entities, we now need to consider images within
a group that may have significant correlational structure. Yet, formalizations
of several fundamental image analysis tasks such as image segmentation, for the
most part, still consider one image at a time. This project makes the case for
exploiting this shared structure for understanding content in images. It
develops an efficient framework which permits the segmentation of images at a
group level and therefore is applicable to various scenarios in which visual
data typically presents itself. The primary objective is to design a
comprehensive system that addresses all aspects of this problem -- from
preconditioning the input using training data, to providing powerful
segmentation models that take the group structure into account, to building
dictionaries which can then be used to effectively segment a set of related
images.

This project provides a vehicle for engaging undergraduates to become immersed
in research during the semesters and full-time in summers. Students are exposed
to and participate in state-of-the-art research in computer vision which
furthers their understanding of these topics and stimulate their intellectual
curiosity. This can significantly increase the possibility of these students
choosing to pursue higher studies in computer science.