* 1219387
* RIG:  Genetic mechanisms of detoxification in the cactophilic Drosophila mojavensis
* BIO,DEB
* 11/14/2011,10/31/2014
* Luciano Matzkin, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2014
* USD 128,486.00

Shifts in food resources are an influential force in the adaptation and
evolution of species. This project focuses on the ability of the cactophilic
fruit fly, Drosophila mojavensis, to detoxify the toxic compounds that are found
in its food resource (necrotic cacti). Drosophila mojavensis is composed of four
host races, each of which specializes on a different cactus species. Host races
that use different cacti as food resources differ in some genes that appear to
have played a role in the cactus specialization. The aim of this project is to
quantify the performance of host race-specific alleles of two candidate
detoxification genes by using experimental laboratory crosses to insert alleles
found in one host race into the other and measuring the effect on performance on
necrotic cactus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Improved knowledge of the genetics of
resource specialization will increase understanding of the genetic basis of
adaptation and the differentiation of species. The project will provide research
based training and mentoring to undergraduates through collaboration with the
California Alliance for Minority Participation Program. Undergraduates will
attend the SACNAS and the Society for the Study of Evolution Conferences, where
they will have the opportunity to interact with more senior scientists and
present the results of their research.