* 1219595
* 2012  Biocatalysis Gordon Research Conference (GRC) / July 8-13, 2012, Bryant University - Smithfield, RI
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Stefan Lutz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 12/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

1219595&lt;br/&gt;Lutz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biocatalysis encompasses
the use of isolated enzymes or whole cell systems for conversion of readily
available, inexpensive starting materials to high-value products. Enzymes are
fully recyclable catalytic proteins that frequently display exquisite chemo-,
enantio- and regioselectivity and operate under mild conditions of pH and
temperature. These characteristics make enzymes cost effective and sustainable
catalysts for a wide range of chemical transformations. Modern tools of protein
discovery, design and engineering aid the development of novel biocatalysts and
their tailor-designed integration into industrial processes. Consequently,
biocatalysts have applications to the production of pharmaceutical
intermediates, novel materials and diagnostics, as well as fine, performance and
agro-chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests support for the
twelfth biennial Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Biocatalysis. The
conference will take place at Bryant University, in Smithfield, Rhode Island on
July 8-13, 2012. The meeting will be preceded by the first associated Graduate
Research Seminar (GRS) on July 7-8, 2012. Together, these meetings will bring
together graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and leaders of the field to
discuss the latest scientific and technological advances in biocatalysis from
the research bench to the industrial production plant. Topics include:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- synthetic biology in biocatalysis&lt;br/&gt;- design and
engineering of biocatalysts&lt;br/&gt;- cascade reaction systems&lt;br/&gt;-
design and engineering of processes&lt;br/&gt;- academic and industrial trends
in biocatalysis&lt;br/&gt;- biocatalysis in synthesis&lt;br/&gt;- industrial
biocatalysis&lt;br/&gt;- future challenges in green chemistry
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to better facilitate scientific exchange
between graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, the co-chairs of the GRC
have established a research seminar where the young scientists will present
their research findings and discuss potential future implications of their work.
Participation by early career researchers will add significant value to this
conference and will foster communications among current and future leaders in
the field. The small, highly interactive setting helps foster intellectual
discourse, networking, and collaborations.