* 1219150
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Lighthouse: Resource-Aware Advisor for High-Performance Linear Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Boyana Norris, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

This research will study ways to ease the production and&lt;br/&gt;use of high-
performance matrix algebra software. Matrix algebra&lt;br/&gt;calculations
constitute the most time-consuming part of simulations&lt;br/&gt;in diverse
fields, and lowering the runtimes of those computations&lt;br/&gt;can have a
significant impact on overall application performance. The&lt;br/&gt;process of
converting matrix algebra from algorithm to high-
quality&lt;br/&gt;implementation is, however, a complex one. At each step, the
code&lt;br/&gt;developer is confronted with a myriad of possibilities, many
requiring&lt;br/&gt;expertise in numerical computation, mathematical software,
compilers,&lt;br/&gt;and computer architecture. In response to these
difficulties, the PIs&lt;br/&gt;have developed a prototype taxonomy
implementation entitled Lighthouse,&lt;br/&gt;which is a guide to the linear
system solver routines from the software&lt;br/&gt;package LAPACK. It is the
first framework that combines a matrix algebra&lt;br/&gt;software ontology with
code generation and tuning capabilities. Its&lt;br/&gt;interface is designed for
users across a spectrum of disciplines, career&lt;br/&gt;levels, and programming
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will dramatically extend
the&lt;br/&gt;Lighthouse framework in a number of new directions. First, they
will&lt;br/&gt;construct a general taxonomy of software that can be used to
build&lt;br/&gt;highly-optimized mathematical applications. The taxonomy will
initially&lt;br/&gt;provide an organized ontology of software components for
high-performance&lt;br/&gt;matrix algebra and later other numerical software
from a variety of&lt;br/&gt;problem domains. It will serve as a guide to
practitioners seeking&lt;br/&gt;to learn what is available for their
mathematical programming tasks,&lt;br/&gt;how to use it, and how the various
parts fit together. Second, the PIs&lt;br/&gt;will apply a combination of source
code analysis and machine learning&lt;br/&gt;techniques to fully automate the
generation of parameterized models that,&lt;br/&gt;given representative inputs
and a simple architecture description, can be&lt;br/&gt;evaluated to identify
methods from various libraries that best reflect&lt;br/&gt;the user's resource
and performance requirements. This automation is&lt;br/&gt;critical for ensuring
that the taxonomy is comprehensive enough to be&lt;br/&gt;useful and that it
accurately reflects the features and performance&lt;br/&gt;of the latest
versions of numerical libraries. Finally, the PIs will&lt;br/&gt;advance the
state-of-the-art in tuning tools by improving some of the&lt;br/&gt;tools
included in the taxonomy, broadening their ranges of functionality&lt;br/&gt;in
terms of problem domains and languages. This project will produce&lt;br/&gt;the
following impacts: greater performance by applications, enabling&lt;br/&gt;both
more discovery with available computing resources and
greater&lt;br/&gt;productivity of application programmers; greater understanding
of the&lt;br/&gt;interaction between architecture and algorithms; and an
educational tool&lt;br/&gt;for future computational scientists.