* 1219243
* SHF:Small:RUI: Observationally Cooperative Multithreading
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Christopher Stone, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2016
* USD 375,395.00

Today's multicore processors are often underutilized because programmers lack
tools and techniques to program them effectively. To understand the problem,
imagine that a microprocessor is like a restaurant kitchen. For years, processor
designers improved execution speed, replacing the chef with one who can work
even faster. Because this strategy has physical limits, hardware vendors are
turning to multicore CPUs, akin to multiple chefs. Some problems adapt easily to
multiple cores; if you need to bake 16 identical cakes, it's easy to use 16
chefs in separate kitchens (i.e., symmetric parallelism). But if you need to
prepare a complex banquet (i.e., irregular parallelism), the many tasks can
require significant coordination. One mistake (e.g., two chefs using the same
bowl at the same time) and the results may be disastrously wrong. Experience has
shown that few programmers can foresee and avoid all possible coordination
issues ahead of time. This project develops the approach Observationally
Cooperative Multithreading (OCM) for solving problems on parallel machines. OCM
makes it easier to write correct code, while allowing speedup on from multiple
processing cores. Because of its simplicity, OCM could make parallelism and
concurrency more accessible to a broad audience, including introductory
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in programs written for the well-
understood cooperative multithreading (CM) model, subtasks take turns and
execute one at a time. This approach rules out conflicts between subtasks and
simplifies programming and debugging. OCM takes these same programs but runs
them on modern multicore machines, executing subtasks simultaneously (and hence
more efficiently) when there are no conflicts. This research, extending
preliminary work on OCM, will involve 18 undergraduate students over three
years. They will help design, develop and evaluate practical OCM implementations
using techniques such as Transactional Memory and Lock Inference, addressing the
concerns both of the parallel-programming community (who value demonstrated
performance) and of the CS education community (who value ease of use and
desperately need a simpler introduction to concurrency and parallelism).