* 1219089
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Lighthouse: Resource-Aware Advisor for High-Performance Linear Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Jessup, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2016
* USD 263,000.00

This research will study ways to ease the production and use of high-performance
matrix algebra software. Matrix algebra calculations constitute the most time-
consuming part of simulations in diverse fields, and lowering the runtimes of
those computations can have a significant impact on overall application
performance. The process of converting matrix algebra from algorithm to high-
quality implementation is, however, a complex one. At each step, the code
developer is confronted with a myriad of possibilities, many requiring expertise
in numerical computation, mathematical software, compilers, and computer
architecture. In response to these difficulties, the PIs have developed a
prototype taxonomy implementation entitled Lighthouse, which is a guide to the
linear system solver routines from the software package LAPACK. It is the first
framework that combines a matrix algebra software ontology with code generation
and tuning capabilities. Its interface is designed for users across a spectrum
of disciplines, career levels, and programming experience.

The PIs will dramatically extend the Lighthouse framework in a number of new
directions. First, they will construct a general taxonomy of software that can
be used to build highly-optimized mathematical applications. The taxonomy will
initially provide an organized ontology of software components for high-
performance matrix algebra and later other numerical software from a variety of
problem domains. It will serve as a guide to practitioners seeking to learn what
is available for their mathematical programming tasks, how to use it, and how
the various parts fit together. Second, the PIs will apply a combination of
source code analysis and machine learning techniques to fully automate the
generation of parameterized models that, given representative inputs and a
simple architecture description, can be evaluated to identify methods from
various libraries that best reflect the user's resource and performance
requirements. This automation is critical for ensuring that the taxonomy is
comprehensive enough to be useful and that it accurately reflects the features
and performance of the latest versions of numerical libraries. Finally, the PIs
will advance the state-of-the-art in tuning tools by improving some of the tools
included in the taxonomy, broadening their ranges of functionality in terms of
problem domains and languages. This project will produce the following impacts:
greater performance by applications, enabling both more discovery with available
computing resources and greater productivity of application programmers; greater
understanding of the interaction between architecture and algorithms; and an
educational tool for future computational scientists.