* 1219001
* SHF: Small: Synthesis-Driven Methods for Reuse, Integration, and Programming of Specialized Accelerators in Systems-on-Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Luca Carloni, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

A System-on-Chip (SoC) is the emerging computing platform that lies at the core
of a variety of systems from computer servers in data centers to embedded
systems and mobile devices. As semiconductor technology progresses, in order to
deliver higher performance under tighter power constraints, SoCs increasingly
combine various programmable cores, which provide precious flexibility through
software, with many specialized accelerators, hardware modules optimized to
execute only specific functions without dissipating too much power. The result
is a heterogeneous system that is energy efficient but also very difficult to
design. Indeed, the growth of SoC complexity has been outpacing progress in the
computer-aided design (CAD) tools which are available to computer engineers.
This design-productivity gap is a gloomy trend for the entire semiconductor
industry. The PI will address this challenge by establishing Supervised Design-
Space Exploration as the foundation for a new component-based design environment
in which hardware-accelerator developers, software programmers and system
architects can interact effectively while they each pursue their specific goals.
In particular, the PI will develop CAD methodologies and tools that: (1) at the
component-level, assist developers and programmers in the cost/performance
modeling and optimization of accelerators to enable architectural exploration
and to increase their reusability across many potential SoC designs; and (2) at
the system-level, assist architects in the automatic integration of accelerators
and other heterogeneous components to obtain an optimal implementation of a
given SoC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will allow the PI to train
graduate and undergraduate students in the design and programming of innovative
SoC platforms for a variety of application domains from computer vision to
security and networking. A core part of the proposal is the development of a new
capstone course that is aimed at breaking the historical boundaries between
software programming and hardware design which are still present across many
electrical engineering and computer science curricula.