* 1219532
* Support for Student and Postdoc Participation in the 19th CIRP Conference on Life Cycle Engineering (LCE 2012); Berkeley, California; 23-25 May 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2012
* David Dornfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2012
* USD 19,500.00

This award provides support to offset the costs for 26 students and postdocs to
attend the 19th CIRP Conference on Life Cycle Engineering (LCE 2012) at the
University of California, Berkeley, California, May 23-25, 2012. The conference
is a forum to share ideas about different aspects of life cycle engineering as
it applies to manufacturing processes and systems and to discuss recent and
future trends in these areas. The students and postdocs who are provided with
funding through this proposal will attend technical presentations given by
leading international experts. There will be additional opportunities to
interact and network more informally with peers and senior researchers during
breaks and meals. The strong international character and interdisciplinary of
this conference will foster new ideas and better understanding of worldwide
challenges in the future development of sustainability, manufacturing science
and engineering. A selection committee from the Life Cycle Engineering
Scientific Committee will identify students and postdocs to receive funding
based upon the following criteria: presenting a paper, his or her research
statement, underrepresented status, and degree sought.

The students and postdocs that attend LCE 2012 will have the opportunity to
display, discuss, exchange, and develop research ideas and collaborative
projects in the area of Life Cycle Engineering. Through this experience they
will sharpen both their technical skills and their communication skills, which
will be valuable in their future careers, international or interdisciplinary
projects. The new perspectives attending students and postdocs gain will help
enable them to employ their talents and knowledge to drive U.S. efforts for
competitive and sustainable manufacturing. Additionally, because much of the
research is industry-focused, American industry will ultimately benefit from the
new knowledge and the expertise gained by the students and postdocs; therefore,
advancing the national prosperity and welfare.