* 1219804
* EAGER: Are coral diseases contagious?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Robert van Woesik, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 05/31/2016
* USD 256,888.00

Diseases are believed to be one of the greatest threats to corals in the
Caribbean. Yet, very little is known about marine diseases in general and coral
diseases in particular. Identifying coral pathogens has proven difficult and
evasive and many coral diseases are assumed to be infectious, suggesting that
infection is caused by pathogens being passed from colony to colony. However,
few studies have tested this assumption and this project will incorporate
spatial epidemiology, or disease mapping, to provide insight into whether
diseases cluster and follow a contagious-disease model. This will be
accomplished by using a hierarchical sampling design over two spatial scales in
the Caribbean. The study will also incorporate locations with and without a
recent history of frequent thermal stress to also test the alternate hypothesis
that coral diseases are not infectious but are the result of secondary effects
due to thermal stress such as the increase of opportunistic pathogens from the
normal flora of the coral or compromised coral immune systems. This approach
will be combined with experiments to examine whether coral diseases are indeed
transmissible. There is great urgency to identify coral diseases, predict their
prevalence, and determine whether they are infectious or not. This project will
help provide an understanding of the etiology of coral diseases, which can then
inform us whether human intervention will help reduce their prevalence and
negative outcomes. Although microbes play a role in coral disease, many coral
diseases might not be transmissible. Therefore, we also need to incorporate
environmental threshold parameters, which may be more likely as an underlying
mechanism driving coral-disease dynamics. The results will have important
implications for modeling diseases and predicting contemporary and future coral
disease outbreaks. &lt;br/&gt; The Broader Impacts of this proposal are
potentially transformative with regards to our understanding of coral disease by
taking a spatial ecology and epidemiological approach. The principal
investigator will train underrepresented groups in coral reef biology and
ecology as well as train a Ph. D. level graduate student during this project.
Additionally, the principal investigator will conduct public outreach activities
on the importance of coral reef ecosystem services.