* 1219739
* Carbonate preservation in pelagic sediments:  Developing a new aragonite preservation proxy
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Figen Mekik, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 10/31/2016
* USD 87,087.00

Ocean acidification is widely referred to as "the other CO2 problem." Marine
invasion of anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) causes reduced pH and lowers the
calcium carbonate (CaCO3) saturation of seawater. Coral calcification rates
decrease as the CaCO3 saturation state of their ambient waters decreases. Marine
plankton such as pteropods (also known as sea butterflies) show evidence of
shell dissolution when subjected to seawater under-saturated with respect to
CaCO3. Similar to corals, if pteropods prove unable to adapt to living in
continuously under-saturated waters, their geographic distribution may be
limited in the future. While some of the effects of ocean acidification on biota
in the modern ocean can be directly observed, forecasting how fast changes will
occur as anthropogenic CO2 continues to increase in the atmosphere and how
organisms will respond to these changes presents challenges. Reconstructing the
marine saturation state of CaCO3 in the past, using the geological record, is
important for understanding the potential future outcomes of modern ocean
acidification because it provides a record of natural variability and
sensitivity of the carbonate system, and a baseline from which to understand
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project, led by a professor
at Grand Valley State University in Michigan, is to develop a new proxy for
quantifying the degree and effect of ocean acidification events in Earth's past
by studying the preservation of fossilized pteropod shells in marine sediments.
A reliable and quantitative indicator of CaCO3 preservation in deep sea
sediments will help discern geographic and hydrographic shifts in benthic (e.g.
corals, calcifying algae) and planktonic ocean communities (e. g. pteropods,
coccolithophores, foraminifers) driven by ocean acidification or alkalization
events. Such a proxy will also aid in understanding ocean circulation changes,
water mass boundary changes, changes in ocean carbonate chemistry on millennial
timescales, and other factors that may cause dissolution of CaCO3 such as
changes in fluxes of CaCO3 and organic carbon to the deep sea. Funding supports
four undergraduates in data generation, data analysis, and dissemination of
results to the scientific community. The results of this study are disseminated
to the public in outreach events and postings on science blogs.