* 1219253
* RI: Small: Incremental Speech Processing for Rapid Dialogue
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Traum, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 457,984.00

This project develops incremental language processing techniques to enable
spoken dialogue systems to communicate in a way that is more highly interactive,
more efficient, and more human-like. Most previous dialogue systems have
employed a strict turn-taking regime in which one person speaks at a time, no
attempt is made to understand or respond to speech until the speaker finishes
speaking, and the overall latency in system responses is high in comparison to
human-human conversation. This results in systems that are unable to provide a
range of rapid and overlapping responses that human interlocutors frequently use
to achieve an efficient and successful communication process, including back-
channels, interruptions, collaborative completions, clarifications, and other
rapid responses. This project is a computational and empirical investigation
into how a system's assessment of its own incremental understanding of ongoing
user speech can guide its strategic decisions to initiate such rapid and
overlapping responses. The feature representations and response policies that
can implement this decision-making are studied in the context of two fast-paced
interactive dialogue games. These games are carefully chosen to support
objective evaluation of incremental response strategies and fun gameplay that
facilitates large-scale data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting
computational models may improve the conversational skills of a range of
dialogue systems, including not only game-oriented systems but also practical
applications such as intelligent tutoring and training systems, information
access systems, and entertainment applications. A second product of this project
is an annotated corpus of human-human and human-system dialogue data for use by
other researchers. A third product is the incorporation of relevant software
into a publicly distributed toolkit for building dialogue systems, supporting
further research and education.