* 1219258
* RI: Small: Integrating Learning and Search for Structured Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Alan Fern, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 463,437.00

The field of machine learning is extremely successful in solving classification
problems where the inputs are fixed size feature vectors and the outputs are a
small fixed number of classes. However, many applications such as natural
language understanding and visual scene interpretation involve inputs and
outputs of variable size that have rich internal structure. This project will
study new approaches for such structured prediction problems. For example, the
inputs may be natural language documents or visual scenes and the outputs may be
formal representations of their semantic content, such as entities inferred or
observed and the relationships between them. Most approaches to structured
prediction learn a cost function to score potential structured outputs. Finding
the correct output for the given structured input then consists of inferring the
least cost output. Unfortunately, the computational cost of this inference is
prohibitive for expressive cost functions; this forces the use of either simpler
cost functions or approximate inference. In either case, prediction accuracy can
suffer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project aims to address this issue by
integrating learning and search in a new framework that allows for the
development of novel algorithms for structured prediction. In particular, this
project will address three topics: (1) A generic framework will be developed for
cost function learning by imitating the decisions of an optimal time-bounded
search procedure on the training data. This will allow for a wide range of
state-of-the-art search algorithms to be leveraged for structured prediction.
(2) A theory and framework will be developed to learn to speed up the search for
a global optimum by compressing the search into a shorter time-frame. This will
allow for learning to address not only accuracy but also the computational
efficiency of the predictor. (3) Both the cost function learning and speedup
learning will be instantiated in multiple search algorithms and evaluated in
different applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to make
contributions to a variety of applications of broad impact including natural
language understanding, tracking objects in video, and personalized scheduling.
The frameworks, algorithms and testbeds for learning to search and structured
prediction will be integrated into the Weka tool-box so that they can be easily
combined with different supervised learning algorithms and used in further
research. The results and benchmark domains will be publicly distributed through
the project's web pages. A special topics graduate course will be taught on the
topic of this proposal at Oregon State University.