* 1219082
* SHF: Small: Real-Time Scheduling and Analysis of Functional Reactive Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Albert Cheng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 463,999.00

The use of sophisticated digital systems to control complex physical components
in real-time has grown at a rapid pace. Examples include automobile adaptive
braking, industrial robotic assembly, medical pacemakers, autonomous vehicular
travel, remote surgery, physical manipulation of nano-structures, and space
exploration. Since all these applications interact directly with the physical
world and often have humans in the loop, their physical safety must be ensured.
The correctness of these safety-critical systems depends not only on the actions
they generate, but also on the time at which these actions occur. This project
develops response time analysis techniques and scheduling algorithms for
embedded control systems implemented as functional reactive programs (FRP's),
which are mathematical functions. The controller may consist of a single control
component or a network of distributed control components, each running on single
or multi-core processors. The response time of the embedded controller has a
direct impact on the safety of the entire physical system, but accurate response
time analysis of FRP's remains a largely unexplored problem. While there are
limited domain-specific studies that provide basic schedulability analysis using
approximate bounds on the response time of the transactional model used in
implementing functional reactive systems, they do not provide the exact timing
characterization needed to guarantee satisfaction of the timing constraints
imposed on the execution of the embedded controller. Thus this work develops a
framework for accurate response time analysis, scheduling, and thermal-
aware/power-conserving methods for these FRP-implemented controllers to improve
their performance and enhance their safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
evaluates the impact of this framework on physical system safety and performance
using two applications that will require integrating the results of all the
research activities: automotive systems and avionics. Determining actual
response times of embedded controllers implemented as FRP's will be a technical
milestone. Verifiably showing how these scheduling techniques enhance physical
system safety and performance will be another. By improving the safety and
performance of embedded control systems while reducing the cost of their
implementation in domains such as aerospace, medicine, communication,
automotive, nano-fabrication, industrial processing, and space exploration, the
project has broad societal impact. This project educates diverse undergraduate
and graduate students to perform research in a top-tier urban university whose
graduates often join local energy-related/high-tech industries, NASA's Johnson
Space Center, and the world-renowned Texas Medical Center. Novel techniques
discovered will be incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate courses in
embedded/real-time systems and operating systems. Project results will be
included in the next edition of the PI's popular textbook titled "Real-Time
Systems: Scheduling, Analysis, and Verification" (Wiley) and in a new textbook
titled "Embedded Programming." The planned research activities will generate a
variety of research papers and hardware/software tools addressing the aspects of
the project. Implemented tools will be readily available for download.