* 1219600
* 2012 Undergraduate Design Project Competition in Rehabilitation and Assistive Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Lorin Maletsky, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 01/31/2014
* USD 21,500.00

PI: Maletsky, Lorin Proposal Number: 1219600

The Bioengineering Division (BED) of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers hosts the annual Summer Bioengineering Conference (SBC). The 2012 SBC,
to be held June 20-23, 2012 at the el Conquistador Resort in Fajardo, Puerto
Rico, will be the 14th installment of this conference. The budget request to NSF
is to provide support for the 2012 Undergraduate Design Project Competition in
Rehabilitation and Assistive Devices and a workshop to help researchers
translate their rehabilitation ideas to market. The primary objectives of the
competition are to expose more students to rehabilitation needs and support
projects in this area as well as to help develop future researchers and
engineers in this. Funding will also support a workshop to be presented at the
meeting which will explain how to convert concepts in rehabilitation developed
from student projects into viable market products. All technical presentations
will be two-page extended abstracts and compiled in a CD format, distributed to
all registrants. The primary purpose of this conference is to promote state-of-
the-art research, collaboration, and scientific discourse in the broad field of
bioengineering with a focus on cutting edge biomechanics encompassing molecular
to tissue and organism-level approaches. This conference highlights and
encourages student participation to advance the education and career aspirations
of these future leaders of bioengineering.

Intellectual Merit: The design projects are rigorously reviewed using a series
of criteria and projects need to be sufficiently developed to be considered in
one of the top six finalists. For the finalist presentations at the conference,
each team will present their design to the audience and must be able to answer
questions. The finalist team members who attend the conference will also be able
to participate in an extremely high quality scientific and intellectually
stimulating interdisciplinary meeting. It is the premiere meeting for
bioengineering with a focus on biomechanical engineering. One of the workshops,
Bringing Assistive Devices to Market, will highlight the translation of
rehabilitation projects to marketable products. Five other workshops with
significant scientific and educational topics in bioengineering will also be
presented: 4D Phase Contrast MRI for Hemodynamics, Solid Mechanics over
Hierarchical Scales by Noninvasive Imaging, Tips for Tenure in Bioengineering,
Teaching Cell & Tissue Engineering, and Biotransport Education. We will also
have two additional Challenges: the Grand Challenge in Predicting Knee Loads and
Computational Fluid Dynamics Challenge. Challenge sessions highlight student
achievements in engineering design and modeling and rapidly advance the field
through simultaneously encouraging competition and collaboration. The winners of
the Lissner and Mow Medals and the Fung Young Investigator Award will make
scientific presentations.

Broader Impact: The rehabilitation design competition will bring students from
across the country to a meeting who might otherwise not have an opportunity to
attend an international research conference. In addition to the direct impact
this conference will have on the mainstream bioengineering community, it serves
an important cross-fertilization role. We will have in attendance bioengineers,
engineers from other disciplines, cell and molecular biologists, biochemists,
biophysicists, and other scientists participating in the meeting. In that
manner, this conference will have a much broader impact than if it were to be
attended by just the biomechanics community. Most importantly, we expect that
more than 50% of the attendees will be students and postdoctoral fellows. This
will provide a broad impact for the current times as well as for the future, as
these students will benefit by participation in the meeting and through the
material presented by the plenary speakers, workshops, and challenges. Through
the CD containing technical proceedings and conference web site, information
presented at the meeting will be available to multiple societies and to the
public at large.