* 1219298
* Climate Change and Community-Based Relocation
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Robin Bronen, Center for International Environmental Law U.S.
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2012
* USD 35,635.00

This award will fund a participatory and consultative workshop that brings
together two indigenous groups, the Yup'ik of Newtok, Alaska and the people of
the Carteret Islands, Papua New Guinea, to explore the social and cultural
ramifications of being on the front line of global climate change.

The inhabitants of Newtok and the Carteret Islands are part of a growing network
of Arctic and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) whose communities are the
first to be affected by climate induced environmental change. Newtok is a
western Alaska, Bering Sea community being forced to relocate due to the
deterioration of the substrate that underlies their village; Carteret Islands,
Papua New Guinea, are being forced to relocate due to rising sea levels - the
Islands on average are only 1.2 meters above sea level and have lost over 50% of
their land mass since 1994.

As the PI states, "reducing vulnerability and implementing adaptation to climate
change are critical to ensure the resilience of indigenous communities in both
regions" and this workshop is the first step in understanding that process. As
part of a community participatory process that is designed to start any research
or assessment project with community discussions, this project will facilitate a
research agenda that is informed by the local knowledge and goals of the
affected communities themselves. This project is the first step in implementing
an assessment or scientific research plan for understanding and facilitating the
long term sustainability and resilience of Arctic and SIDS communities where
climate-induced ecological change are affecting the health and well-being of the
people who inhabit these regions.

Through a 10 day community participatory process that will start in Buka, Papua
New Guinea, Yup'ik people will collaborate with Carteret Island people in order
to better define and understand the decision making process that underlies their
ultimate relocation. The workshop will be a community to community interaction
of sharing experiences, visiting community sites, talking with local government
officials, and creating an outline of guiding principles and capacity building
for other communities facing similar challenges.

This project will contribute to a broader understanding of the social and
cultural challenges that surround population migration through a community
participatory process, which has the potential to create new paradigms for
researchers studying these processes. Although bringing together two
communities, one Arctic, one South Pacific, is a small step it is a critical
step toward creating new knowledge concerning how communities are affected by
and adapting to these environmental changes.

From scientific research supported by the Arctic Social Sciences Program we know
that community resettlement can have disastrous effects on health and well-
being, as well as cultural and linguistic survival (Marino and Kingston, Twice
"Removed: King Islanders Experience of Community through Two Relocations," Human
Organization, Vol. 69. N.2/Winter 2010, Pg. 119-128). This project has the
potential to infuse decision making processes with community based perspectives
and actions, which we know from other research (Arctic Human Development
Report), are key to self determination and ultimately the long-term
sustainability of indigenous communities across the Arctic and the Globe.