* 1219755
* RAPID: Stagnant Flood Water Quality Improvement: Role of Sediment and Interactions between Effective Microorganisms and Indigenous Microorganisms
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,12/31/2013
* John McEvoy, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2013
* USD 60,000.00

1219755/Khan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thailand is experiencing the worst flood in
the history of the country. The flood water has affected more than two million
people in Bangkok. Due to poor drainage, the flood water is stagnant in most
areas leading to water quality issues. Odor emission and waterborne pathogen
proliferation are potential problems. The Thai Government is suggesting the use
of effective microorganisms (EMs) to alleviate the problems. EMs are available
in both liquid and solid forms consisting of three microbial groups including
lactic acid bacteria, yeast, and photosynthetic bacteria. A hypothesis is that
EMs would overtake indigenous microorganisms that are pathogens. The overarching
goals of this project are to investigate type and quantity of sediment and to
study microbial community within the sediment. The microbial community
investigation will focus on: 1) Indigenous microorganisms including sulfate
reducing bacteria that are responsible for odor production and known waterborne
pathogens such as Vibrio chlorella, Salmonella typhi, Escherichia coli, and
Cryptosporidium and 2) Microbial groups associated with EMs. The central
hypotheses are that the presence of sediment with high organic contents is
associated with odor, and sediment harbors sulfate reducing bacteria and
pathogens but not microbial groups associated with EMs. The PIs will test these
hypotheses: 1) Determine the type and quantity of sediment in different areas
(with and without odor and with and without EM application) and 2) Determine the
microbial community and its diversity in the sediment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
benefit practical applications on flood water quality management via sediment
control. The use of EMs for controlling sulfur reducing bacteria and waterborne
pathogens is potentially transformative. Results from this research could be
applicable across different fields as EMs have been used in agronomy, food
science, and health sciences. The project is interdisciplinary in nature
requiring integrated knowledge in environmental engineering, molecular
microbiology, and hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
project meets the RAPID funding criteria because of the need to collect sediment
samples after the flood water is drained; the drainage is projected to happen
early in 2012. The proposed research will have an impact on the well-being of
flood victims. Flooding is one of the major natural disasters and occurs
throughout the world. The information gained through the project could be useful
to post flood cleanup workers in term of reducing risk in contacting with
pathogenic microorganisms. Research findings can be applied to the southern
states of the U.S. because of similarities in climate and long periods of flood
water inundation.