* 1219603
* Engineering C3 Plants with Carbon Concentrating Mechanisms for Enhanced Photosynthesis
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Richard Sayre, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 649,409.00

A major factor limiting photosynthetic efficiency in many crop plants is oxygen-
induced inhibition of CO2 fixation by the enzyme RuBisCO, a first step in a
process known as photorespiration. Photorespiration leads to CO2 release rather
than fixation. Overall, photorespiration reduces the efficiency of
photosynthesis by as much as 30%. To date, attempts to engineer reduced
photorespiration have largely been unsuccessful. Several groups of organisms
including, cyanobacteria, eukaryotic microalgae, and C4 plants have evolved
mechanisms to concentrate CO2 near the active site of RuBisCO, reducing
photorespiration. Based on knowledge gained from investigations on the
biochemistry and cell biology of carbon concentrating mechanisms in algae, this
project will engineer the C3 model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, to concentrate
CO2 near the active site of RuBisCO so as to favor CO2 fixation. The project
will additionally quantify the expected changes in plant productivity at the
biochemical and systems levels (isotopic labeling and metabolic flux analysis of
leaves). The research strategies include: 1) enhancing photosynthetic carbon
fixation by engineering the overexpression of bicarbonate transporters and other
inorganic carbon metabolizing enzymes in leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana, and 2)
developing leaf isotopic labeling and flux analysis methods to quantify
photosynthetic metabolism and respiration in wild-type and mutant leaves.
Results from flux analyses will be used to identify metabolic bottlenecks,
assess the overall CO2 metabolism, and establish a platform to enable further
metabolic engineering strategies for improving overall photosynthetic
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The scope of the research is
highly interdisciplinary. Therefore, it is anticipated that the project will
attract the interest of individuals from diverse backgrounds and education. The
work will involve undergraduates, secondary science students, teachers, and
scientists. The offering of summer internships to teachers and undergraduates,
as well as professional development workshops for teachers, and an on-line
mentoring program (eScience) involving student and scientist partners will
result in a greater appreciation and understanding of science and stress the
relevance of the research to food production and green energy that are aspects
of everyday life. The transgenic lines and molecular tools, along with flux
analyses and computational methods, will add to the growing body of information
on leaf photosynthetic metabolism and engineering. Results will be disseminated
through traditional journals and meetings, and the software and isotope data
produced will be publicly available via the Web to serve as a valuable resource
for research and teaching. From a societal context, increases in plant biomass
serve to meet growing nutritional and chemical feedstock needs without a
reliance on petroleum-based approaches.