* 1219064
* CSR: Small:  Memory-Centric Real-Time Scheduling for Multicore Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Marco Caccamo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

In modern automotive and avionics applications, the use of multiple sensors and
especially real-time imaging sensors creates unprecedented workloads. From a
computational perspective, multicore architectures have become mainstream;
however, as a multicore chip is expected to process increasing volumes of data
in real-time, the memory hierarchy becomes the bottleneck resource. In the worst
case, task execution times can grow linearly with the number of cores in the
system. This research aims at laying foundations for a modern memory-centric
real-time scheduling theory that can effectively co-schedule the use of the
memory hierarchy, the cores, and the on-chip network, including the I/O
channels. According to the vision of Memory-Centric Scheduling, when the memory
hierarchy is the system bottleneck, memory accesses should be scheduled to
achieve high memory utilization. Performance of a real-time multicore system
should be measured in terms of schedulable memory utilization rather than just
core utilization. Ideally, the real-time constraints should be met as long as
total memory utilization of all real-time applications (across all the cores
contending for shared memory) is below 100%.

The potential economic and social benefits of this research are significant
since the developed theory will greatly increase the temporal predictability of
embedded multicore software systems in general, while in particular reducing
cost and time required to achieve the necessary safety certification of next
generation avionic multicore computing architectures. As the new scheduling
theory is being developed, key elements will be incorporated into graduate
classes in real-time computing and then migrated to senior undergraduate
classes.