* 1219606
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Early Algebra on Students' Algebra-Readiness
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Eric Knuth, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 421,903.00

The Impact of Early Algebra on Students' Algebra-Readiness is a collaborative
project at the University of Wisconsin and TERC, Inc. They are implementing and
studying a research-based curriculum that was designed to help children in
grades 3-5 prepare for learning algebra at the middle school level. Researchers
are investigating the impact of a long-term, comprehensive early algebra
experience on students as they proceed from third grade to sixth grade.
Researchers are working to build a learning progression that describes how
algebraic concepts develop and mature from early grades through high school.
This study helps to build our knowledge about the piece of the progression that
is just prior to entering middle school where many students begin formal
instruction in algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous research about
early algebra learning, researchers will teach a curriculum that was carefully
designed to reflect what we know about learning algebraic concepts. Previous
research has shown that young children from very diverse backgrounds have the
ability to construct algebraic ideas such as equality, representation,
generalization, and functions. Researchers are collecting data about students'
algebraic knowledge as well as arithmetical knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
know that the majority of students in the United States struggle with learning
formal algebra. By studying the implementation of the research-based curriculum
for an extended period of time, researcher's are learning about how algebraic
ideas are connected and whether or not early instruction on algebraic ideas will
help students learn more formal ideas in middle school.