* 1219288
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Caley Upgrade
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* William Byam, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,764.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;09 July 2012&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1219288&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Delaware&lt;br/&gt;PI: W.
Byam&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: [None]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests one
Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment item for the University of Delaware for
the R/V HUGH R. SHARP; namely control system up-grades for the existing CTD
Handling System. This award represents Phase I of a multi-year project award
that will eventually support similar system up-grades on the University of
Hawaii's KILO MOANA. This project will greatly enhance safety and science
support capabilities on both vessels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact and Intellectual Merit: The PI addressed the Broader Impact and
Intellectual Merit of the proposed equipment specifically for the R/V HUGH R.
SHARP. The research projects supported have been individually peer-reviewed for
scientific merit. During operations, these vessels routinely expose graduate and
undergraduate students to seagoing oceanography. Specifically, College of Marine
and Earth Studies participates in a large number of outreach programs including
open house events (Coast Day), participation the MATE program, and educational
cruises. The College also hosts the UNOLS East Coast Van Pool. The R/V HUGH R.
SHARP is scheduled to support over 90 NSF-funded days in CY 2012.