* 1219488
* EAGER: Investigating the Thermal Maturity of Organic Matter in Fault Zones with Laboratory Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2014
* USD 88,841.00

One of the most elusive questions in the study of fault mechanics is how much
shear&lt;br/&gt;stress faults sustain, which is a necessary parameter for a full
description of the rupture&lt;br/&gt;process. Because frictional slip generates
heat, measuring the temperature increase of&lt;br/&gt;fault zones above
background temperatures can elucidates the strength of the fault.
Here&lt;br/&gt;we describe a new paleothermometer that can establish time-
temperature histories for&lt;br/&gt;faults hosted in sedimentary rocks by
examining the thermal maturity of organic&lt;br/&gt;molecules within the fault.
This technique is widely applied in petroleum geochemistry&lt;br/&gt;to
determine burial heating. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will establish
a new paleothermometer for fault zones by&lt;br/&gt;repurposing an existing
paleothermometer used to establish long duration heating&lt;br/&gt;associated
with burial. Quantifying the frictional heating in a fault zone will allow them
to&lt;br/&gt;constrain fault and earthquake parameters like shear stress along a
fault during failure and&lt;br/&gt;slip of the largest event. In order to extend
the time-temperature range of this&lt;br/&gt;paleothermometer and establish
thermal maturity indices at the short time scales and high temperatures that
fault rocks experience during earthquakes, the investigators will design and
conduct rapid heating experiments on organic-rich sedimentary rocks at various
combinations of time and temperature relevant to seismic heating and determine
the kinetic parameters of these reactions at short time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement of the coseismic friction is critical
for determining the conditions under which an earthquake can expand into a
major, societally significant event. This work will devise a new way to directly
measure friction from slip on faults.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, two early career
scientists will be funded.