* 1219509
* A Multi-Spectroscopic Investigation of Protein Structure in Biosilica Composites
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Gary Drobny, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2016
* USD 350,001.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding a
collaboration between the solid state NMR (ssNMR) group of Gary Drobny at the
University of Washington, Seattle, USA, and the optical spectroscopy group of
Tobias Weidner at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany.
The NSF will be funding the U.S. team and the Deutsche Forshungsgemeinshaft will
be funding the German team. This collaboration is aimed at elucidating to high
resolution, the structures of proteins and peptides in biosilica composites. Not
only will this research provide an atomic level structural picture of how
proteins structure when in contact with silica, but the information will be
helpful in understanding how biogenic silica is modeled into elaborate
macroscopic structures under relatively mild conditions compared to the extreme
conditions (high temperatures, pressures etc.) that are involved in the
production and manipulation of anthropogenic silica.

There are potential long term goal implications of these collaborative studies
toward understanding the nature of an important problem in chemical biology;
namely peptide-silica interactions and the roles played by peptide secondary,
tertiary, and quaternary structure as well as amino acid modifications in
controlling the morphology of biosilica composites. These approaches will
develop further a set of spectroscopic techniques for structurally
characterizing proteins as they exist in other types of biomineral composites.
The interdisciplinary and international nature of the collaboration is expected
to be beneficial for both the U.S. scientists funded by the NSF and the German
scientists funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinshaft.