* 1219321
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Improved Control and Sensory Feedback for Neuroprosthetics
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Jose Contreras-Vidal, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2016
* USD 371,370.00

This research involves collaboration among investigators at four institutions.
Recent advances in motor behavior have uncovered structure in the supporting
neural control architecture, including distinctions between feed-forward and
feedback control functions and learning. While the neural code has not yet been
cracked, much is now known about how its foundations for sensorimotor control
differ from those of even the most modern computer-based algorithms. For
example, neural function must accommodate transmission and processing delays, so
feedback control is subservient to feed-forward and anticipatory control. The
nervous system produces exquisite, constantly and widely available predictions
concerning body and environment interactions. These predictive models (also
called internal models) are constructed by learning the invariants in the
mapping from motor commands to sensory feedback (and inverses thereof). The PIs
have developed a unique approach based upon readings from a scalp array of EEG
electrodes for the construction of algorithms (decoders) which predict motor
behavior (control signals) as a weighted sum of the EEG data from all electrodes
at multiple time lags. The team has demonstrated two-axis control over a screen
cursor using only 10 minutes of EEG and motion training data, a feat far
surpassing any brain-computer interface (BCI) available to date. In the current
project, the team will build upon this prior work to design and validate
noninvasive neural decoders that generate agile control in upper limb
prosthetics. To this end, they will investigate neural correlates of brain
adaptation to multiple sources of feedback using EEG and functional near
infrared spectroscopy (fNIR). An important challenge will be to provide sensory
feedback appropriate to contact tasks performed with a prosthesis. Existing BCIs
and neuro-prosthetic devices rely at best on vibrotactile feedback and often
only on visual feedback. The PIs will add haptic and proprioceptive feedback in
concert with a novel adaptation of vibrotactile, skin stretch, and arm squeeze
technologies in the prosthesis interface, to provide intuitive control over
contact tasks and to strengthen the motor imagery whose neural correlates are
processed by the EEG decoder. To establish baseline measures, the team will
compare prosthetic performance under direct brain control to myoelectric
prosthetic control and direct manual control. Experiments will be performed
involving both able-bodied individuals and amputees, in which real-time decoding
(EEG) and analysis (EEG/fNIR) of sensorimotor control and cognitive load will be
combined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will
revolutionize the control and interface of upper limb prosthetics. The work will
lead to a better understanding of the role of sensory feedback in brain-computer
interfaces and will lay the foundation for restoration of motor and sensory
function for amputees and individuals with neurological disease. The project
will create a unique interdisciplinary environment enabling education, training,
co-advising and exchange of graduate students, course development, and
involvement of undergraduates in research. The PIs will also participate in
outreach activities on their various campuses, targeting underrepresented groups
in science and engineering.