* 1219451
* US-Egypt Workshop on Cyber Security, Cairo, Egypt, December 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Tarek Saadawi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/2014
* USD 53,477.00

1219451 &lt;br/&gt;This project supports a workshop proposal by Dr. Tarek
Saadawi, CUNY City College, New York, NY for a US-Egypt Workshop: Cyber
Security, Cairo, Egypt, December 2012. The Egyptian co-organizer is Dr. Ayman
El-Dessouki, Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt. Many cyber security
schemes are based solely on preventive or reactive, rather than proactive,
measures such as patching of software or detecting already occurred attacks.
Most of the network and information system security configurations are performed
manually and require experts to monitor, tune security devices and recover from
attacks. On the other hand, attacks are getting more sophisticated and highly
automated which gives the attackers an advantage in this arms race. The workshop
is to address important issues in cyber security and the protection of
information systems and network infrastructure. The workshop will bring together
leading researchers from academia, industry and the government for a
comprehensive update on security and risk management research and development
issues. The workshop will have scientists from USA and Egypt. The specific
objectives of the proposed workshop are : To convene a gathering of US and Egypt
scientists in the areas of cyber security in a workshop setting to explore the
synergy between: o The current state-of-the-art in cyber security covering
cryptology, network security and intrusion detection, software and operating
system security, and software forensic techniques and tools; The current state-
of-the-art in collaborative support technologies as they pertain to the support
of collaborations between US and Egypt scientists; To identify specific US/Egypt
institutions for faculty and graduate student exchange programs, with the intent
that such initial institutions serve as models for wider exchanges; To identify
specific areas of Undergraduate and Graduate Education which might be beneficial
in the development of young scientists with specific interest in the Workshop
areas; To disseminate the outcomes of the Workshop via the Internet and digital
hardcopy (CDROM/DVD).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The research
problems addressed in this workshop by leading scientists from US and Egypt will
advance the research in this area. This workshop will help to identify specific
US/Egypt institutions for faculty and graduate student exchange programs, with
the intent that such initial institutions serve as models for wider
exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research outcomes of this
workshop will greatly benefit industries and educational institutes not only in
the US and Egypt but other countries in the world as well. Students trained will
acquire unique skills and expertise in the aspects of collaborations. The
problems addressed in this project pertain to cyber security in general and
information assurance and network security in particular. Thus the outcomes of
this project can impact the society in the near future. The applications we
target are very vital to the humans and the society. This proposal is supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program where NSF supports the US side and the
Government of Egypt funds the Egyptian side.