* 1219235
* SHF: Small:Technology Development and Design Optimization of Hybrid Electrical Energy Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Massoud Pedram, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 449,997.00

This proposal provides a systematic approach to combining existing electrical
energy storage technologies and power conversion circuit designs with
sophisticated runtime management policies to create a hybrid electrical energy
storage (HEES) system with performance metrics that would be superior to those
for any of its constituent components. In particular, the proposed research
focuses on: (i) Architecture design and charge management, including charge
allocation, migration, and replacement policies in HEES systems; (ii)
Application driver and customization, including application to portable systems,
and (iii) System prototyping and evaluation, including HEES system deployment
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research claims to produce unprecedented
benefits in terms of energy availability and efficiency in electronic systems as
well as significant reductions in cost of operating these systems. In
particular, the proposed work aims to achieve 2x cost reduction and 10x cycle
life improvement over conventional electrical energy storage systems. This will
in turn enable the design of integrated products and platforms that deliver a
wide range of new capabilities based on efficient power delivery and local
energy storage. Another expected benefit of this proposal is the training of
students, who will acquire knowledge in the development of new means and methods
for electrical energy storage, conversion and delivery.