* 1219344
* Collaborative Research:  Using Visual Methods to Engage Indigenous Youth and Community Members in Cross-Site, International Analysis:  A Methodological Study
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,09/30/2014
* Lisa Wexler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2014
* USD 74,175.00

The proposed five-site data analysis meeting will actively engage community
members in international and cross-site analysis of data generated through the
National Science Foundation Circumpolar Indigenous Pathways to Adulthood (CIPA)
study. Approximately 150 Indigenous people from Siberia, Norway, Canada and
Alaska have been actively guiding this International Polar Year study. The
current project will further involve some of these youth and elders in cross-
site analysis and knowledge production. More specifically, Yupik, Inupiaq,
Inuit, Sami and Eveny young people from each participating community will
produce digital montages that represent key cross-site findings. Sharing these
productions at the cross-site meeting will invite dialogue across communities
about key aspects of daily life that are evident (or noticeably absent from) the
images. The adult and elder community co-researchers will be able to draw on and
reflect upon their own life experiences in relation to the youth montages (and
in relation to historic perspectives from older community members) from other
communities. Because of the variant pace of social change across the
participating communities, this project has an unprecedented opportunity for
insight into mechanisms impacting everyday youth resilience?the processes by
which they get through difficulties--through the reflections of Sami, Inuit,
Yupik, Inupiaq and Eveny elders, adults and youth. We believe this method
provides a unique opportunity to engage local people in cross-cultural, cross-
national meaning-making. The interdisciplinary research team assembled here
brings together investigators from social and medical anthropology, psychology,
public health, and education. These diverse perspectives, including those of the
indigenous community members?should provide insights into the effect of diverse
educational, social, and political policies on the experiences of Indigenous
youth as they become adults, and, specifically, into the ways human systems are
responding to social transformation in the Arctic. To our knowledge, this study
is the first of its kind to utilize visual elicitation techniques to facilitate
international, interdisciplinary and community-engaged data analysis.