* 1219328
* Management of the West Coast Winch Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Stephen Kelety, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,720,657.00

ABSTRACT

30 April 2012 Proposal Number: 1219328 Institution: Scripps Institution of
Oceanography (SIO) PI: B. Appelgate Co-PI: Z. Kelety

This proposal requests CY 2012 operational funding support for the West Coast
Winch Pool which is managed by Scripps Institution of Oceanography. The West
Coast Winch Pool is located at SIO's Marine Facility in San Diego, CA. The West
Coast Winch Pool supports federally-funded oceanographic research by providing
properly outfitted and maintained portable winches of all types (light-duty to
full ocean depth) to the Academic Research Vessel Fleet. Pooling of portable
capital equipment such as this (1) provides "Centers of Expertise" with
logistical support for science and ship operators; (2) provides equipment that
is "Free at the Point of Use" to NSF-funded users which relieves burden on
science and ship operations grants; (3) provides a mechanism for non-NSF funded
users to share maintenance costs by paying established daily rates; (4) reduces
the need for duplication of equipment at multiple institutions which results in
a long-term cost savings to the federal agencies; (5) generates improved budget
transparency on actual costs to operate and properly maintain capital, shared-
use equipment; (6) allows NSF to make proper equipment purchase decisions based
on science needs and provide the appropriate, dedicated, long-term support
budgets; and (7) improves the quality and reliability of equipment.

Broader Impacts: The research projects supported by the equipment pools have
been individually peer-reviewed for scientific merit with all equipment
deployments coordinated with University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS) ship time requests. SIO also operates the MELVILLE, REVELLE, NEW HORIZON
and SPROUL. These vessels support federally-funded scientific research
throughout the world's oceans and routinely expose graduate and undergraduate
students to seagoing oceanography. SIO participates in a large number of
outreach programs including open house events, student tours, and hosting of
government officials, dignitaries, and science communities while in foreign
ports.