* 1219323
* ACS Symposium on Emulsions, Bubbles and Foams: Fundamentals and Applications, New Orleans, Louisiana, April 7th - 11th, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

1219323&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds will be used to organize a
2013 ACS symposium titled ?Emulsions, Bubbles and Foams: Fundamentals and
Applications? for the Spring American Chemical Society (ACS) Meeting in New
Orleans, LA through the ACS Division of Colloid and Surface Chemistry, April 7th
to 11th, 2013 and to partially support travel costs of participants. Emulsions,
bubbles and foams are multiphase systems that have a broad range of applications
in biomedicine, food, cosmetics, pharmaceutics, and renewable energy. The
objective of the symposium is to bring together scientists and engineers
studying these systems from both fundamentals and applications points of view.
These systems are complex in nature; thus, development of new products based on
these materials could significantly benefit from fundamental understanding and
insights. The NSF support will be used towards the travel costs of participants
from academia and industry. The program theme of the 245th ACS National Meeting
is Chemistry of Energy and Food, making this meeting particularly well suited to
host the proposed symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emulsions, bubbles and foams
are multiphase systems that make up important classes of materials that are
studied in academia and commercialized by industry. However, only a limited
number of conferences, symposia, and workshops related to emulsions, bubbles and
foams have been offered recently. Through this proposed symposium, the global
emulsion and bubble/foam communities will have a unique opportunity to interact.
Participants in all stages of their career and of diverse backgrounds,
especially those from academia and industry, will be encouraged to participate
by offering partial financial support.