* 1219316
* EAGER: RNAi Gene Discovery Tool to Randomly Generate Dominant Mutant Pools in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Guiliang Tang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* scott jackson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 251,592.00

Tremendous progress has been made over the last 10 years in small RNA-directed
gene silencing and the development of related technologies in plants. To date,
two general kinds of small RNAs have been discovered in plants: siRNAs and
miRNAs. siRNAs can be further subdivided into three different types: trans-
active siRNAs (tasiRNAs), natural antisense siRNAs, and repeat-associated
siRNAs. Although all of these small RNAs can be used to silence genes in plants,
tasiRNAs are a unique but intriguing population of small RNAs that are well
conserved exclusively in various plant species. Production of tasiRNAs in plants
requires both the miRNA and the RNA interference pathways, which makes gene
silencing by tasiRNAs a potentially powerful system for gene function studies.
Unlike other kinds of small RNAs that need pre-structured double-stranded RNAs
(dsRNAs) as precursors for their production, tasiRNAs can use single-stranded
RNA precursors to produce dsRNA through RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in cells.
This unique quality makes it possible to introduce a randomized short sequence
inside the tasiRNA precursors through genetic engineering. This EAGER project
will explore the novel application of the plant tasiRNA pathway for generating
plant mutant pools in the model plant Arabidopsis as proof-of-concept.

In addition to the broader impacts of a new tool for investigating gene
function in crop plants, the project will provide research training
opportunities for one postdoctoral fellow and nine undergraduate and high school
students. Underrepresented minorities and women, as well as students from rural
eastern Kentucky, will be especially targeted and recruited. All information
regarding the method(s) developed and mutants generated will be available
through publication and through the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR). All
vectors and transgenic seed will be available from the PI and from the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC).