* 1219334
* SAVI: Student Research Network in the Physics of Living Systems (PoLS)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,500,000.00

SAVI: Student Research Network in the Physics of Living Systems (PoLS)

The goal of this project is for the PIs to join the Physics of Living Systems
Student Research Network (PoLS SRN) to foster national and international
interactions among scientists interested in research at the interpface of
physics and biology. Harvard has a long tradition of supporting research and
education at the interface of biology and physics with successful efforts
originating from both physics and biology departments. One of the strengths of
graduate student training at Harvard is the sheer breadth of Harvard's
scientific community. Joining the PoLS network will leverage these diverse and
often experimental experiences at Harvard at a national and international level
to the benefit of other PoLS institutions. In return, Harvard efforts in the
physics of living systems will benefit from complementary intellectual,
educational and research activities at other PoLS institutions. The PIs also
expect that the PoLS network will have synergistic effects at a purely local
Harvard level, especially between the School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Harvard Physics Department, and the FAS Center for Systems Biology,
which host the participating faculty. The future of life sciences lies is in the
hand of young researchers, and increasingly in the hands of scientists whose
training spans multiple disciplines including physics, engineering, and computer
sciences. The PoLS network brings together universities in the US and abroad who
share the vision that research and training partnerships across institutions and
countries will harness previously unexploited complementary intellectual and
educational strengths. The PIs share this view and propose that Harvard join the
PoLS network. Harvard's participation will create new student-led collaborations
and will strengthen existing ones, leading to new insights into general
principles that help to explain the structure, behavior, and evolution of cells
and organisms. The next generation of researchers working in the life sciences
needs to be versed in both the methodologies of the physical sciences and the
experimental practices of molecular biology. Bridging the cultures of physics
and biology resembles (and benefits from) bridging other cultural differences,
for example between institutions and countries. Traveling to another laboratory
for a research internship or to a workshop exposes students to a different
intellectual environment and to new problems and techniques. These encounters
catalyze a profound change in students' appreciation for approaches outside
their original expertise and motivate them to be more fluent in the language of
a different field. The proposed trans-institutional and trans-national network
will create a new community that fosters students creativity and encourages
their curiosity and fearlessness in developing new approaches. For the same
reasons students from underrepresented minority and disadvantaged backgrounds
will particularly benefit from the proposed activities in the PoLS network.

This award is designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and
is being co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering as
well as by the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Physics Division, the
Molecular Biophysics Program in Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS.