* 1219919
* Analysis of Fault Growth and Linkage Using Work Minimization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michele Cooke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2015
* USD 232,101.00

To predict fault growth it is important to understand crack linkage under shear.
If fault growth is governed by maximizing mechanical efficiency, a fault system
will accommodate deformation either via slip on existing faults or via the
growth of a new fault, depending on which is energetically easiest.
Consequently, whether small flaws or cracks will link to form a larger crack
depends on whether the energetic gain in efficient connection of cracks exceeds
the work required to create the linking crack. Using the principle of work
minimization, this research project numerically investigates how faults link and
grow with two approaches: 1) parametric investigation of crack coalescence in
order to test and calibrate the application of work minimization and 2)
simulation of the evolution of the San Jacinto fault in southern California. The
first approach uses mechanical models in a suite of parametric and stochastic
investigations to evaluate the configuration of new fault growth that would both
maximize efficiency of the system and are energetically favored to develop, i.e.
the work cost is less than the efficiency gained. The stochastic models will
incorporate different distributions of flaws in a sample under a variety of
loading conditions to explore the effect of differing degrees of anisotropy.
Furthermore, an investigation of the scaling of mechanical efficiency from the
lab to regional scales will facilitate the second approach employed in the
project. The second approach uses three-dimensional models to investigate the
work associated with the evolution of a stepover between the Clark fault and the
Coyote Creek fault, which are part of the San Jacinto fault in southern
California. Numerical models will simulate several stages in the interpreted
fault development at this stepover and assess the evolving mechanical
efficiency. The study will (a) provide insight into the mechanical efficiency of
fracture growth and coalescence, including the impact of anisotropy and the
scale of the models; and (b) analyze the development of the San Jacinto fault
through the growth and linkage of two fault segments based on the principle of
work minimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tectonic plate boundaries in the Earth
contain many active faults that slip in devastating earthquakes and contribute
to building large mountain ranges. The size of potential earthquakes depends on
the length of the fault; the larger the fault, the bigger the potential
earthquakes. While the behavior of faults is understood, how they grow is not.
Within the laboratory, scientists observed that within rocks, smaller cracks
link to form fault surfaces. Since many rocks already have abundant small cracks
but not all rocks contain faults, we need to understand the conditions that
contribute to crack linkage and eventual fault development. This project
examines how cracks link to form faults by applying the principle of work
minimization. This principle implies that the Earth is lazy. Within a lazy
Earth, cracks will only link up if the energetic cost of linking the cracks is
less than the energetic benefit of having the cracks linked up. In the case of
geologic faults, the benefit is that linked up cracks may more readily
accommodate slip and the cost is the energy need to break the rock at the
linkage. The project will develop tools to predict crack linkage that are based
on work minimization. Once these tools are developed, they will be applied to
the San Jacinto fault in southern California, which has a recent history of
linkage of two segments. If the model predictions match the interpreted history
of the San Jacinto fault then this tool may be of use for investigating other
regions of the world and predicting future fault evolution.