* 1219197
* HCC: Small: Patient-Provider Handoff: Collaboration Challenges and Technology Design
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Yunan Chen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,786.00

This work aims to obtain an empirical understanding of the collaborative
behaviors in patient-provider handoffs and to explore opportunities for
designing technologies that support and enhance these practices. Handoffs, also
called handovers, occur when workers exchange information necessary for their
tasks, and when responsibility for an operation shifts from one person to
another. Handoffs are often considered as the most error-prone activities in
collaborative work, especially for time-critical tasks under continuous
operation, such as in software design, 24/7 services areas, and healthcare
practices. In healthcare, this project's area of study, repeated handoffs occur
between patients and their health providers, with information being transferred
from patients or caregivers to healthcare professionals, and conversely from
professionals back to patients. The challenges involved in patient-provider
collaboration make it a uniquely situated area to
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses ethnographic methods to
investigate patient-provider handoffs in three different patient care settings:
an emergency department, an inpatient ward, and an outpatient clinic. It aims to
study the entire spectrum of activities related to handoffs, including pre-
visit, medical visit, and post-visit information work performed by patients and
clinicians. In addition, based on the empirical insights obtained through the
ethnographic study, an information media prototype will be used to solicit
feedback and further insights on designing information systems to mediate
patient-provider collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will provide
both empirical and conceptual insights into understanding the mechanisms,
challenges and behavioral patterns of team collaboration involving consumers and
professionals. The findings will benefit the design and the adoption of
information systems for health practices, and will reduce information and
communication errors in the handoff process. In the long run, this study will
also positively impact larger populations of patients through the wide
dissemination of the findings and through improving the design of the future
information media for patient-provider handoffs.