* 1219586
* A Numerical Study of the Growth of Large Ice Hydrometeors
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Pao-Kuan Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 380,029.00

The growth of large ice hydrometeors is a central problem in cloud physics and
one that potentially has great impacts on a wide variety of atmospheric
processes, particularly in the context of deep convective (thunderstorm-type)
clouds. These impacts include the rate and location of riming growth of graupel
and hail and the aggregation of snowflakes, which in-turn influence cloud
development and ensuing production of precipitation ultimately reaching the
ground. The growth of graupel is known to be connected with the electrification
of thunderclouds, while costs of hail damage to property and agriculture runs
into billions of dollars annually. Snow-related processes impact thunderstorm
anvil structures, which have important downstream radiative impacts.
Quantitative knowledge of all of these processes and their interactions are
required for accurate weather and climate predictions, yet understanding of
these processes on the scale of individual particles and their interactions
remains limited.

This investigator will utilize a commercially available computational fluid
dynamics package to solve the Navier-Stokes equation for flow around a target
ice particles whose surfaces are defined by an analytical expression, and
thereby gain improved descriptions of the collisional growth of large ice
particles (in particular graupel and snow aggregates). Numerical models of the
fall behavior of these large ice particles as they are accreting other particles
(either supercooled droplets or another ice particle) and hence changing their
shapes will be developed, as will collisional-growth rate models. Complex
combinations of various modes of particle motion including as translation,
vibration, and rotation will be explicitly represented so as to more accurately
characterize particle trajectories, ventilation coefficients and associated
collision efficiencies applicable to real clouds. The intellectual merit of this
work centers on an improved understanding of cloud microphysical interactions
applicable to convective clouds. Broader impacts will include student education
and, ultimately, the potential for improved interpretation of cloud observations
through a variety of operational and anticipated research-mode measurements
including storm-penetrating aircraft.