* 1219638
* RI:Small:Collaborative Proposal: Computational Framework of Robust Intelligent System for Mental State Identification and Human Performance Prediction with Biofeedback
* CSE,IIS
* 06/30/2011,07/31/2013
* Wanpracha Chaovalitwongse, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 174,231.00

This project will integrate new cognitive models of behavioral data based on
queueing theory with new machine learning techniques for analyzing
neurophysiological data, specifically electroencephalogram (EEG), in order to
provide a deeper and more complete understanding of mental states as well as
more accurate prediction of human performance. In cognitive modeling, a new
brain network architecture for human performance and mental workload, called
Queuing Network-Model Human Processor (QN-MHP), will be further improved. QN-MHP
with a new human-like small-scale knowledge system will be used to model the
increase of myelination in the brain in cognitive development and predict human
performance, in terms of subjective risk perception and confidence. In machine
learning, new spatio-temporal (pattern-based) classification techniques will be
developed for multidimensional time series data and used to identify human
mental states (e.g., fully awake, fatigue, distracted, anger) from EEG data. The
integrated framework will result in a robust intelligent system that uses
machine learning to identify mental states and the queueing model of that mental
state to predict the human performance as well as provide a human operator with
feedback. A mind-driven intelligent transportation system will be developed as a
case study in this project, where a certain type of feedback will be designed to
help drivers avoid accidents and to improve system safety. This system can also
be applied to other human-machine systems that require full or partial attention
of human operators (e.g., in aviation, military, or manufacturing settings).