* 1219659
* Research Starter Grant:  Investigating the biochemical function of Wolbachia pipientis type IV effectors
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Irene Newton, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2013
* USD 47,712.00

The ultimate goal of this project is to identify mechanisms by which an
extraordinarily widespread, intracellular bacterium modifies host cell biology.
Specifically, this project focuses on the intracellular bacterium Wolbachia and
the identification of bacterial determinants that manipulate eukaryotic cell
biology. This project leverages the power of bioinformatics and the yeast
genetic system to study this unculturable, genetically intractable bacterium.
First, the project focuses on proteins, identified in a bioinformatics screen,
likely secreted by Wolbachia during the process of host infection. These
proteins are characterized in the context of the eukaryotic cell using high-
throughput genetic screens and functional genomic approaches including the
identification of genetic and biochemical
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification of the mechanisms by which
Wolbachia interacts with its host will contribute to the understanding of this
symbiosis in the context of insect vector control. Wolbachia pipientis infects
an extremely broad array of eukaryotic hosts, including the mosquito disease
vectors Aedes and Anopholes, and have become noteworthy of late due to their
specific relevance to these insects. Dengue fever and its more virulent form
hemorrhagic fever, are emerging as serious public health threats in the 21st
century and controlling the principal vector mosquito is predicted to be
critical to the effective prevention of an epidemic. Interestingly, infection by
Wolbachia has been shown to prevent transmission of Dengue by Aedes, although
the biological mechanisms through which the infection is accomplished are
unknown. By characterizing Wolbachia proteins that interact with eukaryotic cell
biology, we can better understand the mechanism behind the Aedes-Dengue-
Wolbachia interaction, allowing us to better predict how Wolbachia infection may
be used to prevent the transmission of diseases by mosquitos. Additionally,
because Wolbachia infect such a broad diversity of insects, results from this
work will lead to comparative analyses in other infections.