* 1219403
* Workshop:  Computer Simulation - Opportunities and Challenges; Shanghai, China; 23-25 July 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Seong-Hee Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

The objectives of this workshop, being held in Shanghai, China, 23-25 July 2012,
are (i) to scope new opportunities and challenges in simulation research related
to new emerging computing technologies and application areas, and brainstorm how
to successfully approach them; and (ii) to promote simulation research in East
Asia and foster international collaborations. New emerging computing
technologies bring new paradigms to simulation methodology, changing traditional
ways of implementing input modeling, output analysis, and simulation
optimization. The new technologies also give enormous opportunities for the
simulation community to grow further by expanding application areas and
providing fast/efficient/reliable decision support tools for large-scale
simulations in the new application areas. The meeting will help define new
directions in research and applications of simulation with respect to new
computing technologies and emerging application areas.

In contrast to other operations research methodologies, stochastic simulation
has been relatively underused outside of North American and Western Europe, due
to limited computational resources, as complex large-scale simulation models are
computationally intensive. If successful, this workshop will enable and foster
long-term cooperation and collaboration on simulation research that will exploit
new emerging computing technologies such as parallel and cloud computing and
lead to wide use in applications from healthcare to energy to telecommunications
to transportation.