* 1219366
* Collaborative Proposal: Mathematical and experimental study of lipid bilayer shape and dynamics mediated by surfactants and proteins
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 181,667.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the fundamental mathematics and
biophysics that underlie the equilibrium shape and dynamics of a lipid bilayer
interacting with surfactants and proteins. The lipid bilayer is the main
structural component of the elastic biological membranes that consist of
different lipid species, and contain many kinds of proteins, and many other
molecules such as cholesterols and surfactants. In addition, the biomembranes
are asymmetric double leaflets coupled to a cytoskeleton that is crucial for
cellular adaptation of different shapes and motility. It is now known that lipid
composition may set limits to the possible shapes and deformations, while the
actual shape of the cellular membrane depends on both the force (from the
cytoskeleton, for example) and membrane-deforming proteins. Much progress has
been made to uncover and decipher the mechanisms by which proteins can sense
and/or induce membrane curvature. However, recent experiments have shown that
interaction between lipid membranes and amphipathic molecules, such as
surfactant and amphipathic peptides, also leads to changes in total membrane
area, curvature and rigidity. No mathematical modeling of these effects have yet
been obtained to help elucidate the asymmetry in the lipid bilayer due to
surfactants and proteins, or how cells may utilize these mechanisms to perform
diverse biological functions. This project aims to establish mathematical
understanding of the roles of surfactants and proteins in causing the
asymmetries in lipid double leaflets and their subsequent shape and dynamics.
The particular focuses are on (1) surfactant-induced membrane area regulation
and shape change, and (2) effects of transport, assembly, and organization of
trans-membrane proteins on membrane shape and dynamics. In addition, the
experiments (by Stone) will validate and refine the modeling approach (by
Young), which will in turn facilitate the numerical simulation (by Veerapaneni)
of the elastic lipid bilayer interacting with surfactant and protein. Results
will help uncover the complex organization and interplay between proteins and
lipid domains in cellular membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this
project is the development and analysis of mathematical models of the
interaction between lipid membranes and surfactant or protein over large spatial
(microns) and long time (seconds to minutes) scales, which is difficult to
achieve using state-of-the-art coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations.
Quantitative comparison between experiments, mathematical modeling, and
numerical simulations will be conducted. Broader impacts of the research include
the development of new mathematical models, numerical methods and complementary
analysis and experiments that will be of benefit to scientists and engineers
studying rafts dynamics as well as emerging applications in drug delivery,
cellular adhesion, motility and mechanosensing. The concepts and methods
described here go beyond the context of moving boundary dynamics mediated by an
active species, and extend to other problems featuring reaction-diffusion of
chemicals. The approach has the potential to be adapted to more complicated
biological membranes that are similar from a mathematical point of view. The
students involved in this project will receive valuable interdisciplinary
training in a wide range of mathematics, biophysics and computer science.