* 1220076
* Developing a REE-in-two-pyroxene Thermometer for Pyroxene-bearing Mafic and Ultramafic Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Yan Liang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2014
* USD 206,173.00

Temperature of the Earth?s and planetary interior is a key parameter in
understanding the thermal and chemical evolution of the Earth and planetary
bodies. One standard tool that has been widely used to read temperatures of
rocks from the Earth?s interior is geo-thermometer that has been developed on
the basis of temperature and pressure dependent distribution of major chemical
elements in minerals that form the rocks. Among the most popular are the major
element-based pyroxene thermometers that have played an important role in
determining thermal structure of the Earth?s upper mantle. Clinopyroxene and
orthopyroxene are major rock-forming minerals controlling the abundance and
distribution of rare earth elements (REE) in rocks from the Earth?s upper
mantle. It has been well documented that ratios of REE abundances between
clinopyroxene and orthopyroxene in mantle rocks are sensitive to temperature. A
principal goal of the studies proposed is to develop a pyroxene thermometer that
is built on the temperature-dependent REE distribution between the two
pyroxenes. One of the most important advantages of this new thermometer is that
it has a higher closure temperature. This means that one can potentially read
high temperature history of rocks now exposed on the surface.

In this project, researchers at Brown University will calibrate a REE-in-two-
pyroxene thermometer through a combination of laboratory crystal growth and
trace element partitioning experiments and chemical analysis of well-
equilibrated two-pyroxene bearing ultramafic and mafic samples from the Earth?s
upper mantle and lower crust. Together with published high quality pyroxene-melt
trace element partitioning data, they will develop internally consistent lattice
strain models for REE partitioning in the system clinopyroxene-melt,
orthopyroxene-melt, and orthopyroxene-clinopyroxene using nonlinear least
squares regression methods. With a laboratory calibrated temperature- and
composition-dependent orthopyroxene-clinopyroxene REE partitioning model, they
will be able to calculate equilibrium temperatures for ultramafic or mafic
samples using measured REE abundances in the two coexisting pyroxenes. Potential
applications of the new thermometer to ultramafic and mafic rocks from a range
of geological settings are outlined.

The broader impacts of this project will derive from the importance of geo-
thermometer and pyroxene-melt REE partitioning models to petrologic,
geochemical, and geodynamic applications. Results from this study will provide
valuable information for a diverse group of petrologists, geochemists,
geodynamicists, and planetary scientists, promoting cross-discipline integration
in Earth and Planetary Sciences. The internally consistent pyroxene-melt REE
partitioning models will provide key parameters to geochemists to infer melting
processes in the Earth and planetary interior. The high closure temperature of
REE-in-two-pyroxene thermometer may provide a new tool to petrologists,
geodynamicists, and planetary scientists to estimate cooling rate and thermal
structure of the lithosphere, to better understand the thermal and chemical
history of mafic and ultramafic rocks from the Moon, Mars, and other planetary
bodies. Results from this study will also be disseminated to a broader audience
through public lectures and undergraduate and graduate courses. And finally, the
proposed project will provide hands-on experience for undergraduates, research
opportunities for senior thesis work, and experimental, computational, and
educational experience for graduate students.