* 1220666
* Collaborative Research: Researching The Efficacy Of The Science &amp; Literacy Academy Model
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2017
* Hilda Borko, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,472,714.00

This award is doing a research study of three models of professional development
(PD) to test the efficacy of a practicum for grade 3-5 in-service teachers
organized in three cohorts of 25. Model 1 is a one-week institute based on
classroom discourse practices and a 2-week practicum (cohort 1). Model 2 is the
one-week institute (cohort 2). Model 3 is a "business as usual" model (cohort 3)
based on normal professional development provided by the school district.
Cohorts 1 and 2 experience the interventions in year 1 with four follow-up
sessions in each of years 2 and 3. In year 4 they receive no PD, but are being
observed to see if they sustain the practices learned. Cohort 3 receives no
treatment in years 1 and 2, but participates in a revised version of the
institute plus practicum in year 3 with four follow up sessions in year 4. The
Lawrence Hall of Science provides the professional development, and Stanford
University personnel are conducting the research. The teachers come from the
Oakland Unified School District. Science content is the GEMS Ocean Sciences
Sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are 3 research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. In what ways do practicum-based professional
development models influence science instructional practice?&lt;br/&gt;2. What
differences in student outcomes are associated with teachers' participation in
the different PD programs?&lt;br/&gt;3. Is the impact of the revised PD model
different from the impact of the original model? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
designed-based research model. Teacher data is based on interviews on beliefs
about teaching and the analysis of video tapes of their practicum and classroom
performance using the Discourse in Inquiry Science Classrooms instrument.
Student data is based on the GEMS unit pre- and post-tests and the California
Science Test for 5th graders. Multiple analyses are being conducted using
different combinations of the data from 8 scales across 4 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be 75 teachers and their students directly
impacted by the project. Additional impacts of the project are research results
and professional development materials, including a PD implementation guide and
instructional videos. These will be presented in publications and conference
presentations and be posted on linked websites at the Lawrence Hall of Science
and the Center to Support Excellence in Teaching at Stanford University.