* 1220034
* Ocean Acidification: Examining Impacts on Squid Paralarval Development, Behavior, and Survival
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Aran Mooney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2016
* USD 587,065.00

Squid are often referred to as keystone species because of their central role in
ocean ecosystems. They play vital roles in marine food webs both as prey for
many of top predators such as seabirds, dolphins, sharks, and tunas, and as
voracious predators of smaller, often deep-water (mesopelagic) fishes and
invertebrates. Squid comprise a substantial fisheries resource, both directly as
commercial and recreational fisheries, and indirectly as an important food
source for many of the fishes consumed by a growing human population. Changes in
squid abundances can dramatically impact the ecology of the ocean and fisheries
yields. &lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of squid to both ecosystems and
economies, there has been little investigation of the effects of ocean
acidification (OA) on these taxa. Impacts upon juvenile squid are a primary
concern because: (i) early developmental stage animals are highly sensitive to
environmental conditions and (ii) their successful early life history growth,
behavior and survival are critical to founding future cohorts that support
ecosystem food webs and global fisheries. The goal of this work is to quantify
how OA conditions impact squid embryo and juvenile development, behavior, and
survival. The studies will provide a mechanistic foundation for understanding
potential impacts of OA on squid populations. Squid are dynamic organisms, which
may now encounter high carbon dioxide and lower pH in areas of ocean upwelling,
and measures of these environmental variables will be collected in this study.
This research takes an extensive whole-organism approach to understanding OA
impacts on squid by examining anatomy, physiology, and behavior of these animals
at levels of environmental carbon dioxide and pH encompassing present-day and
predicted, future values. &lt;br/&gt;These are the first tests to
comprehensively examine OA impacts on squid. The experiments are timely in the
context of changing ocean conditions, increased pressure on squid fisheries, and
preliminary data showing potential OA impacts on squid. Understanding these
effects will aid fisheries managers in estimating ecosystem and economic impacts
in this and other cephalopod species. Information from this research will be
used to engage and educate the general public, who are fascinated by squid
biology, about ocean acidification through a summer seminar series at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. The research team and the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Communications Department will communicate findings from this study to
journalists; interact with teachers about this work through existing fellowship
programs; construct and convey education materials for grade-school children at
a local science school; and develop a squid dissection module for high school
teachers entitled "Squid have ears too!"