* 1220269
* OCI: VOSS: Stakeholder Participation and the Emergence of Dominant Design in Large-Scale Cyber-Infrastructure (CI) Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Charlotte Lee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2016
* USD 413,332.00

Cyberinfrastructure systems are large-scale information systems that are built
for the purpose of supporting scientific collaboration within and across
disciplines, research fields and subfields. Although scientific advances in an
increasing number of disciplines depend on the development of
cyberinfrastructures, the processes by which such systems are designed are not
well understood. The proposed study will contribute to an understanding of how
cyberinfrastructure systems are designed and developed, and in particular, how
their design emerges out of social influence processes among the project
stakeholders. The study will investigate the role that different stakeholders
play in the design and development process, the ways in which their interests
and priorities are aligned, and the social organization of development efforts.
A qualitative study will be conducted to examine the collaboration and social
influence behaviors of scientists, project managers, team leaders,
experimenters, and campus CIOs and other stakeholders during the design and
development of multiple clusters within the Global Environment for Network
Innovations (GENI) project, a unique virtual laboratory for at-scale networking
experimentation. The project will describe the processes of collaborative design
and development of cyberinfrastructure systems and identify interventions that
might help promote the alignment of various stakeholder groups' interests and
priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining the process by which alternative
designs are evaluated and the nature of stakeholder participation in design
decisions, this study will contribute research and practical knowledge to the
area of CI and large-scale IT development. Collaborations among institutions
conducting work on social and organizational aspects of cyberinfrastructure
systems will be established to more efficiently define common concerns. Be
contributing to a more sophisticated understanding of how cyberinfrastructure
development evolves over time, this project will simulate and support the
development of future cyberinfrastructure systems improving our ability to
enable the computational and data-enabled science and engineering required to
address significant societal challenges such as disaster response, energy
efficiency, and public health.