* 1220305
* Exploring the Efficacy of Engineering is Elementary (E4)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* William Carlsen, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,999,827.00

This project is developing evidence about the efficacy of the Engineering is
Elementary curriculum under ideal conditions by studying the student and
teacher-level effects of implementation. The rigorous level of evidence that is
developed in this study has significant utility as a support for the kinds of
elementary engineering curricula that are needed as the Next Generation Science
Standards come online and emphasize engineering design. The study is a
randomized control trial where the assignment of teachers will be to the EiE
curricular materials or to a counterfactual condition, the use of more standard
design engineering curricular materials. The project studies the impact of the
use of the curriculum on student learning and on teachers' use of the curriculum
in a fidelity of implementation study to determine the core elements of the
curriculum that support successful use. The study examines the implementation of
the curricular materials in a number of contexts to more fully understand the
conditions under which they work best and to explicate what aspects of such
project-based inquiry materials most support student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses a randomized cluster trial to
examine the efficacy of the EiE curriculum across 75 schools in the treatment
and 75 schools in the control group samples. Two teachers per school are
included in one treatment/control condition per school. Outcome measures for
students include performances on project-specific measures that have been
examined for technical quality of validity and reliability. A set of additional
research-based survey instruments validated for use in the EiE context are also
used to collect data about students' attitudes, perceptions, interest and
motivation toward science and engineering. A robust fidelity of implementation
research plan is being implemented that will include teachers surveys, pre and
post assessments, teacher logs, as well as student engineering journals and
student work from classroom implementation. The fidelity of implementation is
further studied with forty treatment and ten control teachers through classroom
observations and interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this study
have broad implications for how engineering design curricular can be developed
and implemented at the elementary level. Engineering design has not been
emphasized in the elementary classroom, lagging behind instruction in science
with which teachers are more familiar. The results of this study inform
practitioners and policy makers about what works, for whom and under what
conditions. Information about the different contexts in which the curriculum has
been implemented supports the dissemination of evidence-based research and
development practices to strengthen STEM learning for all students.