* 1220521
* NAACL-HLT 2012 Student Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Ani Nenkova, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The NAACL HLT conference is the major international conference in North America
in the field of natural language processing. The goal of this grant is subsidize
travel, conference, and housing expenses of students selected to participate in
the NAACL HLT Student Research Workshop which will be held during the conference
June 3-8 in Montreal, Canada. The workshop aims to attract papers both from
authors who are in their early stages of academic work (possibly undergraduate
and masters students) as well as from students who are approaching graduate and
would like to present their thesis work. The goal is to help attract students
from the first group to pursue further academic work, and to help students from
the second group in their job search and career planning.

Papers from the student workshop are presented as posters during the main poster
session of the conference. Senior researchers are assigned as mentors to each
student and provide individual feedback. A general session on on how to review
papers and what to expect from reviewers is held during a lunch slot. The
workshop is organized and run by students.

The Student Research Workshop provides a valuable opportunity for the next
generation of natural language processing researchers to enter the computational
linguistics community. It allows the best students in the field to take their
first important step toward becoming professional computational linguists by
receiving critical feedback on their work from external experts, and by making
contacts with other students and senior researchers in their field. The students
who are involved in running and selecting papers for the workshop also gain
valuable opportunities for professional growth and interaction with the
researchers on the organizing committee of the main conference. The workshop
contributes to the maintenance and development of a skilled and diverse
computational linguistics and natural language processing research community.