* 1220051
* Rheological Evolution of Basaltic Lava Flows During Cooling and Crystallization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alan Whittington, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2015
* USD 316,682.00

Basaltic lavas cover large portions of the surface of the Earth and several
other planets and moons. The morphology of lava flows and other structures such
as cones and domes is related to the physical properties of the lava, the
effusion rate, and environmental factors such as surface medium (submarine vs
subaerial) and slope. Important physical properties of lavas include viscosity,
yield strength, thermal diffusivity and heat capacity, all of which vary with
temperature (T) and crystal fraction (&amp;#966;, which itself varies with T).
Melt viscosity can vary by many orders of magnitude within a single eruptive
event, and despite recent advances the rheology of crystallizing basaltic magma
is still relatively poorly constrained. The PI and graduate students will
measure the rheological and thermal properties of basaltic lavas from various
tectonic settings at conditions appropriate to basaltic volcanism, and model
variations in these properties as a function of T, composition (X) and
&amp;#966;. The aim is to provide a better understanding of how these properties
can vary across a flow at a particular instant in time, and within a single
quantum of magma from vent to final emplacement. By combining information on
rheological and thermal properties of magma, we seek to explore potentially
complex feedback relationships between crystallization, latent heat release,
melt viscosity and yield strength that control the overall rheology and flow
morphology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lava samples to be studied will come from
Kilauea (Hawaii), Laki (Iceland), Etna (Italy), Fuego and Pacaya (Guatemala),
and Arenal (Costa Rica). Experimental measurements will include: determination
of melt viscosity from 1 to 1012 Pa.s as a function of temperature, using
parallel-plate and concentric-cylinder viscometers. Yield strength will be
determined at low stresses relevant to lava flows by measuring strain rate as a
function of stress, for carefully selected time series experiments to obtain
samples with different crystal contents. Liquid heat capacity and the enthalpy
of fusion will be determined by drop calorimetry. Heat capacity of glasses and
supercooled liquids, and enthalpy of crystallization under supercooled
conditions, will be determined by differential scanning calorimetry. Melt
viscosity and multiphase magma rheology (effective viscosity and apparent yield
strength) will be parameterized as a function of T, X and &amp;#966;. The
research program will be divided into smaller projects that will provide many
opportunities for integrated graduate and undergraduate training and education.
The project will provide data and models with applications extending to natural
hazards, planetary geology and materials science.