* 1220747
* Collaborative Research: ATD: Statistical and Computational Methods for the Analysis of Metagenomic Count Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Zhenqiu Liu, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 96,307.00

Molecular genetics, metagenomics, and bioinformatics are central to
species/strain identification, virulence determination, pathogenicity
characterization, and source attribution. Faster, cheaper sequencing
technologies and the ability to sequence uncultured microbes sampled directly
from their habitats have enabled the production of massive metagenomic data that
are tangible for the detection of biological threats. Distilling meaningful
information from millions of new genomic sequences presents serious challenges
to bioinformaticians. Even though there have been intensive studies determining
the taxonomical content of the sequences, there is a dearth of methods available
to study the associations and interactions among metagenomic count data, human
genomic data, and clinical outcomes. This project proposes to develop novel
parametric and nonparametric methods for bacterial taxa identification, clinical
outcome prediction, and bacterial community structure estimation. Taxa selection
will be based on changes in both abundance and correlation structures. This
project will also develop statistical learning methods for evaluating bacterial
community dynamics and causal inference with longitudinal metagenomic data.
Efficient computational methods for detecting gene-microbe interactions with
integrated metagenomic and genomic data analysis will also be developed. The
proposed methodologies and algorithms will be evaluated and validated with
various simulation and publicly available metagenomic and genomic
data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The threat of terrorists or criminal use of
pathogenic organisms and their toxins remains a great concern in the United
States. Bioterrorism utilizes viruses, bacteria, fungi and toxins to cause mass
sickness or death of people, animals, or agriculture. The analytical methods and
software developed in this proposal are anticipated to provide an important
bioinformatics resource for researchers who have a goal of using metagenomic
data sources for the prevention of bioterrorism and the conviction of
bioterrorists. In addition, methods and software developed in this project would
be a valuable contribution to environmental and human metagenomic research,
which could potentially have a broader impact, especially in public health
research, as a myriad of diseases such as obesity, inflammatory bowel diseases,
bacterial vaginosis, and cancer all have been associated with shifts in
microbiota. Finally, this project will also contribute to the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in a cutting-edge
interdisciplinary research area that fuses knowledge of biology, statistics and
computer science.