* 1220478
* Ocean Acidification: Physiological and genetic responses of the deep-water coral, Lophelia pertusa, to ongoing ocean acidification in the Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Erik Cordes, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2017
* USD 658,994.00

The Gulf of Mexico deep water ecosystems are threatened by the persistent threat
of ocean acidification. Deep-water corals will be among the first to feel the
effects of this process, in particular the deep-water scleractinians that form
their skeleton from aragonite. The continued shoaling of the aragonite
saturation horizon (the depth below which aragonite is undersaturated) will
place many of the known, and as yet undiscovered, deep-water corals at risk in
the very near future. The most common deep-water framework-forming scleractinian
in the world's oceans is Lophelia pertusa. This coral is most abundant in the
North Atlantic, where aragonite saturation states are relatively high, but it
also creates extensive reef structures between 300 and 600 m depth in the Gulf
of Mexico where aragonite saturation states were previously unknown. Preliminary
data indicate that pH at this depth range is between 7.85 and 8.03, and the
aragonite saturation state is typically between 1.28 and 1.69. These are the
first measurements of aragonite saturation state for the deep Gulf of Mexico,
and are among the lowest Aragonite saturation state yet recorded for framework-
forming corals in any body of water, at any depth. This project will examine the
effects of ocean acidification on L. pertusa, combining laboratory experiments,
rigorous oceanographic measurements, the latest genome and transcriptome
sequencing platforms, and quantitative PCR and enzyme assays to examine changes
in coral gene expression and enzyme activity related to differences in carbonate
chemistry. Short-term and long-term laboratory experiments will be performed at
Aragonite saturation state of 1.45 and 0.75 and the organismal (e.g.,
survivorship and calcification rate) and genetic (e.g., transcript abundance)
responses of the coral will be monitored. Genomic DNA and RNA will be extracted,
total mRNA purified, and comprehensive and quantitative profiles of the
transcriptome generated using a combination of 454 and Illumina sequencing
technologies. Key genes in the calcification pathways as well as other
differentially expressed genes will be targeted for specific qPCR assays to
verify the Illumina sequencing results. On a research cruise, L. pertusa will be
sampled (preserved at depth) along a natural gradient in carbonate chemistry,
and included in the Illumina sequencing and qPCR assays. Water samples will be
obtained by submersible-deployed niskin bottles adjacent to the coral
collections as well as CTD casts of the water column overlying the sites. Water
samples will be analyzed for pH, alkalinity, nitrates and soluble reactive
phosphorus. These will be used in combination with historical data in a model to
hindcast Aragonite saturation state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This project will provide new physiological and genetic data on an ecologically-
significant and anthropogenically-threatened deepwater coral in the Gulf of
Mexico. An experimental system, already developed by the PIs, offers controlled
conditions to test the effect of Aragonite saturation state on calcification
rates in scleractinians and, subsequently, to identify candidate genes and
pathways involved in the response to reduced pH and Aragonite saturation state.
Both long-term and population sampling experiments will provide additional
transcriptomic data and specifically investigate the expression of the candidate
genes. These results will contribute to our understanding of the means by which
scleractinians may acclimate and acclimatize to low pH, alkalinity, and
Aragonite saturation state. Furthermore, the investigators will continue a time
series of oceanographic measurements of the carbonate system in the Gulf of
Mexico, which will allow the inclusion of this significant body of water in
models of past and future ocean acidification
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results that combine the study
of ongoing ocean acidification in the Gulf of Mexico with the physiological and
genetic responses of the corals to low saturation state will be presented at
conferences, seminars, and published in high-impact and open-access
publications. Raw and processed data will be made available in existing
databases including NCBI (genetic and genomic data), and through the Biological
and Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office (BCO-DMO). All project data
will also be made available via a local ftp server linked to each of the PIs
websites. The PIs are committed to the inclusion of under-represented minorities
in their research, and have a proven record of mentoring undergraduates at
Temple University, one of the most diverse institutions in the U.S. A two-day
workshop for 20 Gulf Coast high school teachers, and also including students
from Temple, will be led by the PIs and coordinated by Dr. Shelia Brown at the
Gulf Coast Research Lab in Ocean Springs, MS to provide teachers with the
background and materials needed to bring curricula based on these results
directly into their classrooms. A high school teacher will also participate in
the cruise. Through these efforts, the investigators hope to raise public
consciousness of the issue of ocean acidification, increase the level of
awareness of the presence of deep-water coral communities in U.S. waters, and to
inspire the next generation of scientists.