* 1220616
* Intercellular Interactions and Dynamics of Morphogenesis.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Boris Shraiman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 783,481.00

In this project, the PI will develop an intermediate, cell and tissue-level
description of tissue and organ morphogenesis that would on one side connect to
specific molecular pathways and on the other to the macroscopic phenotypes, thus
bridging the gap between the molecular and organismal scales. On this level
developmental processes directly involve physical interactions and physics ideas
regarding collective phenomena and pattern formation. The PI will develop
theoretical models that explain existing experimental observations and generate
falsifiable quantitative hypotheses, which will guide new experiments with the
long-term goal of elucidating dynamics of morphogenesis. The project will focus
on several model systems where extensive experimentally acquired knowledge is
available. Specifically, the proposed project will: 1) Investigate the dynamics
of cell rearrangement that drives germ-band extension in Drosophila embryo.
Based on the quantitative analysis of time-lapse fluorescent microscopy data
from T. Lecuit's lab (IBDM, Marseille) the PI will formulate and analyze models
of stress and planar cell polarization-dependent mechanical remodeling of
cellular cytoskeleton and intercellular adhesion, which causes convergent
extension of epithelial tissue. 2) Develop a model of pattern formation in the
process of hair-cell differentiation in the avian cochlea. The PI will
specifically address the dynamical interplay of lateral inhibition, due to
Notch/Delta cell-contact signaling, with cell division and rearrangement that
modify tissue morphology. The PI will collaborate with D. Sprinzak (Tel Aviv U)
in the design of an experimental investigation of this phenomenon and in the
interpretation of the results. 3) Develop a model of intercellular contact
signaling mediated by Fat/Ds cell-adhesion proteins, which have been implicated
in cell polarity and regulation of growth in Drosophila imaginal discs. The PI
will carry out quantitative analysis of the effects of clonal genetic
perturbations using extensive existing data from K. Irvine's lab (HHMI and
Rutgers), compare results with model predictions and use the model to design new
experiments. The PI will collaborate with D. Sprinzak (Tel Aviv U) on the design
of the "bottom-up" synthetic reconstruction study of the Fat/Ds signaling. The
PI will work with physics students encouraging and guiding their research on
biology problems. As a member of the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics
(KITP), the PI coordinates the Interdisciplinary Biology Initiative that runs
programs designed to break barriers between disciplines. The PI will expand
these interdisciplinary activities to include, in collaboration with CNSI and
MCD Biology Dept on the UCSB campus, a summer experimental research course on
the subject of "Dynamics of Development". This course, to be held in 2013, will
be the inaugural session of the Santa Barbara Advanced School of Quantitative
Biology that is being set up by the PI. The course will teach physics and
biology students how quantitative methods and ideas can be applied to the study
of animal development.