* 1220300
* Did Channel Flow Drive the Thermo-mechanical Evolution of the Eastern Himalaya? A Field-based Test in Northeast Bhutan
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Stacia Gordon, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 392,960.00

The Himalayan range and Tibetan Plateau represent the world?s tallest mountain
range and largest area of elevated land, and are the type-example of a mountain
belt that formed as a result of continent-continent collision. This system is
still actively growing; therefore, study of these mountains provides a unique
opportunity to understand how the crust evolves during this type of plate
collision. Across much of the Himalayan range, rocks that have been buried to
depths as much as approximately 35 km below Earth's surface and taken to
temperatures hot enough to partially melt are observed at the surface today.
These rocks have been studied in many parts of the Himalaya, and there is
currently a vigorous debate over how these rocks were exhumed to the surface.
The channel flow model predicts that these deeply buried rocks lost much of
their strength after partially melting, and were then translated southward and
towards the surface. In comparison, other proposed models argue that faults and
shear zones were responsible for their exhumation, and are less focused on the
driving force being the weakness of the rocks. In this project, we propose to
test the applicability of these different models to rocks in the kingdom of
Bhutan, which lies in the eastern part of the Himalayan range. We will do this
by collecting rock samples during field expeditions, and determining the
pressure, temperature, timing, and evolution of deformation that they
experienced. In the past, Bhutan has been relatively isolated for geologic
researchers so the majority of the rocks exposed in Bhutan have not been well
studied.

The results of this project will make a valuable contribution to the debate over
how continental crust evolves during collisional mountain building. In addition,
multiple graduate students will be trained in the field and laboratory,
including one Bhutanese citizen and current employee of Bhutan's geologic
survey. After he finishes his degree, he will return to Bhutan to take on a
leadership role in the study of natural resources, natural hazards, and public
policy. Undergraduate students will also be involved with laboratory analyses
and will obtain training, education, and research experience. Finally, this
study will support the research efforts of two early career researchers, as well
as foster valuable international collaboration between UNR and scientists at
Bhutan?s geological survey.