* 1220630
* Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Woody Sutherland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2014
* USD 36,215.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on the R/V
Roger Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel; the R/V Melville, a
279?general purpose Global vessel; the R/V New Horizon, a 170?, general purpose,
Ocean/Intermediate vessel and the R/V Sproul, a 125? general purpose
Coastal/Local vessel. All four vessels are operated by Scripps Institution of
Oceanography as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
research fleet.

Both R/V Roger Revelle and R/V Melville are Global vessels and support
multidisciplinary oceanographic research in all of the world?s ocean basins. R/V
New Horizon focuses primarily on offshore California but has been used for work
throughout the Pacific. The primary working area for R/V Sproul has been the
continental shelf and coastal environments off Southern California. In 2012, R/V
Roger Revelle is scheduled for 281 days with NSF days accounting for 64% of the
total sailing schedule; R/V Melville is scheduled for 281 days with NSF days
accounting for 60% of the total sailing schedule; R/V New Horizon is scheduled
for 131 days with NSF days accounting for 60% of the total sailing schedule; and
R/V Sproul is scheduled for 91 days with NSF days accounting for 35% of the
total sailing schedule

Oceanographic instrumentation requested in this proposal includes: 1) Disk
Storage Servers $36,215 2) TrackLink 5000 USBL $64,564 3) Air Winches $111,285
4) EIVA Geophysical Software $50,222 5) SeaSoar Block $16,897 6) SeaSoar
Hydraulic Unit $59,574 7) 10m2 MOCNESS Components $46,217 TOTAL $384,974

Broader Impacts: The principal impact of the present proposal is under criterion
two, providing infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its
shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research
projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research
program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use
instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.