* 1220048
* Isotopic Methods for Sourcing Shell Beads in California
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Jelmer Eerkens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 239,382.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Jelmer Eerkens and
Howard Spero will build on previous research to develop a robust method for
tracing the geographic origin of ancient shell beads in Central California. The
approach is based on stable isotope signatures preserved in the shells used to
make beads. There is significant variation along the California Coast in
seasonal water temperature, salinity, and upwelling of cold and nutrient-rich
seawater. Together, these effects impart distinctive isotopic signatures to
shells growing along different sections of the coast. When a shell is collected
on the coast, turned into a bead, and traded inland, it retains the signature of
where it originally grew in the calcium carbonate structure of its shell. When
archaeologists recover shell artifacts far away from the coast, they can work
backwards, from the artifact and through the isotopic signature, to determine
where the shell originally grew.

Archaeologists use these types of techniques to trace the movement of raw
materials across the landscape and this allows them to reconstruct ancient
trading and interaction networks. These trading networks, by extension, allow
evaluation of how people adapted to their ever-changing social and natural
environments. As new technologies were innovated and spread, demand for raw
materials to support them also increased, and reliable access to raw materials
that were not locally available would have been important. Archaeologists can
trace the history and development of different technologies by examining where
raw materials were procured, the style of artifacts produced, and how the two
co-evolved over time. Although the specific case study to be examined here
addresses ancient trade and exchange of marine shell artifacts in Central
California, the approach can be applied to shell artifacts almost anywhere in
the world.

In California, indigenous peoples commonly made beads out of the purple olive
shell, Olivella biplicata. At the time of contact, in the late 1700s, these
shell beads were used in a manner akin to currency and they are ubiquitous in
archaeological sites. An exact tally is not available, but over the last 100
years archaeologists have recovered well over a million Olivella beads from
sites in Central California. Even the earliest sites in California, dating to
over 10,000 years ago, have beads made out of Olivella biplicata. Why Native
Californians selected this particular species is not known, but is something the
proposed research may be able to address.

This project will support one part-time post-doctoral researcher and one to two
UC Davis undergraduate students, who will be trained in geochemical and
archaeometric analysis. The data and resulting analysis will be shared with the
Central California community through outreach efforts at UC Davis, including
public displays at the UCD Anthropology Museum, programs with school children at
Bodega Bay Marine Laboratory, and presentations at professional conferences.