* 1220440
* Widespread Layered Pyroxenites in the Earth's Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Veronique Le Roux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2016
* USD 259,097.00

The Earth's mantle is primarily composed of peridotites, which are magnesium and
iron silicate rocks that often contain 5 to 10% heterogeneities by volume. These
heterogeneities can be very variable in composition but pyroxene-rich rocks, and
in particular websterites (those that have additional calcium, sodium and
aluminum in the silicate crystal structure) appear to be the dominant type of
heterogeneity associated with peridotites exhumed at the Earth?s surface. No
study has so far explained why and how this type of heterogeneity is so
widespread in mantle rocks. Importantly, it might be an indication that a
ubiquitous process is significantly modifying the composition of the mantle and
its derived lavas. A multidisciplinary study will be conducted, which will
combine field observations, geochemical and petrophysical analyses of selected
websterites from two locations: the Lherz Massif (FR) and the Josephine
Peridotite (USA), that are believed to represent subcontinental and subarc
mantle, respectively. Trace and major element variations will be measured and
modeled in order to constrain the process(es) responsible for the formation of
heterogeneities in the mantle. Additionally geodynamical conditions of
emplacement of the websterites will be constrained by measuring small-scale
variations of lattice-preferred orientations of minerals. The results of this
study will benefit a broad community of scientists due to its multidisciplinary
approach that can reconcile observations of interest for mantle geochemists,
rheology experimentalists and geophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mantle
represents about 80% of the volume of our planet, lying underneath the crust
between approximately 30 km and 2900 km depth. A large part of the thermal and
chemical variations of the Earth is controlled by the mantle, which locally
melts and gives rise to most of the volcanic activity visible at the surface of
the planet. In order to better predict volcanic hazards, it is fundamental to
constrain what type of material is melting at depth, because the composition of
the lava affects the explosivity of volcanic eruptions. In order to answer this
question, the composition of the mantle should be well constrained. Exposures of
mantle rock at the Earth?s surface are rare but where we can obtain access, we
find that many aspects of its composition remain uncertain. We know that the
Earth's mantle is not uniform in composition and that it contains
heterogeneities, however the nature and the distribution of these
heterogeneities are poorly constrained. For instance, there could be blobs of
crustal material, recycled in the deep Earth by plate tectonics. This project
will focus on the fundamental processes responsible for the formation of these
heterogeneities.