* 1220121
* International Collaboration in Chemistry of Alkaloid Natural Product Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* David Sherman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,001.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is supporting an
International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) collaborative between Professors
David H. Sherman of the University of Michigan and Roberto G. S. Berlinck of the
Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil (supported by the Sao Paulo Research
Foundation (FAPESP)). The objective of this research effort is to investigate
fundamental aspects of alkaloid natural product assembly and tailoring by marine
fungi derived from Brazilian biodiversity resources. The fungal alkaloid natural
products are among the most under-explored from a genetic and biochemical point
of view. The University of Michigan will conduct total genome sequencing,
bioinformatic mining, and annotation to identify target natural product
biosynthetic systems from selected marine fungi. Molecular genetic and
biochemical approaches will be employed collaboratively to understand the basis
for construction of the core polycyclic ring systems, as well as oxidative
modifications and structural rearrangements to elaborate the complex su√≠te of
molecules within this fascinating class of metabolites. The group in Brazil will
work on manipulating growth condition to maximize production of key biosynthetic
intermediates and final products to facilitate an understanding of fundamental
genetic and physiological factors involved in augmenting secondary metabolism
and output of natural products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms for creating
chemical diversity in these pathways are often unique compared to bacterial and
plant systems. Thus, there are great opportunities to gain new knowledge that
can lead to pathway engineering and advance the fields of chemical biology and
medicinal chemistry. The Broader Impacts of the proposal are multi-factorial and
include expanding the genomic and biochemical basis for fungal alkaloid natural
product diversification and training of students and postdoctoral fellows in
cross-disciplinary aspects of natural product sciences. The PI at the University
of Michigan plans to conduct workshops in Brazil to promote training in natural
product pathway engineering and synthetic biology applications.