* 1220311
* ATD: Statistical methodology and algorithms for detection problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Guenther Walther, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 471,623.00

The investigator will develop new statistical methodology and algorithms for the
quick detection of the abrupt emergence of a signal which is observed by a
sensor in a noisy data stream or by an array of sensors in multiple data
streams. A particular emphasis will be on the construction of techniques for
effectively combining the information from several sensors. Such techniques are
essential when the signal is weak and observed by only a small fraction of the
sensors. Part of the proposed new methodology is based on recent advances in the
statistical theory of multiscale analysis. Theoretical investigations of these
recent advances in the abstract Gaussian White Noise model suggest that clear
improvements in detection power are possible for the problem of a quick
detection of a change point, and the investigator plans to adapt these ideas for
this problem, to investigate its theoretical performance, and to develop
efficient algorithms for its implementation. The second main emphasis is to
develop improved statistical methodology to combine the information from several
data streams using a novel criterion based on the average likelihood ratio. In
preliminary work the investigator has shown that this criterion results in
superior detection power in a large-scale multiple testing context, and the
investigator will develop corresponding methodology for the detection of a
signal in multiple data streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Change-point detection
plays an important role in a range of problems such as the detection of
radioactive and biochemical threats, environmental monitoring, or the detection
of recurrent DNA copy number variants in multiple samples in high-thoughput
genomics. Advances in detection methodology have thus a direct impact on
important problems in national security and in high-thoughput genomics, e.g. in
terms of a shorter time to the detection of chemical agents and biological
threats. The investigator will adapt recent results in statistical theory to
these detection problems. The theoretical results suggest that clear
improvements in detection power are possible in these important problems.