* 1220403
* Collaborative Research/RUI: Testing Hypotheses on Pillow Lava Production During Glaciovolcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Benjamin Edwards, Dickinson College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2016
* USD 161,571.00

As recently witnessed during the 2010 Eyjafjallajokull eruption in Iceland,
interactions between lava and ice can have devastating local and global
implications. However, because these eruptions most frequently occur in remote,
hard-to-access places, we do not fully understand many of the processes that can
produce glaciovolcanic hazards from rapidly melting ice, such as floods and
mudflows. In order to better understand the role of lava flow formation during
eruptions within and beneath ice, we propose to study one of the products of
subglacial eruptions, called 'pillow lavas'. Although pillow lavas are one of
the most common types of lavas on the ocean floor, which covers about 70 percent
of Earth's surface, their formation beneath ice is relatively unstudied. We are
going to work in two areas with exceptionally well-exposed examples of
glaciovolcanic pillow lavas in Iceland and British Columbia, Canada. Our work
will help other scientists to better understand how heat is transferred from
lava to water and ice during glaciovolcanic eruptions, which may lead to better
methods for predicting the sizes of floods resulting from lava-ice interactions.
Through our research, we will also have a better understanding of how to use
pillow lavas from ancient deposits to unravel mysteries related to ice-age
global climate. Finally, we hope that our data will also be useful for better
understanding of the formation of the Earth's ocean floors, which may be
important for future mineral and energy resources. The main goals of this
research are to use pillow lavas covering a range of basaltic compositions for
testing hypotheses about the formation of subglacial pillow mounds, including
models for lava transport within a growing pillow-dominated volcano and the
potential for sudden transitions between explosive versus effusive eruption
styles. Specifically we will address the following questions: i) Is the
initiation of pillow lava emplacement preceded by an explosive phase? ii) How is
lava distributed along and across the ridge structure? iii) What are effusion
rates during subglacial, pillow-dominated eruptions? iv) Are multiple eruptive
centers active along a fissure segment during a single eruptive episode? We will
pursue answers to these questions by using modern field and analytical
techniques to document the three-dimensional structure, stratigraphy and
geochemistry of two different pillow ridges with exceptional exposures: (1)
open-pit rock quarries along a single fissure segment on the Reykjanes Peninsula
in southwestern Iceland and (2) the crest of Pillow Ridge in northern British
Columbia. Both locations have similar lithofacies, including a specific
stratigraphic sequence of vitric tuff-breccia cut by dikes that feed pillow lava
flows emplaced immediately above the tuff-breccias (TDP lithofacies
association). We have established a broad-based research team, comprising US,
Icelandic and Canadian scientists working in full collaboration with the PIs, to
build a comprehensive database of subglacial pillow characteristics for
comparison to pillow lavas produced in other environments and potentially to
revise existing models for the construction of the pillow-dominated parts of
subglacial volcanoes.