* 1220529
* Toward Predicting the Impact of Ocean Acidification on Net Calcification by a Broad Range of Coral Reef Ecosystems: Identifying Patterns and Underlying Causes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/29/2016
* USD 695,322.00

Intellectual Merit: Much of our understanding of the impact of ocean
acidification on coral reef calcification comes from laboratory manipulation
experiments in which reef organisms are removed from their natural habitat and
reared under conditions of calcium carbonate saturation (Omega) predicted for
the tropical oceans at the end of this century. By comparison, there is a
paucity of in situ data describing the sensitivity of coral reef ecosystems to
changes in calcium carbonate saturation. Yet emerging evidence suggests there
may be critical differences between the calcification response of organisms in
culture and the net calcification response of a coral reef ecosystem, to the
same degree of change in calcium carbonate saturation. In the majority of cases,
the sensitivity of net reef calcification to changing calcium carbonate
saturation is more severe than laboratory manipulation experiments predict.
Clearly, accurate predictions of the response of coral reef ecosystems to 21st
century ocean acidification will depend on a robust characterization of
ecosystem-scale responses and an understanding of the fundamental processes that
shape them. Using existing data, the investigators show that the sensitivity of
coral reef ecosystem calcification to Delta calcium carbonate saturation
conforms to the empirical rate equation R=k(Aragonite saturation state -1)n,
which also describes the relationship between the rate of net abiogenic CaCO3
precipitation (R) and the degree of aragonite supersaturation (Aragonite
saturation state-1). By implication, the net ecosystem calcification (NEC)
response to ocean acidification is governed by fundamental laws of physical
chemistry and is potentially predictable across space and time. When viewed this
way, the existing, albeit sparse, dataset of NEC reveals distinct patterns that,
if verified, have important implications for how different coral reef ecosystems
will respond to 21st century ocean acidification. The investigators have
outlined a research program designed to build on this proposition. The project
expands the currently sparse dataset of ecosystem-scale observations at four
strategically placed reef sites, enabling us to test the following hypotheses:
1. The sensitivity ("n" in the rate equation) of coral reef ecosystem
calcification to Delta Aragonite saturation state decreases with decreasing
Aragonite saturation state. By implication, the rate at which reef calcification
declines will slow as ocean acidification progresses over the course of this
century. 2. The energetic status of the calcifying community is a key
determinant of absolute rates of net ecosystem calcification ("k" in the rate
equation), which, combined with n, defines the Aragonite saturation state value
at which NEC approaches zero. By implication, the shift from net calcification
to net dissolution will be delayed in healthy, energetically replete coral reef
ecosystems and accelerated in perturbed, energetically depleted ecosystems. 3.
The calcification response of individual colonies of dominant reef calcifiers
(corals and algae) is weaker than the measured ecosystem-scale response to the
same change in Aragonite saturation state. By implication, processes not
adequately captured in laboratory experiments, such as bioerosion and
dissolution, will play an important role in the coral reef response to ocean
acidification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Ocean acidification
threatens the livelihoods of 500 million people worldwide who depend on coral
reefs to provide habitable and agricultural land, food, building materials,
coastal protection and income from tourism. Yet data emerging from ocean
acidification (OA) studies point to critical gaps in our knowledge of reef
ecosystem-scale responses to OA that currently limit our ability to predict the
timing and severity of its impact on different reefs in different parts of the
world. Using existing data generated by the investigators and others, this
project will address a series of related hypotheses, which, if verified by the
research, will have an immediate, direct impact on predictions of coral reef
resilience in a high CO2 world. This project brings together expertise in coral
reef biogeochemistry, chemical oceanography and physical oceanography to focus
on a problem that has enormous societal, economic and conservation relevance.
Support is provided for a young investigator, undergraduate and minority student
will participate in research through the WHOI Summer Fellowship Program, the
Woods Hole Sea Education Association and PEP programs, and a burgeoning
collaboration will be enhanced between the PIs and Pacific Island conservation
groups and stakeholders whose goal it is to ensure that conservation decisions
are grounded in scientific data. Results of the study will be presented at
national and international meetings and workshops and disseminated in a timely
manner through peer-reviewed publications. All data produced through this
program will be archived in the Biological and Chemical Oceanographic Data
Management Office (BCO-DMO) and the Pangaea Open Access library.