* 1220641
* Ocean Acidification:   Physiological Mechanisms for CO2-sensing and Related Intracellular Signaling Pathways in Corals
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Dimitri Deheyn, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2017
* USD 867,045.00

Carbon dioxide has been rapidly accumulating in the atmosphere over the past 200
years as a by-product of the modern industrialized human lifestyle. A large
portion of this excess carbon dioxide is dissolving in the oceans, producing
hydrogen ions that lower the pH of the water, thus making it more acidic.
Because the current rate of ocean acidification is faster than the most rapid
rates recorded in the geological record, it is unclear whether marine organisms
will be able to survive and adapt to these rapid changes in ocean chemistry.
Coral reefs are among the most vulnerable organisms to ocean acidification owing
to their calcium carbonate skeleton that dissolves at more acidic pH. Moreover,
the deleterious effects of ocean acidification on corals may also extend to
fertilization, metabolism and to the essential relationship between corals and
their symbiotic algae. However, the lack of information on basic coral cell
physiology precludes predicting the effects of ocean acidification based on
strict chemical and mechanistic models. The limits to our knowledge about the
basic biology of corals in turn limits the effectiveness of policy-making and
managerial decisions about these important marine resources. This project will
characterize the molecular and cellular mechanisms used by corals to sense
carbon dioxide, pH and bicarbonate, their associated signal transduction
pathways, their roles in regulating physiology, and their responses to ocean
acidification. This project will use a suite of experimental techniques,
including in vitro biochemical assays with recombinant proteins; real-time
microscopy imaging of coral cell cultures to determine regulation of
intracellular pH, calcification and biofluorescence; and respirometry
experiments with live coral fragments. Therefore, this study will characterize
coral physiological responses to ocean acidification over the broad spectrum
from molecules, to cells to whole organisms. This research has the potential to
generate mechanistic models to explain and predict the effects of ocean
acidification on corals, thereby complementing ongoing and future physiological,
transcriptomic and genomic studies, while also bridging fundamental research on
coral physiology with coral reef management. Other broader impacts of this
research include mentoring of young scientists at various stages of their
careers (several volunteers, undergraduate and graduate students and one
postdoctoral researcher). The project establishes interdisciplinary research
collaborations with intramural, national and international laboratories,
particularly with researchers at Centre Scientifique de Monaco. A museum exhibit
will be developed at the Birch Aquarium at Scripps to enhance public awareness
of ocean acidification. Together with a series of public lectures and online
resources, these activities will reach approximately 400,000 children and adults
that attend the Birch Aquarium annually, and millions of online viewers.