* 1220715
* STRONG COUPLING EFFECTS AND POLARITON LASING WITH GaN AND ZnO - BASED NANOWIRES
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Pallab Bhattacharya, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 09/30/2015
* USD 370,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the physics, design,
fabrication and characterization of a new class of coherent light sources --
polariton lasers -- that can have ultra-low threshold powers at room
temperature. The approach is to design the lasers with GaN-based nanowires grown
on silicon and other substrates. Single and multiple microcavity devices with
optical and electrical excitation will be characterized and
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is the
first comprehensive study of strong coupling and Bose-Einstein condensation in
nanowires. Polariton lasing with electrical injection has not been achieved and
this demonstration is transformative. Demonstration of room temperature
polariton lasing and Bose-Einstein condensation are also transformative and are
considered as milestones in optoelectronics. These lasers will have lower
threshold powers than any other microcavity laser currently being
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts and Human Resources Development:
The realization of a coherent light source which will potentially consume energy
three orders of magnitude smaller than that consumed by current lasers is a
quantum leap for green photonics with far-reaching consequences in
telecommunication, medical and display applications. The broader impacts are the
interdisciplinary nature of the research and its undergraduate and
underrepresented minorities and K-12 outreach. The principal goal in education
and Human Resources Development (EHRD) is to provide effective programs to
educate the students involved in the research and outreach program constituents
on the science and technology of photonic materials, regarded as an issue of
national importance.