* 1220512
* Visualizing Protein Interactions and Dynamics: Evolving a Visual Language to Support Learning in Undergraduate Science Education
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Gael McGill, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 549,114.00

This project explores how students learn from 3D animated and/or interactive
visualizations and aims to understand which design choices are most effective in
fostering learning of complex, dynamic events. The focus of the study is to 1)
gain a better understanding of how animation/interactivity design choices can
impact learning in undergraduate molecular biology and 2) how to effectively
engage and impact the communities most directly involved in either producing or
consuming this kind of media. The work is based on a pilot study that explored
the role of visual complexity in helping students understand concepts such as
diffusion, conformational change, and molecular crowding. Although increasing
the level of visual complexity of the animations was effective in conveying the
dynamic nature of the molecular world, students still had difficulty
understanding the random nature of molecular events and tended to
anthropomorphize the motion of molecules shown in the animations.

Intellectual merit: This study is uncovering key visual and auditory variables
that significantly impact undergraduate students' understanding of abstract
molecular concepts (e.g. the effects of temperature and molecular crowding on
protein conformational flexibility and diffusion). A strength of the project is
that the team includes content experts to ensure content accuracy and to
validate student learning outcomes, animation experts to translate findings into
visual materials, and experts in assessment to help design the tools and
processes for informing the content, graphic design and visualization experts.
The implications of this work are potentially transformative in that the study
offers insight into the role visualizations play in learning complex concepts,
and provides broadly applicable guidelines to help both educators and media
designers in the design and use of complex 3D visualizations in ways that
maximize their pedagogical value.

Broader impact: The design principles and the visualizations themselves are
being widely disseminated to an audience of students, educators, and media
designers through a combination of web-based channels and hands-on workshops.
Broader impacts are expected on multiple levels: 1) instructors who make better
choices in the selection and use of media in the classroom (as well as during
their involvement in developing educational tools), 2) media developers and
animators who design more pedagogically impactful visualizations, and 3)
students who become better consumers of educational media with the aid of
appropriate classroom discussion activities that promote a more critical
appraisal of visualization materials.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.