* 1220068
* Ocean Acidification - Effects of ocean acidification on Emiliania huxleyi and Calanus finmarchicus; insights into the oceanic alkalinity and biological carbon pumps
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* William Balch, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2017
* USD 999,956.00

Ocean acidification is one of the most pressing marine science issues of our
time, with potential biological impacts spanning all marine phyla and potential
societal impacts affecting man's relationship to the sea. Rising levels of
atmospheric pCO2 are increasing the acidity of the world oceans. It is generally
held that average surface ocean pH has already declined by 0.1 pH units relative
to the pre-industrial level (Orr et al., 2005), and is projected to decrease 0.3
to 0.46 units by the end of this century, depending on CO2 emission scenarios
(Caldeira and Wickett, 2005). The overall goal of this research is to
parameterize how changes in pCO2 levels could alter the biological and
alkalinity pumps of the world ocean. Specifically, the direct and indirect
effects of ocean acidification will be examined within a simple, controlled
predator/prey system containing a single prey phytoplankton species (the
coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi) and a single predator (the oceanic metazoan
grazer, Calanus finmarchicus). The experiments are designed to elucidate both
direct effects (i.e. effects of ocean acidification on the individual organisms
only) and interactive effects (i.e. effects on the combined predator/prey
system). Interactive experiments with phytoplankton prey and zooplankton
predator are a critical starting point for predicting the overall impact of
ocean acidification in marine ecosystems. To meet these goals, a state-of-the-
art facility will be constructed with growth chambers that are calibrated and
have highly-controlled pH and alkalinity levels. The strength of this approach
lies in meticulous calibration and redundant measurements that will be made to
ensure that conditions within the chambers are well described and tightly
monitored for DIC levels. Growth and calcification rates in coccolithophores and
the developmental rates, morphological and behavioral effects on copepods will
be measured. The PIC and POC in the algae and the excreted fecal pellets will be
monitored for changes in the PIC/POC ratio, a key parameter for modeling
feedback mechanisms for rising pCO2 levels. In addition, 14C experiments are
planned to measure calcification rates in coccolithophores and dissolution rates
as a result of grazing. These key experiments will verify closure in the mass
balance of PIC, allowing the determination of actual&lt;br/&gt;dissolution rates
of PIC within the guts of copepod grazers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of
scientists in this work contributes expertise in coccolithophore ecology,
biogeography and physiology (Balch) and copepod ecology and physiology (Fields).
They will be joined by a post-doctoral fellow and a highly capable technical
staff to provide the necessary support to cultivate and monitor cultures during
experiments. Six supervised undergraduate students will have projects associated
with this work. Expertise in carbonate chemistry will be provided by Dr. N.
Bates (consultant, see letter of support).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.
Along with the numerous scientific and societal broader impacts of ocean
acidification, there are also significant educational impacts associated with
this work. This project has numerous self-contained sub-projects that will
provide exceptional opportunities for motivated undergraduate students to
receive hands-on research experience, learning sophisticated culturing
techniques, the fundamentals of optics and micro-videography. Six supervised
undergraduate students will have projects associated with this work. Students
will be required to meet weekly and to give a Bigelow seminar on their
respective projects. Participation at national meetings will be encouraged and
supported. Balch and Fields have had great success with undergraduate students
in the past with several receiving authorship on publications that incorporated
their work. They will also invite several high school students into the lab to
assist with basic aspects of the project. Fields is involved in the COSEE
program (designed to bring ocean science to rural areas) and the "Keller Bloom"
project, which provides a week-long science immersion course to gifted high
school students from rural Maine. Results of the project will also contribute to
the development of other BLOS educational and outreach programs, most notably
weekly summer seminar series open to the public, the summer REU program and a
new Colby College semester program at Bigelow Laboratory. Funds from this
proposal will be used to build a state-of- the-art facility for creating,
maintaining and monitoring pCO2 concentrations.