* 1220642
* Using Temperature to Measure Fault Stress:  Analysis of Data from the Fault Zone of the Mw 7.9 Wenchuan Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Emily Brodsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2016
* USD 253,783.00

The devastating 1999 Mw 7.9 Wenchuan thrust earthquake generated a 300
kilometers-long surface rupture with an average offset of about 5 meters. If the
resisting stress of faults is controlled by Byerlee?s friction law, this slip
should have resulted in significant energy dissipated as heat. The Wenchuan
Fault Zone Scientific Drilling Project has successfully measured multiple
temperature profiles within 2 years after the earthquake. In a pilot hole
intersecting the major fault zone at 589 m depth, 13 high-quality repeated
temperature logs were taken over a 1.5 year period. In addition, temperature
logs were performed before casing completion and continuous measurements were
made at a few points between profile runs. Preliminary inspection and modeling
of the data indicates that any transient temperature anomaly over the fault is
less than 0.05 degrees C, which suggests that the equivalent coefficient of
friction during the earthquake is less than 0.05 and, by implication, that the
earthquake completely relieved the stress stored up from plate motion. However,
the preliminary modeling did not account for several important effects such as
advection and fault structure. The goal of this project is to determine the
actual value of the stress on the fault during the earthquake by: (1) employing
a more sophisticated numerical model that includes the cooling effect of water
flow along the fault in order to better interpret the borehole data; and (2) by
collection and analysis of new temperature and pressure data in a second
borehole that intersects the most prominent fault zone at 1247-1250 meters and
extends to 1400 meters total depth and in a third borehole planned for
completion in 2013.

Earthquakes are the result of motions of the tectonic plates and the driving
forces are well understood. However, the resisting force impeding the motion on
the faults is much more poorly constrained. This frictional stress during an
earthquake is one of the major unknown parameters in earthquake mechanics. The
processes controlling friction at high slip velocities are vigorously debated
with many theoretical possibilities. Field measurements are needed to constrain
the dominant processes on actual faults. This project would take advantage of
new and planned temperature measurements in boreholes that penetrate the fault
that generated the Wenchuan earthquake that would allow determination of the
coefficient of friction during the earthquake.