* 1220063
* Mathematical Analysis of Electrical Oscillations in Anterior Pituitary Cells
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Richard Bertram, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 275,000.00

This project is a hybrid mathematical/experimental approach to the analysis of
the behavior of hormone-secreting pituitary cells. We record a cell's electrical
activity and use features of this to calibrate a mathematical model. This
calibration is done with the aid of a graphics processing unit (GPU) for fast
optimization of a fitness function that compares features of the model voltage
trace to those of the experimental recording. Once calibrated, the model is used
to make predictions about the effects of changes in biological parameters, such
as the conductances of various types of ionic currents. These predictions are
then tested on the same cell that was used to calibrate the model, using the
dynamic clamp technique to inject a model-based ionic current into a real cell.
To help with our understanding of the model, and thus to make more useful
predictions, we use geometric singular perturbation methods to understand the
basis for spiking and bursting patterns of electrical activity, and the
parameter ranges where different types of activity
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of mathematical models for
biological systems is to generate hypotheses that can be tested in the lab. If
the model is well calibrated, then testing a prediction made by the model is the
best way to determine if our understanding of the biology that is reflected in
the model is correct. In particular, if a test of a model prediction fails, then
it means that something is wrong with our understanding of the biology that was
the basis for the model. However, this is only true if the model is well
calibrated, since a model that is correct in its formulation, but incorrect in
its parameterization, can lead to incorrect predictions. This caveat is
particularly important given the great degree of cell-to-cell heterogeneity that
exists in many biological systems. For example, a cell may exhibit one type of
pattern of activity, while a neighboring cell of the same type may exhibit a
very different pattern of activity, reflecting differences in biological
parameter values. In this project, we combine fast model calibration with the
dynamic clamp technique to calibrate a model based on a single cell's activity,
and then test predictions made by the model on the same cell, overcoming
problems associated with cellular heterogeneity.