* 1220075
* Experimental Constraints on Crustal Rheology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* J. Gregory Hirth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2016
* USD 291,853.00

The rheology of the lower continental crust controls a wide range of processes
that are important for understanding the development and evolution of plate
boundary shear zones, seismic hazards, the geochemical evolution of the crust
and mantle, the coupling of mantle flow and crustal dynamics and the long-term
support of mountain belts. While existing laws that describe the flow behavior
of lower crustal rocks can explain many geologic observations, the extrapolation
of these laws to conditions appropriate for lower continental crust indicates
that the interpretation of geophysically- and geologically-derived data can be
improved with new experimental data. The goal of this project is to provide new
experimental data on the rheology of rocks at pressures appropriate for the
lower continental crust. The project will involve three lines of investigation
involving a set of experiments conducted in a Griggs and Paterspm deformation
apparatuses at temperatures from 900 to 1100 degrees C and strain at confining
pressures from 500 MPa to 1.5 GPa. These experiments will address the following:
(1) The role of water on rheology/viscosity of lower crustal rocks. Initial work
demonstrates dramatic changes in viscosity of diabase with increasing water
content. These results will be extended to higher temperature/lower stress to
increase the resolution of extrapolation to natural conditions; (2) Dynamic
recrystallization and rock fabric (i.e., lattice preferred orientations)
development in plagioclase. The results of initial experimental work challenge
previous interpretations based on analyses of naturally deformed rocks. However,
at face value, interpretation of the natural rocks remains consistent with other
geological data. Resolution of this issue requires better understanding of grain
size evolution during deformation, and better understanding of lattice preferred
orientation development in plagioclase. (3) Rheology of amphibole. There are
very few experiments on the rheology of amphibole, despite its importance for
crustal rheology and ubiquitous presence in mid- to lower-crustal shear zones.
The lack of data partly reflects difficulty in deforming amphibole in the lab
owing to its limited thermal stability. Motivated by microstructures in natural
rocks, the researchers will use very fine-grained aggregates to explore the role
of low stress deformation processes in amphibole, which is a new approach.

Understanding the rheological properties of the lower crust is important for a
broad range of geodynamic problems. Probably the most important reason to
understand crustal rheology is for the accurate assessment of earthquake hazards
produced by time-dependent loading of seismogenic faults - as may be quantified
by geodetic studies. The techniques used in this research effort involve state
of the art application of electron microscopy and mechanical testing equipment
which bridge the gap between materials science and the geological sciences. An
additional component of the project will be the creation of a searchable archive
of results from previous deformation experiments in the Brown University Rock
Mechanics laboratory. The archive will contain information from more 2000
experiments covering more than 40 years of research. Access to such a database
will facilitate new ideas and encourage scientists outside of the immediate
experimental rock deformation community to explore rheological data and
attendant microstructures pertinent to their own research.