* 1220084
* Experimental and Microanalytical Study of Dendritic Crystal Growth in CMAS and Basaltic Magma
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Julia Hammer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2015
* USD 270,928.00

Petrogenetic and geochemical models generally assume that magmas crystallize
under near equilibrium conditions, and that crystal growth occurs firmly in the
interface-limited (as opposed to diffusion-limited) regime. However, mounting
textural and compositional evidence points toward incipient magma
crystallization characterized by rapid growth and formation of dendritic
crystals ? in which case diffusion rates of the incorporated elements can
significantly influence crystal growth. This proposal outlines a plan for
studying the mechanics and petrologic consequences of dendritic crystal growth
in two mafic crystalline phases, olivine and clinopyroxene, utilizing dynamic
crystallization experiments and frontier compositional and microtextural
analysis techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The experimental
and analytical study of Module 1, targets olivine crystallization in a thermal
gradient under dynamic temperature conditions, utilizing a novel experimental
geometry to enhance formation of defects. Activities in this module will test
hypotheses regarding the origin of curved olivine-melt interfaces, development
of subgrain boundaries (low angle lattice misorientations) in the absence of
anisotropic stress, and the process of melt inclusion entrapment. The
anticipated results have important implications for geochemical ?crystal
stratigraphy? as well as geophysical models of ocean island magmatic plumbing
systems. The microanalytical study in Module 2, targets clinopyroxene dendrites
to investigate a style of progressive lattice rotation that is previously
unrecognized in crystals growing freely from a liquid, and unexplained by
existing crystal growth theory. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) mapping
will be used to characterize the incidence of lattice misorientations in
previously-synthesized experimental samples as well as naturally-occurring
clinopyroxene dendrites and polyhedral crystals. Selected materials will be
further interrogated in TEM foils using diffraction contrast imaging, high
resolution phase contrast imaging, and enegy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy to
determine the defect microstructure that accommodates the lattice
rotation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. We will continue offering a
professional development program for Hawaii K-12 teachers developed during prior
and current award periods. The program, Research Experience for Teachers in
Volcano-Petrology (RET/V-P) emphasizes geoscience fundamentals and exposure to
geology in a field setting. We will develop and disseminate educational
materials intended for 6-8th grade instruction, composed of pre- and post-
assessment instruments, classroom activities, field trips to several Oahu sites,
and resources for deeper investigation. We will work with Dr. Lehnert, Director
of the Integrated Earth Data Applications (IEDA), to develop schema appropriate
for incorporation of novel textural and analytical data in the Geochemical
Resource Library catalog. Tasks include incorporating (a) analytical data
collected from non-equilibrated (i.e., kinetics-focused) experiments, (b)
metadata such as tabulated analytical data that is contextualized with imagery,
and (c) microcrystallographic orientation data, e.g., as generated during EBSD
analysis and Xray element mapping.