* 1220327
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Petro-Politics at the Grassroots: Big Oil, Environmental Education and Governance in Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jessaca Leinaweaver, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,537.00

Brown University doctoral student Paula S. Dias, guided by Dr. Jessaca
Leinaweaver, will undertake research on how economic development projects linked
to oil extraction affect and illuminate local politics and social dynamics. As
some governments delegate development responsiblities to resource extraction
corporations as a cost of doing business, the effects of these extraction
activities are broadened, often in ways that are unanticipated. This project
will trace how these impacts are understood and experienced and what these
impacts reveal about local political processes and their relation to higher
level politics more generally. The research will be conducted in Brazil, where
government regulation of oil extraction is coupled with mandatory community-
level, oil company-funded Environmental Education (EE) projects.

Dias will carry out 12 months of ethnographic research in Quilombo da Rasa, a
community of Afro-descendants ("maroons") located in northeast Brazil. She will
collect data on the relationship between EE and community politics at two
levels: (1) the broader level of political practices and relations with state
agencies; and (2) the more micro level of community social dynamics. She will
employ a mix of social science research methods including participant
observation, interviews, and archival research.

Findings from this research will contribute to social science theory of how
political processes work throughout the chain of relationships, from national
institutions to community-level power dynamics. The research also will help
policy makers to understand the broader logics of governance that bridge
strategic interests of resource extraction with progressive environmental
legislation and state regulation of corporations. Funding this research supports
the education of a graduate student.