* 1220587
* Ocean Acidification:   Predicting "Winners and Losers" to Ocean Acidification -- a Physiological Genomic Study of Genetically-determined Variance during Larval Development
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Dennis Hedgecock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,430,225.00

Global emissions of CO2 are acidifying the world's oceans, so the impact of
current and future ocean acidification (OA) on marine life is under intense
scrutiny. A growing body of biological evidence demonstrates that OA can impact
many aspects of marine organism physiology and that OA responses are highly
species-specific. Species' responses can range, however, from negative to
positive, making predictions of "winners and losers," under various scenarios of
future ocean environments, difficult. Physiological responses of individuals
within species also vary, yet little attention has been paid to genetically
determined variation in physiology that will underpin adaptive responses to
increasing OA. This project focuses on the genomic basis of adaptive metabolic
capacities and the potential for the evolution of organisms better able than
those of present-day to cope with future levels of ocean acidity. &lt;br/&gt;
Though most marine invertebrates have a larval stage, present understanding of
the biology of these larval forms often limits ability to predict future
recruitment to the adult stage or potential "winners and losers" under various
environment change scenarios. Fuller understanding of how marine invertebrates
will respond to change in the world's oceans requires a merging of information
on physiological, genetic and environmental factors. This study will uncover
genotype-by-environment interactions in larval responses to OA for a
commercially important bivalve mollusc, the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas.
This species has genetic and genomic resources that are unparalleled for most
marine animals and permit cross-generational experiments. Larvae from many
different pedigreed families will be screened for differential responses to OA.
Once contrasting responses (phenotypes) are identified, the biochemical,
metabolic, and gene-expression bases of the "winners and losers" will be
identified. The genetic basis of these physiological responses will then be
determined in the following generation, using trait-mapping methods. Such
interdisciplinary experimental approaches provide a mechanistic understanding
and will improve prediction of biological adaptation to changing ocean
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Educational outreach will involve all project associates
who will give lectures and laboratory demonstrations to K-12 students, first-
generation university students, and students from underrepresented groups on
national food security, seafood sustainability, biodiversity and conservation,
and ocean change. For the science and policy communities, investigators will
disseminate results through publication, conferences, and international
collaborations. The genetic markers and gene-expression profiles created by this
project will contribute to ongoing international scientific efforts to annotate
and assemble the genome sequence of the Pacific oyster. As the Principal
Investigators have worked closely with the U.S. West Coast oyster industry for
more than a decade, research results will translate directly into improved
breeding programs for this $100M industry. Finally, results of these fundamental
studies will be directly applicable to other highly fecund marine species, many
of which are fish and shellfish of commercial importance that provide a major
source of food for human consumption.