* 1220092
* Evaluation of the Sustainability and Effectiveness of Inquiry-Based Advanced Placement Science Courses: Evidence from an In-Depth Formative Evaluation & Randomized Controlled S
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Raymond McGhee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sarah-Kay McDonald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,616,777.00

This study examines the impact of the newly revised Advanced Placement (AP)
Biology and Chemistry courses on students' understanding of and ability to apply
scientific inquiry, on students' confidence in successfully engaging in college-
level material, and on students? enrollment and persistence in college STEM
majors. AP Biology and Chemistry courses represent an important educational
program that operates at a large scale across the country. The extent to which
the AP curricula vary in implementation across the schools in the study is also
examined to determine the range of students' opportunity to learn the
disciplinary content and the knowledge and skills necessary to engage in inquiry
in science. Schools that are newly implementing AP courses are participants in
this research and the challenges and successes that they experience are also a
component of the research plan. Researchers at the University of Washington,
George Washington University and SRI International are conducting the study.

The research design for this study includes both formative components and a
randomized control experiment. Formative elements include observations,
interviews and surveys of teachers and students in the AP courses studied. The
experimental design includes the random assignment of students to the AP offered
and follows the performances of the treatment and control students in two
cohorts into their matriculation into postsecondary educational experiences.
Surveys measure students' experiences in the AP courses, their motivations to
study AP science, the level of stress they experience in their high school
coursework and their scientific inquiry skills and depth of disciplinary
knowledge. The study examines the majors chosen by those students who enter into
colleges and universities to ascertain the extent to which they continue in
science and engineering.

This project informs educators about the challenges and successes schools
encounter when they expand access to AP courses. The experiences of the teachers
who will be teaching students with variable preparation inform future needs for
professional development and support. The project provides estimates of the
impact of students' AP-course taking on their progress into postsecondary
educational experiences and their intent to continue to prepare to be future
engineers and scientists. It informs policy efforts to improve the access to
more rigorous advanced courses in STEM and provides strong experimental evidence
of the impact of AP course taking. The project has the potential to demonstrate
to educational researchers how to study an educational program that operates at
scale.