* 1220756
* High Adventure Science: Earths Systems and Sustainability
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Hee-Sun Lee, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 01/31/2018
* USD 2,328,593.00

We have entered the Anthropocene, an age when the actions of seven billion
humans have increasing influence on the Earth. The High-Adventure Science: Earth
Systems and Sustainability project is developing modules for middle school and
high school students in Earth and Space Science classes, testing the hypothesis
that students who use computational models, analyze real-world data, and engage
in building scientific reasoning and argumentation skills are better able to
understand Earth science core ideas and how humans impact Earth's systems. The
Concord Consortium in partnership with the University of California Santa Cruz
and the National Geographic Society are co-developing these modules, conducting
targeted research on how the modules enhance students' higher order thinking
skills and understanding of human-Earth interactions, and broadly disseminating
these materials via far-reaching education networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
High-Adventure Science: Earth Systems and Sustainability project is creating
online, middle and high school curriculum modules that feature computational
models and cover five topics: climate change, fresh water availability, fossil
fuel utilization, resource sustainability, and land use management. At the same
time, the project team is conducting design studies to look at how specific
features, prompts, argumentation and evaluation tools built into the modules
affect student understanding of core Earth science concepts. The design studies
promote rapid, iterative module development and help to identify features that
support student learning, as well as scientific reasoning, scientific
argumentation with uncertainty, systems thinking, and model-based
experimentation skills. For each module, pre- and posttest data, embedded
assessments, student surveys, classroom observations, teacher interviews and
surveys, provide important information to rapidly improve module features,
content, and usability. The final, high-quality, project materials are being
made available to a national audience through the National Geographic Society as
well as through the High-Adventure Science: Earth Systems and Sustainability
website hosted at the Concord Consortium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is essential
that students graduate from high school with a solid understanding of the
scientific concepts that help explain how humans impact Earth systems, and
conversely, how Earth processes impact humans. The High-Adventure Science: Earth
Systems and Sustainability project provides a unique, research-based approach to
conveying to students core Earth science content, crosscutting concepts, and
fundamental practices of science. The resulting online curriculum modules and
teacher guides provide exciting examples of next generation Earth science
teaching and learning materials, and the research findings provide new insights
on how students learn core science concepts and gain critical scientific skills.