* 1220602
* Ocean Acidification: Collaborative Research: Establishing The Magnitude Of Sea-Surface Acidification During The Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 206,681.00

At projected rates of anthropogenic carbon emissions, the pH of the surface
ocean is expected to decline by 0.3 pH units by the end of this century, and 0.7
pH units by 2300. The only other time the ocean might have experienced a similar
change in pH in the past is during the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM;
56 Mya) as a consequence of a massive carbon release, which also warmed the
planet. The mass of carbon released is estimated to have been as large as that
projected for the future but over thousands of years rather than centuries, thus
allowing for greater buffering of the saturation state of the surface ocean.
Nonetheless, planktonic calcifiers and coral reefs both experienced significant
reductions in diversity, likely in response to a combination of factors,
including pH and carbonate saturation state. Efforts to quantify changes in
carbonate chemistry, however, have relied on indirect methods, that is with
numerical models of the carbon cycle constrained by observations of changes in
ocean carbonate chemistry such as carbon isotopes and the distribution of
carbonate sediments. In computing the mass and rate of carbon release, the
models also simulate changes in ocean pH and saturation state. While the range
of model estimates continues to narrow, testing has been limited by the lack of
more direct information on ocean carbonate chemistry, specifically changes in
the pH and/or carbonate ion concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this
deficiency, a team of scientists from the University of California at Santa
Cruz, the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University, and the
University of Hawaii are conducting a 3-year study to quantify changes in the
sea-surface carbonate chemistry during the PETM. The project will focus on the
application of two boron-based proxies, B/Ca and B isotopes as recorded in
planktonic foraminifera, to quantify pH and possibly carbonate ion
concentration. The team will develop detailed proxy records for a number of
globally distributed locations, with the goal of establishing regional anomalies
in surface ocean carbonate chemistry relative to longer-term trends. The data
will be interpreted with numerical models utilizing information from laboratory-
based calibration studies of modern foraminifera, and compared with plankton
assemblage records. The results will also provide an independent means of
testing model simulations of the rate and duration of carbon release, and
ultimately the rise in atmospheric CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide important insight into the short- and long-term impacts of anthropogenic
CO2 on surface ocean pH and carbonate chemistry. Moreover, the project will
integrate research and educational activities on global warming and ocean
acidification by introducing this information directly into secondary school and
college curricula and popular journals.