* 1220141
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging MIPOs: Developing a Theory of Productive Use of Student Mathematical Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Keith Leatham, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 09/30/2017
* USD 899,886.00

Leveraging MOSTs (Mathematically Significant Pedagogical Openings to build on
Student Thinking) is a collaborative project among Brigham Young University,
Michigan Technological University and Western Michigan University that focuses
on improving the teaching of secondary school mathematics by improving teachers'
abilities to use student thinking during instruction to develop mathematical
concepts. The core research questions of the project are: (1) What is the nature
of high-leverage student thinking that teachers have available to them in their
classrooms? (2) How do teachers use student thinking during instruction and what
goals, orientations and resources underlie that use? (3) What is the learning
trajectory for the teaching practice of productively using student thinking? and
(4) What supports can be provided to move teachers along that learning
trajectory? The project is developing a theory of Productive Use of Student
Mathematical Thinking (PUMT Theory) that articulates what the practice of
productively using student mathematical thinking looks like, how one develops
this practice, and how that development can be
facilitated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design research methodology underlies the work
of four interrelated phases: (1) Student thinking - testing and refining a
preliminary framework by expanding an existing data set of classroom discourse
video to include more diverse teacher and student populations; (2) Teachers'
interactions with student thinking - assessing teachers' perceptions of using
student thinking and how they make decisions about which thinking to pursue; (3)
Teachers' learning about student thinking - using a series of teacher
development experiments to improve teachers' abilities to productively use
student mathematical thinking during instruction; and (4) Shareable products -
creating useful products that are in forms that encourage feedback for further
refinement. Data include video recordings of classroom instruction (to identify
MOSTs and teachers' responses to them), teacher interviews (to understand their
decisions in response to instances of student thinking), and records of teacher
development sessions and the researchers' discussions about the teachers'
development (to inform the teacher development experiments and future
professional development activities). Project evaluation includes both formative
and summative components that focus on the quality of the project's process for
developing a PUMT Theory and associated tools and professional development, as
well as the quality of the resulting products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging
MOSTs provides critical resources - including a theory, framework, and
hypothetical learning trajectory - for teachers, teacher educators, and
researchers that make more tangible the often abstract but fundamental goal of
productively using students' mathematical thinking. The project enhances the
field's understanding of (1) the MOSTs that teachers have available to them in
their classrooms, and how they vary in diverse contexts; (2) teachers'
perceptions and productive use of student thinking during instruction; and (3)
the trajectory of teachers' learning about student thinking and how best to
support movement along that trajectory. Using student thinking productively is a
cornerstone of effective teaching, thus the PUMT Theory and associated supports
produced by the project are valuable resources for those involved in mathematics
education as well as other fields.