* 1220626
* Center for Integrated Space Weather Modeling (CISM) Space Weather Summer School
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Stanley Solomon, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2017
* USD 405,138.00

This is to conduct a Space Weather Summer School (SWSS) which provides
participants a broad overview of the sun-earth system, how space weather effects
arise, and how models can be used to help understand, investigate, and predict
the space weather system. Approximately 30 students will travel to the High
Attitude Observatory (HAO) in Boulder, CO, each year to attend a two-week
intensive school with experts in all areas of heliosphere and geospace providing
lectures as well as interactive laboratory session where the students use model
output for exploring the high coupled space weather system. In addition to these
sessions, experts from industry and government will discuss how space weather
impacts our technological systems. The students will leave the school with a
broad understanding of the entire Sun-to-Earth chain that makes up the space
weather system in fashion that is not possible at a typical university. The
school builds on a proven, successful model developed by a previously funded
Science and Technology Center, the Center for Integrated Space Weather Modeling
(CISM). It provides a needed community resource for space system education using
the highest quality content. The SWSS is based on research-based pedagogical
practices such as peer-instruction and other cooperative learning strategies to
produce an active-learning environment. It will focus on providing upper level
undergraduate students and beginning graduate students with a dynamic and
exciting introduction to space weather, concentrating on both its effects and
the basic physics underlying the processes. The selection process for students
will ensure that a broad range of students from underrepresented groups will be
able to attend the school. Also, post-doctoral research faculty at HAO will be
given the opportunity to develop lectures and teach in the school. All of the
school lectures will use modern teaching practices that the students will be
able to bring back to their home institutions when they return. Finally, the
students will have learned how to use advanced visualization and analysis
packages for processing model output, a valuable tool as they continue their
research careers.