* 1220381
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Acidification: Impacts on copepod populations mediated by changes in prey quality
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Julie Keister, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2017
* USD 177,683.00

Research shows that ocean acidification (OA) has physiological consequences for
individual organisms, even those lacking calcium carbonate skeletal structures.
However, this research does not adequately address how OA effects to individuals
are linked across trophic levels. Pelagic copepods are critical players in most
marine biogeochemical cycles. Their consumption of phytoplankton and
microzooplankton is the primary mechanism by which bacterial and phytoplankton
production is transferred to higher trophic levels. Despite their high abundance
and ecological importance, copepods have received little research attention
concerning OA. The few studies focused on direct acute effects to copepods (e.g.
egg hatching, survival) under elevated pCO2, and few significant effects have
been observed at predicted future pCO2. However, there is increasing recognition
that OA significantly affects their phytoplankton prey, including elevating
growth rates, increasing cell sizes, altering nutrient uptake and ratios, and
chemical composition. Because copepod grazing, egg production, and hatching
success all can vary with these prey characteristics, OA mediated changes in
phytoplankton quality may be an important indirect mechanism through which OA
acts on copepod populations and, ultimately, marine food webs.

This study that will advance our understanding of how copepod populations may be
affected by OA, specifically through OA induced changes in phytoplankton
quality. The core objective of this study is to determine how changes in
phytoplankton physiology and biochemistry (e.g. lipid composition) affect
copepod egg production, hatching, and ontogenetic development of nauplii. The
PIs will include a subset of experiments to test whether OA affects copepod
reproductive output independent of changes to prey. To achieve these research
goals, the diatom, Ditylum brightwellii, and dinoflagellate, Prorocentrum
micans, will be cultured semi-continuously under several pCO2 concentrations,
during which time the investigators will characterize changes in their
physiology and biochemistry. The copepods, Calanus pacificus, a large, high
lipid-bearing marine species, and Acartia clausi, a smaller, low lipid-bearing
estuarine species, will be maintained across varying pCO2 concentrations and fed
these pCO2-acclimated prey, and their grazing and reproductive capability
quantified. The copepods and phytoplankton used in this study will be collected
from the Salish Sea, a region already experiencing periods of high pCO2/H+
(>1000 ppm, pH 7.5) on varying timescales. Therefore, this research addresses a
question of how future climate change may impact marine ecosystems, but also is
relevant to pCO2/H+ variability presently experienced in coastal environments.

Broader Impacts: The PIs of this project are committed to: 1) promoting access
to under-represented groups, 2) training and mentoring, 3) broadening knowledge
of OA and 4) developing infrastructure for ongoing, multidisciplinary OA
research. Under-represented groups will be served through Shannon Point Marine
Center's (SPMC) nationally recognized NSF-funded Multicultural Initiative in the
Marine Sciences: Undergraduate Participation (MIMSUP:
http://www.wwu.edu/mimsup/), and University of Washington's Pacific Northwest
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PNW LSAMP) programs.
Educational goals are addressed through an array of activities including K-12
outreach, research experiences for undergraduates, including SPMC's summer REU
program, and development of widely disseminated curricular materials. The
project will support and participate in SPMC?s public outreach initiative,
increasing awareness of marine issues in the general public. This study will
support three early career scientists, a public education outreach specialist,
and will train a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student. Infrastructure
improvements to SPMC's existing OA research facility will increase usability,
making it more accessible for classroom use and student research. The additional
instrumentation will also allow the facility to become a regional resource for
monitoring pCO2 in the Salish Sea.