* 1220481
* Towards Mass Balancing Arc Magmatic fluxes - Insights from the Central Mexican Volcanic Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Georg Zellmer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2015
* USD 99,803.00

Towards mass balancing arc magmatic fluxes - insights from the central Mexican
Volcanic Belt Intellectual Merit: A fundamental breakthrough in understanding
the solid Earth geochemical cycle was the recognition of slab recycling in arcs.
Quantifying the magnitude of the slab flux, however, is a complex task that
requires understanding the petrogenesis of arc magmas, and in particular the
causes of their high average SiO2 (>50-65 wt%) by which they differ globally
from magmas produced at mid-ocean ridges and intraplate settings. The purpose of
this project is to investigate the provenance of high-Si andesites and dacites
(=?silicic magmas?) in the central Mexican Volcanic Belt (MVB) from mantle vs.
crustal sources. The presence of equilibrium olivines with high, mantle-type
3He/4He (=7-8 Ra) in coeval basaltic and andesitic MVB magmas suggests the
possibility that the high-SiO2 melts may have a mantle origin. Studies of
silicic volcanic rocks from Quaternary composite volcanoes Malinche,Popocateptl
and Nevada de Toluca and from coeval silicic monogenetic volcanoes of The
interjacent Sierra Chichinautzin Volcanic Field are proposed to test this idea.
Comprehensive major and trace element and isotopic data (incl. Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf
isotopes) will be measured in bulk rocks and phenocrysts to evaluate crust vs.
mantle contributions to formation of these rocks, and specifically whether or
not the silicic magmas are principally(i) crustal partial melts, vs. (ii) melts
generated in a subarc mantle infiltrated by reactive silicic fluids and partial
melts from the subducting slab. A crustal origin of the silicic magmas would
emphasize the importance of intracrustal processing and recycling at the expense
of the recycled crustal flux from slab. Confirming the existence of broader
spectrum of basaltic to dacitic initial mantle melts in the central MVB,
however, has transformative potential as to models of arc magma genesis, arc and
continental crustal growth, arc-trench connectivity and hence the overall impact
of arc fluxes on the broader geochemical cycles. Broader Impacts: The project
furthers the careers of two female scientists (Straub, with a disability, and
Bolge). Participation of undergraduate and graduate students will contribute to
the training of the next generation. Scientific interaction between US
scientists at Lamont and the Oregon State University and international
colleagues in Mexico, Taiwan and Scotland will be furthered. The project
proposed is of interest to the broader science community, as it addresses
questions on the forefront of the GeoPRISMS Initiative and of the New Science
Plan of the post-2013 International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP).