* 1220596
* Relationships Between Eruption Rate, Tephra Dispersal and Total Grain Size at Hekla and Askja volcanoes, Iceland: Enhancing the Source Term for Tephra Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Thorvaldur Thordarson, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2016
* USD 366,758.00

The 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallaj√∂kull volcano demonstrated a vulnerability of
global air traffic to even small eruptions from Icelandic (and other) volcanoes.
The $3B economic impact via transport went well beyond the regional stranding of
passengers to affect primary and manufacturing industry globally. Forecasts of
ash concentrations that could have minimized the impact, were handicapped by a
lack of key types of data. A key shortfall was a lack of distribution of ash
particle sizes from past eruptions as input for forecasting models. the goal is
to gather data from very young eruptions from two active Icelandic volcanoes to
solve this problem. The target audience for this study is not merely
volcanologists but meteorologists and decision makers for the global network of
Volcanic Ash Advisory Centers. The researchers will work with an advisory group
drawn from Volcanic Ash Advisory Centers and Meteorological Offices to ensure
take-up of the results.

Mass eruption rate, eruption column height, total grain size distribution (TGSD)
and particle settling properties, like density and shape, are key contributions
to understanding volcanic ash transport and dispersal models but globally very
few eruptions are characterized for all these parameters. TGSD data is
particularly lacking, e.g., of 25 eruptions with well constrained column height,
volume and eruption rate listed by Mastin et al. (2009) only 5 have TGSD. We
would acquire new and compile existing data for particle size and shape
distributions for 4 Hekla eruptions (2000, 1991, 1970, H1 (1104)) and 2 phases
of the 1875 Askja eruption. These range in eruption rate and volume over two
orders of magnitude. The three 20th - 21st century eruptions, and Askja 1875 B,
supply inputs to ?most plausible event? scenarios, for eruptive activity in the
near future, whereas the H1, and 1875 phase D eruptions credibly constrain
?worst case? scenarios for a decadal time scale. We aim to (i) understand the
relationships between tephra dispersal and eruption rate, TGSD, and pyroclast
size, shape, density and crystallinity, and (ii) supply a set of robust field-
derived source parameters to test models of tephra dispersal and transport.