* 1220110
* Ocean Acidification: Collaborative Research: Investigation of seawater CO2 system thermodynamics under high pCO2 conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Xuewu Liu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2018
* USD 650,603.00

Assessments of the effects of ocean acidification in a high CO2 world require
well-constrained models that interrelate measurable carbon system parameters:
total dissolved inorganic carbon (CT) and total alkalinity (AT), CO2 fugacity
(fCO2), pH and carbonate ion concentration ([CO3 2-]). Current thermodynamic
models that relate CT and AT to fCO2 using carbonic acid dissociation constants
(K1' and K2') developed for seawater analyses have been shown to provide good
results at current fCO2 values ca. 380 uatm, but break down at the elevated CO2
concentrations (&gt;500 uatm) that are likely to occur before the end of this
century. Studies of the effects of elevated CO2 on organismal and ecosystem
functions require robust thermodynamic models to ensure that results, which
occasionally involve measurements of only two system-variables, provide accurate
depictions of the investigated system in its entirety. Because accurate
predictions of the consequences of ocean acidification are critical to guide
management and policy decisions, development of accurate thermodynamic CO2
system models is essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at
the University of South Florida and SRI International will perform best
practices measurements of CT, AT, fCO2 and pH, and subsequently assess the
magnitudes of K1', K2' and KB' that produce an internally consistent
thermodynamic model of the marine CO2 system. The proposed work is facilitated
by (a) the recent development and characterization of purified indicators for
precise and accurate seawater pH measurements and (b) the development of
accurate borate to salinity ratios that provide an improved account of the
contributions of boric acid to the buffer intensity of seawater. The study will
include investigations of the AT contributions of uncharacterized seawater
protolytes (e.g. from dissolved organic matter) as well as the possible
interactions between carbonate and borate ions that may influence CO2 equilibria
under high pCO2 conditions. The proposed work will additionally be promoted by
the recent development of UV spectrometric procedures for direct measurements of
carbonate ion concentrations in seawater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The OCB Ocean Acidification Principal Investigator Workshop Report (2011)
identified a near-term need to "determine the consequences of large pH change on
the carbonate system; as pH shifts the carbonate system may respond in ways
different from the range we customarily measure". Since interpretation of the
results of CO2 system perturbation experiments depend on accurate knowledge of
the carbon system parameters under which the experiments were performed,
development of improved carbon system equilibrium relationships, especially at
high CO2 levels, is vitally important to the study of ocean
acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students involved
in the project will benefit from learning carbon system best practices as well
as obtaining a comprehensive understanding of CO2 system thermodynamics. The
field component will provide hands-on experience in at sea measurements and
statistical analysis of CO2 system relationships. Furthermore, we intend to
develop an ocean acidification classroom and laboratory module that will be
taught at a local high school serving an ethnically-diverse student population.
The lesson plans developed during this activity will be presented to teachers at
the annual District-wide Training for High School Science/Math for Pinellas
County schools.