* 1220116
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Industrialization and Commercial Law in Late Imperial Russia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Timothy Guinnane, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,948.00

By the beginning of the twentieth century, decades of sustained economic growth
in Western Europe left the Russian Empire a poor and largely agricultural
society compared with its neighbors. In the final decades before the October
Revolution of 1917, the Imperial Government enacted several reforms designed to
improve the economy. A central objective of these reforms was the stimulation of
growth in Russia's small but rapidly expanding manufacturing sector. How
effective were these reforms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding
for the collection and analysis of firm-level data from Russian manufacturing
censuses dating from the early twentieth century as well as archival sources
from the late nineteenth century. This data will support tests of hypotheses
concerning Russia's relative poverty in this period. The project uses economic
and econometric tools to study a cluster of questions related to the late
development of the Russian economy. When the project is completed, the data will
be available to the public through the ICPSR and similar organizations. Such a
new historical dataset of factories will be of interest to scholars in diverse
fields including economic history, economic development, industrial
organization, trade, and geography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will provide clues about the kinds of commercial law regimes that
encourage development of manufacturing. This project contributes to the
literature in economics that examines the relationship between institutions and
economic growth by determining how a specific institution, commercial law,
affected economic outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industrialization and
modernization are two major goals of economic development, and the Russian
economy at the beginning of the twentieth century provides one of the best
examples available of rapid industrialization and major reforms before political
revolution. By understanding the kinds of policies employed by the Russian
Empire and the resulting patterns of industrialization, researchers can gain an
understanding of similar patterns exhibited by developing economies today.
Furthermore, when industrialization is a goal of development, this project will
have implications regarding which policies can encourage the growth of an
industrial labor force.