* 1220216
* Collaborative Research: Shear Zone and Detachment Formation during Syn-convergent Extension in the Andes: Cordillera Blanca, Peru
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Colin Shaw, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 77,320.00

The dominant process in mountain building is shortening and thickening of the
Earth?s crust across relatively narrow orogenic belts where tectonic plates
converge. During the past two decades there has been growing appreciation of the
importance of crustal extension occurring within mountain belts at the same time
as shortening. Examples of such syn-convergent extension have been identified in
active mountain belts including the Himalaya and Andes and many researchers have
also found evidence for similar processes in rocks that formed in ancient
mountain belts. The goal of this project is to document the mechanisms of
ongoing syn-convergent extension within an active fault system that bounds the
southwestern margin of the Cordillera Blanca in the Peruvian Andes. Data
collected on this modern structure will help researchers interpret evidence for
syn-convergent extension from ancient orogenic events as well as modern mountain
belts. The Cordillera Blanca is the ideal structure to study these processes
because extension is very recent (&lt; 6 million years), the regional tectonic
regime has remained fairly constant during the evolution of the fault and the
rocks in the footwall are similar along the entire 200 km length of the
detachment. These factors will facilitate comparison of data from different
parts of the detachment and allow us extrapolate processes and rates of
deformation into the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syn-convergent extension can be
broadly divided into two general types according to the direction of extension
relative to the mountain belt: orogen parallel extension involves stretching of
the crust parallel to the trend of the mountain belt (perpendicular to the
direction of shortening); transverse extension involves stretching across the
trend of the mountain belt (parallel to the direction of shortening). Orogen
parallel extension generally occurs on faults oriented perpendicular to the
mountains while transverse extension occurs on structures parallel to the
mountain belt. Transverse extension poses something of a conundrum: How can the
crust shorten and extend at the same time and in the same direction? The answer
seems to involve a partitioning of shortening and extension at different levels
in the crust. By studying the evolution of the Cordillera Blanca through time as
it is exhumed we will attempt to elucidate the conditions that allow extension
while overall shortening continues across the Andes. This project will focus on
shear-zone-scale processes including: (1) How have the thickness, strain rate,
differential flow stress and temperature evolved during exhumation to shallower
crustal levels, and (2) How is deformation on the master detachment related to
slip on seismically active structures? By carefully integrating field mapping of
structural geometry, kinematic studies, analysis of deformation mechanisms,
temperature estimates and paleopiezometry, we hope to reconstruct a profile
showing how the strength and mechanical behavior of the shear zone varied at
different depths during deformation and exhumation of the Cordillera Blanca. Our
research will provide results that will help researchers to better understand
how extensional faults evolve during crustal extension in modern and ancient
mountain belts. The research represents a collaborative effort between
researchers at the University of Kentucky Knoxville and Montana State
University. In addition to the scientific goals of the project, the project is
supporting the training of graduate and undergraduate students in an STEM
discipline and contributing to public outreach efforts based on the research
outcomes.