* 1220026
* SBES: Small: Developing Countermeasures to Mitigate Psychology Cyber-Attacks on Personal Identity Information
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Feng Zhu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 464,124.00

Approximately six million Americans are targets of identity theft each year.
Many of the attacks on identity privacy use psychological influence strategies
("psychological attacks?) to induce individuals to provide their private
information. Although people are appropriately concerned about their privacy,
they often unnecessarily disclose information that could be used to their
disadvantage. Our studies have shown that people?s privacy exposure behaviors
may be severely affected by psychological attacks. Unfortunately, research from
a psychological perspective to mitigate the attacks is scarce. This research
identifies critical aspects of warnings for a sub-set of psychological cyber-
attacks on privacy and provides guidelines for developing effective mitigations
against other types of psychological cyber-attacks. We create computer-mediated
countermeasures. We also ascertain the extent to which the warnings capture
attention, are understood, are memorable, increase perceptions of risk, decrease
trust, and lead to compliance under conditions of psychological attacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This research is a first investigation
of whether theoretical models developed to reduce risky behaviors (e.g., health-
related behaviors) can be extended to the domain of computer privacy. The
research determines whether warnings can have significant impact on people?s
decisions about disclosure of their private information. The effectiveness of
our mitigation approach is tested on hand-held devices and web sites with the
goal of increasing compliance with the warnings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This research provides mitigation strategies for private information
exposure and provides guidelines for software developers to use when designing
privacy preserving software. Potentially, the results can be generalized to
mitigate other current and future psychological privacy attacks. Research
findings are disseminated in both social psychology and computer science. In
addition, a website is developed to share the research results, the data sets,
and the lessons learned, in order to raise the awareness of the importance of
protecting identity information and mitigating psychological cyber-attacks.