* 1220588
* Does the Holocene Slip History for the Mojave Section of the San Andreas Fault Indicate Secular Variation in Slip and a Discrepancy with Geodetic Rates?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Eric Cowgill, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2017
* USD 373,313.00

In this project a team of scientists from the University of California, Davis,
in collaboration with researchers at the United States Geological Survey, will
use geologic observations to measure the history of fault slip along the Mojave
section of the San Andreas fault in Southern California (from Frazier Mountain
in the northwest to Cajon Creek in the southeast). The primary goal of the
project is to test the hypothesis that the average rate of motion along the
Mojave section of the San Andreas fault alternated between periods of fast slip
(approximately 45 mm/yr) at 1100-4500 and 6500-8000 yr ago and periods of slower
motion (approximately 16 mm/yr) at 0-1100, 4500-6500, and 8000-10000 years ago.
To do so, the research team will determine the history of fault motion along
this section of the San Andreas fault over the last ten thousand years by
measuring the ages and offsets of ten different faulted stream channels. Because
each channel formed at a different time, each channel records a different period
of fault motion. In particular, each channel experienced a different number of
ancient earthquakes and thus accumulated a different amount of fault slip, with
offsets ranging from 26 (+4/-3) m for the youngest channel to 261 (+46/-26) m
for the oldest. To precisely measure the total age and total offset for each of
these channels, and thus measure the slip rate since the channel formed, the
research team will use careful field mapping, analysis of detailed topographic
measurements, and excavations at each site. These age and offset data will then
be analyzed to determine both the slip rate as averaged over the last ten
thousand years and the extent to which there were statistically significant
faster and slower pulses of slip within that period of motion.

In general, active faults remain locked until they suddenly break and slip to
produce an earthquake. Such motion is roughly analogous to that of a car in
stop-and-go traffic. During earthquake ruptures, surface features such as stream
channels or roads are often cut and displaced by the rapid fault motion. Thus,
repeated earthquakes over time can result in both an accumulation of surface
displacements along the fault and a time-averaged slip rate. Because faster-
moving faults will produce more frequent earthquakes, determining the average
rates at which faults slip is of fundamental importance for evaluating their
earthquake hazards. Geological records of ancient earthquakes in the Los Angeles
Basin and Eastern California Shear Zone appear to indicate that fault activity
has rapidly switched between the Mojave section of the San Andreas fault and the
Eastern California Shear zone, as well as other fault systems in southern
California. This model has important implications regarding seismic hazards and
if correct, would significantly revise understanding of the mechanical behavior
of major continental fault systems.