* 1220675
* Modeling Hydrologic Systems in Elementary Science (MoHSES)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Christina Schwarz, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 448,491.00

The Modeling Hydrologic Systems in Elementary Science (MoHSES) project involves
research and development to investigate 3rd-grade students' model-based
reasoning about hydrologic systems and how teachers scaffold students'
engagement in modeling practices. The research builds upon existing modeling
frameworks to guide the development and integration of a long-term conceptual
modeling task into the Full Option Science System (FOSS) Water module. The
participants in the study include ten 3rd-grade elementary teachers recruited
from diverse settings. The team utilizes an extensive classroom observation
system, in-depth interviews with students and teachers, and student artifacts to
investigate the following research questions: (1) How do 3rd-grade students
construct, use, evaluate, and revise conceptual models of groundwater systems to
reason about geospheric components of the water cycle? (2) Are 3rd-grade
students able to construct more scientifically-accurate models of groundwater
cycling over time? (3) What instructional strategies do 3rd-grade teachers use
to support students' model-based reasoning about groundwater
systems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can help build a foundation in
model-based reasoning about complex global environmental and scientific
phenomena in early learners. Investigations of elementary students' model-based
reasoning about the water cycle, are largely absent from the literature. The
data collected from this project can help inform science curriculum materials
development and elementary teacher preparation efforts designed to foster
reform-oriented, model-centered elementary science learning environments. This
research also informs the development of learning progressions that account for
elementary students' learning within a core component of the Earth Sciences.