* 1220453
* Collaborative Research: Non-equilibrium Topography and Crustal-scale Imbrication in an Arc-continent Collision, Taiwan
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Timothy Byrne, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2016
* USD 381,675.00

This project, in collaboration with scientists from Taiwan, will study of the
deformation, exhumation, and landscape evolution of the Central Range of Taiwan
with focus on recently recognized patches of low relief at high elevations that
straddle the crest of the range and stand in stark contrast to the steep and
rugged topography predicted for an orogenic system considered to have reached
steady-state topography. The research team will test the idea that these areas
of low relief are uplifted remnants of a relict landscape that formed prior to a
recent transient acceleration in rock uplift rate and that the acceleration in
uplift was driven by crustal-scale imbrication as suggested by preliminary
interpretations of seismic tomographic analyses. To test these linked
hypotheses, the team will carry out three related lines of research: 1)
geomorphology and cosmogenic analyses (detailed analysis of the topography;
detailed field mapping of fluvial terraces; and determination of erosion rates
for the areas of low relief primarily using 10Be); 2) field-based and crustal-
scale kinematic analyses (documentation of the spatial distribution, relative
age, and orientation of outcrop-scale faults and kinematics; determination of
the dominant deformation mechanisms; and inversion of fault earthquake data for
the shape and orientation of the strain ellipsoid); 3) thermochronometry
studies. The integrated dataset from this study has the potential to transform
understanding of the crustal deformation and landscape evolution of one of the
type examples of an active, arc-continent collision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taiwan
represents one of the most active tectonic environments on Earth. The island
marks the collision between the Luzon volcanic arc and the passive margin of
Asia and for decades the collision has motivated geodynamic models to explain
the evolution of many mountain belts around the world. The paradigm for Taiwan
is that the obliquity between the northeast-southwest trending passive margin
and the north-south trending volcanic arc has led to steady southward
propagation of the mountain belt and a time-for-space equivalence so that cross
sections of the belt can be treated as time slices for different stages in a
characteristic evolution. Moreover, the relatively constant width of the orogen
has led numerous workers to argue for a topographic steady state where the
influx of material is balanced by erosion. This project aims to examine the idea
that the mountain belt is punctuated by episodic events that perturb the steady
state system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Earth
Sciences Division Tectonics Program and the NSF Office of International Science
and Engineering.