* 1220484
* Ocean Acidification: The Influence of Ocean Acidification and Rising Temperature on Phytoplankton Proteome Composition
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 697,491.00

In recent years, a number of studies have demonstrated significant impacts of
ocean acidification on the physiology of marine phytoplankton. While the most
well-known are studies that have focused on calcifying organisms, there have
also been studies on noncalcifying phytoplankton, such as marine cyanobacteria
and diatoms. Three particularly notable observations include: 1) increased
growth and nitrogen fixation rates with acidification in marine nitrogen fixing
cyanobacteria, 2) differences in response between the two most abundant marine
cyanobacteria groups, Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, where the growth of the
latter responded positively to the acidification while the former did not, and
3) an increased level of iron stress in marine diatoms and a coccolithophore due
to decreased iron availability upon lowered pH and the resultant shift in
complexation chemistry. Together these suggest that ocean acidification has the
potential for causing large shifts in: phytoplankton community composition, the
sensitivity of this community to iron availability, and the marine nitrogen
biogeochemical cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will investigate physiological
mechanisms set into motion by the environmental stimuli associated with ocean
acidification by quantifying changes in the proteome of four marine
phytoplankton species: the abundant cyanobacteria Synechococcus and
Prochlorococcus, the key nitrogen fixing cyanobacterium Crocosphaera, and an
Antarctic diatom Nitzschia sp., in response to ocean acidification. In recent
years, the team has adapted and developed quantitative proteomic capabilities
for marine microbes using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry systems. The
approach has become virtually routine and could be applied to a variety of
problems related to ocean acidification. In addition, because of the climatic
link between ocean acidification and global warming, the synergistic influences
of increasing temperature will also be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This proposed study will provide mechanistic information about how the
processes of ocean acidification and warming influence marine phytoplankton. In
addition, a Postdoctoral Investigator and Graduate Student will be trained and
supported. The project will also feature an outreach program to expose summer
minority students from New Bedford, Massachusetts to oceanography and
environmental science in partnership with the Eagle Eye Institute and Trustees
of the Reservations.