* 1220523
* Zircon in Iceland:  Elucidating Generation and Evolution of Silicic Magma and  Juvenile Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Calvin Miller, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2016
* USD 332,921.00

The 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajökoll, which paralyzed international air
traffic, called attention to Iceland?s geological uniqueness and potential
global impact. Both the explosive behavior of its many active volcanoes and the
plentiful geothermal energy resources that power the clean island nation are
linked to unusual oceanic magma systems that yield abundant silicic lava, ash,
and granitic rocks. This project emphasizes the mineral zircon as a tracer to
explore the processes operating in Iceland at present and in the past to
generate silicic magmas, build a continent-like island in the mid-Atlantic, and
power its dynamic volcanic and geothermal systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iceland?s size and the thickness of its crust, as well as
its copious silicic magmatism, make it unique among Earth?s oceanic islands.
These characteristics have led previous researchers to propose that the island
provides a modern example of the early stages of formation of permanent, low-
density continental crust, perhaps mimicking the initiation of the first
continents over four billion years ago. Notably lacking in the extensive studies
of Icelandic geology are investigations of zircon, which have elsewhere provided
the underpinnings for much of our understanding of magmatic processes and the
origin and evolution of the Earth?s crust. Zircon, a mineral typically
associated with the silicic rocks of continents and island arcs, is the most
durable and reliable material for radiometric dating of high-temperature
processes and at the same time provides information about the environments in
which it grows. Although a majority of Iceland?s crust is low in silica (basalt)
and therefore poor in zircon, the island's higher-silica rocks (granite and
rhyolite) carry sufficient zircon to elucidate its history. This investigation
builds on pilot studies by the investigators using radiometric dating and
elemental and isotopic compositions of zircon to clarify the processes by which
silicic magmas are generated in Iceland and stored and modified prior to
eruption. The research will refine understanding of how magmatic and related
geothermal systems work in Iceland. In so doing, it will also address issues of
evolving climate (did the change from temperate to glacial conditions affect
magmatic processes?) and tectonic construction of Iceland (what roles do rifting
and plume processes play in production of silicic magma?; is Iceland underlain
by fragments of ancient continental crust that remain from the opening of the
Atlantic?).