* 1220532
* Collaborative Research: Age, Petrology, and Tectonic Setting of Purported Taconic-aged plutons, Ashland-Wedowee-Emuckfaw Belt, Southern Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Paul Mueller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 139,942.00

This collaborative project between investigators at Columbus State University
and the University of Florida aims to resolve conflicting interpretations of the
tectonic origin and age of a number of metamorphosed granitoids in the Ashland-
Wedowee-Emuckfaw belt (Eastern Blue Ridge) province of Alabama in the
southernmost Appalachians. Traditionally attributed to latest Cambrian-Middle
Ordovician magmatism associated with the Taconic orogeny, the Elkahatchee Quartz
Diorite, Zana Gneiss, and Kowaliga Gneiss have been considered by some workers
to be part of an obducted Taconic island or peri-Laurentian arc emplaced atop
the subducting margin of North America. SHRIMP-RG results from the dominant
quartz diorite component of the Elkahatchee, however, suggest an Upper Devonian
emplacement age with considerable evidence for abundant xenocrystic inheritance
which may have complicated the initial whole rock and multi-grain analyses
completed over two decades ago. The potential for significant Acadian-aged
magmatic components in the Elkahatchee calls into question its association with
a Taconic arc; a question which can only be addressed by detailed isotopic
analysis of the various lithologies typically assigned to this batholith.
Furthermore, since both the Zana and Kowaliga gneisses were assigned ages using
some of the same techniques as those used to assign a latest Cambrian age to the
Elkahatchee, attribution of these plutons to Ordovician orogenesis is also
suspect. Spatially resolved U-Pb analysis of these plutons will provide the best
temporal context for examining the Lu-Hf systematics of zircon components and,
in combination, will allow us to constrain the petrotectonic evolution of
parental magma(s).

Results from this project will shed new light on the tectonic evolution of the
North American margin and the development of the Appalachian Mountains through
the Paleozoic. Significantly, it will provide new constraints on fundamental
questions regarding evolution of the southern Appalachian orogeny because of its
bearing on the continuity and nature of subduction along the eastern margin of
North America during the closure of the Iapetus and Rheic oceans. These results
will also afford an improved understanding of the role of important plutonic
elements in the evolution of the southern Appalachians, which will be of
advantage to many institutions in the region for undergraduate and graduate
instruction. Integration of student and faculty expertise and opportunities at
these universities will have a significant impact on training professional
geoscientists, who are critical to developing a strong national STEM workforce,
and will provide valuable support for a faculty research program at a
predominantly undergraduate institution through the Research in Undergraduate
Institutions program (RUI). Finally, this project will afford a group of geology
undergraduates an invaluable experience (from field to analytical) through
participation in a geological research program, greatly enhancing their
undergraduate education and enhancing the nation?s STEM workforce.