* 1220252
* A Quantitative Method for Measuring Temperature-time Histories in Hydrothermal Magmatic Ore Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Drew Coleman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2015
* USD 216,976.00

In 2010, the United States produced over $800 million of molybdenum oxide, and
the demand for molybdenum as an alloying agent in high-grade steel will likely
increase as global economies recover. The majority of the world's molybdenum
reserves are contained within porphyry copper (±molybdenum) and porphyry
molybdenum (±copper) deposits. Although porphyry molybdenum deposits are often
volumetrically smaller than porphyry copper systems, they are still a
significant source of molybdenum owing to higher ore grades. Understanding
porphyry molybdenum deposition is important for accurate predictions of spatial
and temporal ore distribution during exploration. The timing and duration of
molybdenum mineralization relative to associated magmatism will be investigated.
The study will lend insight into the complex variations of ore grade, alteration
geochemistry, and magmatic-hydrothermal textures observed within porphyry
molybdenum ore systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed uranium/lead zircon
(±titanite) and argon/argon biotite (±hornblende) dating of plutonic rocks
associated with porphyry molybdenum deposits in the western US will be obtained.
In addition, rhenium/osmium molybdenite dates, and fluid trapping temperatures
for molybdenite in quartz veins from economically important deposits will be
determined. These data will be used to establish precise temperature-time
histories of the deposits and the timing of mineralization within the thermal
maturation of the magma system. This information should be useful in enhancing
exploration for molybdenum - an increasingly valuable international commodity.
The results of this work should 1) enable better understanding of porphyry
mineralization in light of new hypotheses regarding the incremental assembly of
homogeneous plutons, and 2) further development of combined rhenium/osmium
geochronology and fluid inclusion thermometry as a broadly applicable
thermochronologic tool.