* 1220363
* OCEAN ACIDIFICATION - COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: OMEGAS II - Linking ecological and organismal responses to the ocean acidification seascape in the California Current System
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Peter Raimondi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2014
* USD 77,018.00

This project is a renewal of an existing ocean acidification (OA) grant
supporting an interdisciplinary research team (called OMEGAS) with expertise in
oceanography, ecology, biogeochemistry, molecular physiology, and molecular
genetics. Research to date has documented a dynamic oceanographic mosaic in the
inner shelf of the California Current System (CCS) that spans 1,200+ km and
varies at tidal, diurnal, event, and seasonal temporal scales at local to ocean
basin spatial scales. In OMEGAS II, the project seeks to better understand the
drivers of this striking time-space variability, and to link the OA seascape to
the physiological and ecological performance of a key member of this ecosystem,
the mussel Mytilus californianus. In addition, the investigators will explore
the influence of this oceanographic mosaic on species interactions and community
organization. As a dominant habitat-forming species, strong interactor, and
major space occupant, M. californianus is arguably the core component of the
rocky intertidal ecosystem along the upwelling-dominated CCS. Using an
interdisciplinary, spatially extensive approach integrating inner shelf
oceanography with ecology, physiology, and eco-mechanics, the interdisciplinary
team will study the response of juvenile mussels M. californianus to OA. The
studies span levels of biological organization, thereby allowing assessment of
how the cost of forming a shell under field conditions might influence
physiological performance and resistance to predation. This investigation will
include modeling to link to larger-scale ecosystem and oceanographic dynamics in
the CCS and beyond.

Results from OMEGAS I show that the growth, survival, and shell strength of
mussel larvae are strongly negatively affected by elevated pCO2, and that growth
of adult mussels varied among sites within regions and between regions. Emerging
data on natural variability in seawater conditions will allow a deeper
exploration of the organismal response of M. californianus, and the ecological
consequences of traits, such as reduced shell thickness and strength. The
present project will expand and strengthen the existing oceanographic network to
increase our understanding of the coastal OA regime, and provide the
environmental context for ecological and physiological research. Specifically,
this project will (1) conduct field and laboratory experiments on the influence
of OA on the growth, shell accretion, and resistance to predation of juvenile
mussels collected from 10 sites spanning 1,400 km of coastline, (2) link the OA-
sensor oceanographic "backbone" to an existing database of community structure
via ecological modeling to assess the influence of OA on coastal variation in
community organization, (3) determine the physiological responses of juvenile
mussels following field deployments and culture under common garden conditions
to evaluate mechanistic underpinnings to the responses observed in mussels from
different sites, (4) explore the physiological and transcriptomic response of
mussels in lab mesocosms to field-documented variability in pCO2, and (5) using
modified ROMS models, evaluate the linkage between basin-scale oceanography and
local-scale variation in inner-shelf oceanography to evaluate the relative
influences of large-to-local scale factors on OA variability. This research aims
to understand how coastal ecosystems will respond to OA, and thus to develop our
capacity to predict the future impact of OA on coastal ecosystems.

Broader Impacts. This project will leverage complementary funding for research,
training and outreach, and engage undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers, as well as PIs. Part of an overall goal is to increase
the visibility and familiarity of OA science for policy makers and the general
public. Outreach will be facilitated through extensive ties to COMPASS
(Communication Partnership for Science and the Sea), public lectures, websites,
and multimedia outlets, such as films and television. Each campus is engaged in
local-to-national displays on OA.