* 1220480
* Ocean Acidification: Effects on Morphology and Mineralogy in Otoliths of Larval Reef Fish
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Tlusty, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2015
* USD 204,556.00

If a larval fish cannot avoid predators and cannot orient itself in three-
dimensional space, the consequences to the individual and the population are
dramatic. Otoliths (ear stones), formed precipitation of calcium carbonate from
a bicarbonate-rich and alkaline pH fluid, are critical to fish movement and
orientation. Although marine fish compensate for carbon dioxide levels in the
surrounding waters little is known about how increased dissolved carbon dioxide
and changes in bicarbonate concentrations will impact the formation of otoliths.
Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations, leading to decreased ocean
pH (ocean acidification) may have profound impact on the deposition, growth and
function of these critical structures, particularly in larval fish. Focusing on
pre-settlement age larval reef fish (Amphiprion clarkii and Chrysiptera
parasema), this research integrates expertise in carbonate mineralogy, otolith
development, and reef fish biology and leverages this unique combination of
expertise to answer fundamental questions regarding the impact of ocean
acidification on the structure and function of otoliths. Specifically, the
research will answer two fundamental questions: What are the natural
morphological and mineralogical variations within growing otoliths? How do these
change when larvae are exposed to high dissolved carbon dioxide concentrations?
Larvae will be hatched and reared under high carbon dioxide-induced low pH and
three types of otoliths (sagittae, lapilli, asterisci) will be extracted over
the duration of the experiments. Changes in calcium carbonate mineralogy from
aragonite (most common) to vaterite (less common, less dense) as well as changes
in crystal habit (well formed to poorly formed) will be evaluated using a
combination of microscopic and morphometric techniques. The gap in understanding
of otolith morphology and mineralogy precludes our ability to accurately
evaluate the impact of ocean acidification on larval fish survival. Given that
we know very little about the morphology and mineralogy of all three otolith
types in larval marine fish, this research will provide fundamental data
regarding natural variability. Data from unexposed and exposed larvae will
inform our understanding of the development of otoliths and structure-function
relationships. Additionally, otoliths provide long-term records of environmental
life histories that could be better exploited if we understood the relation
between environmental conditions and otolith morphology and mineralogy.
&lt;br/&gt;This research represents a unique interdisciplinary collaboration
between faculty and students at the University of Massachusetts Boston (a
minority-serving institution), New England Aquarium (NEAq; not-for-profit
research aquarium), and, through a formal partnership with NEAq, Roger Williams
University (primarily undergraduate institution). NEAq is one of the premier
visitor attractions in Boston, with over 1.3 million visitors a year, and a
major public education resource. In addition to significant research outcomes
this project also supports the development of informal science education
materials that will be distributed to the public and displayed at the NEAq
Harborside Learning Lab and NEAq Ocean Center. The project also supports the
training of 1 PhD student and 1 undergraduate student.