* 1220450
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Structure and Kinematics of an Accommodation Zone within the Evolving Afar Triple Junction, Central Afar (Ethiopia and Djibouti)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Samson Tesfaye, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2014
* USD 33,212.00

This study will examine the structure and late Cenozoic tectonism in the Afar
region (East Africa) in an effort to decipher the neotectonic framework of an
active rift-rift-rift triple junction. The interaction between the Gulf of Aden
and Red Sea rifts may have led to the development of a large scale accommodation
zone that presently is marked by half grabens and tilted fault blocks in central
Afar. Understanding the partitioning of extension across Afar rift will provide
insight into the evolution of rift-rift-rift triple junctions and continental
rifting, in general. Comparison of long-term (Quaternary) deformation with more
recent kinematics (e.g., from late Pleistocene landforms and available GPS
observations) provides an initial means of assessing the evolution of the
accommodation zone (e.g., co-axial strain versus progressive strain and
rotation). The structure and tectonics of central Afar will be investigated from
remote sensing data and field studies to better understand the linkage between
the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden rift propagators into central Afar. In particular,
the research will focus on the Afar Stratoid volcanic rocks (approximately 4.0
to 1.0 Ma), a regionally extensive lava surface that predates the initiation of
grabens in central Afar. ALOS PRISM & PALSAR data will be utilized to generate
high resolution digital topographic base maps, and ASTER & AVNIR-2 images will
be used to discriminate geomorphic and lithologic features. Field observations
will provide ground-truth verification for the remote-sensing-based regional
mapping. Investigations will involve local mapping of the geological structure,
Quaternary geology, and geomorphology. This activity will constrain the geometry
of fault-related landforms and other landscape elements that could provide
markers of recent tectonic activity. Field investigations will also document and
measure basic structural data. Combining structural and neotectonic analyses, we
aim to accomplish the following: 1) determine the presence of an accommodation
zone between the propagating Red sea and Gulf of Aden rifts; 2) constrain
structural geometries and the viability of a regional datum for restoration; 3)
document the contribution of small faults to regional strain; 4) estimate
horizontal extension across part of the central Afar; and 5) assess late
Pleistocene tectonic landforms as kinematic indicators and potential for
estimating rates.

The Afar region encompasses the only sub-aerial exposure of a rift-rift-rift
triple junction and, hence, affords a unusual opportunity to study the
extensional tectonism from the early break-up of continents to seafloor
spreading. Present-day extension across the Afar is accommodated by magmatic,
axial rift zones (the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden propagators and the main
Ethiopian Rift), and amagmatic extension across the intervening region in
between. As an exploratory project this work will facilitate the development of
new international collaborations between US universities and colleagues in
Ethiopia and Djibouti. As with neotectonics studies, in general, results will
contribute to a more informed assessment of the earthquake hazard in the region,
although implementing that link is beyond the scope of this pilot study.
Although the Afar region is sparsely populated urban and infrastructure
development including dam and irrigation schemes, large scale commercial farms,
roads, and railway lines have taken place. Past earthquakes including the Serdo
(1969) and Dobe (1989) in central Afar have disrupted road networks that provide
Ethiopia access to the sea.

This project is supported by the Earth Sciences Division Tectonics Program and
the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.