* 1220302
* Ocean Acidification - Collaborative Research: Measuring the kinetics of CaCO3 dissolution in seawater using novel isotope labeling, laboratory experiments, and in situ experiments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* William Berelson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 469,212.00

Ocean acidification by anthropogenic CO2 emissions to the atmosphere will
ultimately be balanced by sedimentary carbonate dissolution. The time constant
for this reaction, however, is ca. 6,000 years. So, in the coming decades, the
ocean's response to CO2 uptake will be based on the kinetics of supply and
removal, not on the thermodynamics of the system. Unfortunately our
understanding of the basic rate law for carbonate dissolution in the ocean is
lacking. The order of the rate law is still argued to be anywhere from 1 to 4.5;
this range represents a major difference in the sensitivity of the system to
small changes in saturation state. The relative importance of aragonite vs.
calcite dissolution, the influence of Mg content in the minerals, and the sign
of the role of organic matter are all still unknowns in the modern ocean. Of
course, a truly useful rate law would be able to combine the relative importance
of all of these factors into a predictive rule for how dissolution will respond
to ocean acidification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the
California Institute of Technology and the University of Southern California
will address this problem with a novel set of laboratory and in situ experiments
that use 13C tracer labeled biogenic carbonates to measure the dissolution rate
under a wide range of saturation states. They will assemble a set of rules that
will govern carbonate dissolution in sinking particles and in marine sediments.
This will require two sub-projects. First, they will culture several different
species of biogenic carbonate producers in the lab under the influence of a
strong 13C label. With enrichments of around 30,000o/oo in the CaCO3, they will
measure the change in DI13C at several time points over 1-2 weeks in specially
built high-pressure reaction chambers. The construction of a prototype chamber
is completed and it provides the means, for the first time, to control carbonate
saturation state by changing seawater chemistry, pressure, and temperature
independently. Experiments with pure 13C labeled inorganic CaCO3 will provide
the inorganic reference frame for our biogenic carbonate results. Secondly, to
check the lab-based rate data, they will also use labeled biogenic particles in
a simple Niskin bottle based reactor that will be deployable on regular
hydrowire. The accumulation of 13C in the Niskin DIC over 1-2 days will provide
an initial rate that is directly comparable to the more extensive laboratory
study on the same sorts of materials. Using the San Pedro Basin as a test bed
for these in situ experiments will sample a range of saturation states in a
series of 3-day cruises. This high-sensitivity approach should allow the team to
unpack the various components of carbonate dissolution in seawater under rising
CO2 concentrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Producing a better
rate law for carbonate dissolution will have broad implications for the fields
of marine chemistry, marine biology, paleoceanography, and for potential
societal response to ocean acidification. This rate law sits at the heart of the
marine carbonate cycle. In addition, this work will benefit at least two
graduate students and promote US-Israel collaborations via the inclusion of
Jonathan Erez and his students. The specific involvement of underrepresented
high school students in scientific/oceanographic research is built into the
efforts of this project as well as ongoing efforts by both PIs to communicate
their science to a broad array of non-scientific audiences.