* 1220022
* Mathematical and Computational Methods for Planning a Sustainable Future
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2015
* USD 425,773.00

This Exploratory Project is developing two prototype innovative instructional
modules for grades 9-12 modules, and testing them extensively for useability and
impact. These modules will emphasize the role of mathematics and computer
science in planning for sustainability. The primary hypotheses is that short
(roughly one week) interdisciplinary modules can positively impact students' in
the following ways:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- attitudes toward mathematics and
computer science by immersion in sustainability topics of personal
relevance;&lt;br/&gt;- facility with cross-cutting skills in mathematical and
computational methods; &lt;br/&gt;- awareness of interdisciplinary issues in
sustainability;&lt;br/&gt;- empowerment to engage in sustainability discourse
and exercise responsible citizenship; &lt;br/&gt;- learning of the STEM
practices and modes of inquiry necessary to become the next generation of
interdisciplinary problem solvers;&lt;br/&gt;- awareness of STEM educational
opportunities and career paths related to sustainable living. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project is conducted by Rutgers Bloustein School of Planning and
Public Policy, the Consortium for Mathematics and its Applications (COMAP),
Colorado State University (CSU), the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR), and at multiple schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics for the initial two
modules will be chosen by a high level Advisory Board from the following:
Passive Solar Building Design, Weather Generators, Hydrologic Cycles, Invasive
Species and Percolation, and Uncertainties with Projections in Climate Models.
Each module will contain a description of career opportunities and related jobs,
and highlight a person in one such job. Module writer teams of 2-3 writers
consisting of at least one content expert and one pedagogical expert and/or
experienced teacher will write the two modules in the first year; they will be
tested with high school students in a summer prototyping workshop held at The
Groton School in the summer between the two years of the project; revised during
that summer; field tested in diverse high schools during the fall of the second
year; revised again during the spring; and prepared for publication at the end
of the two years.