* 1220731
* EAGER: Self-Protection of Organic Carbon in Soil Pores under Organic Agricultural Practices
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* John McCarthy, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2015
* USD 99,944.00

1220731 (Zhuang). In agricultural food production, organic farming practice is
an engineering approach that applies various methods, such as crop rotation,
crop residue return, no-tillage and others, to realize goals of nutritional
food, ecosystem health, and high soil productivity. This project will provide
insightful information and evidence including evaluation criteria that helps
farmers make optimized decisions on what agricultural engineering practices or
their combinations should be adopted to maximize soil carbon sequestration and
how climate and soil properties affect the effectiveness and potential of
organic practices. Soil organic carbon sequestration has many benefits to soil
health and food productivity. Due the dependence of agricultre on soil health,
this resource is vital important to society. Adoption of organic or conservation
practices in crop production can increase the input of organic matter (OM) into
soil and thereby create great potential for prioritizing soil quality and
preserving organic carbon (OC) in soils. Unfortunately, the mechanisms
controlling the rate and capacity of OC accrual remain unclear. This research
will use a novel integrated approach to examine an untested but potentially very
important mechanism that controls the capacity and stability of carbon
sequestration in nano-/micro-sized soil pores. It is hypothesized that a pore-
mediated feedback between soil organic colloids, water, and nitrogen dominates
the fate and storage of soil carbon in organic farming systems. Research
objectives are to: (1) quantify the extent of OM pore-filling (encapsulation)
under different organic or conservation practices as well as water hysteresis as
affected by the size distribution of OM-filled soil pores; (2) evaluate the
biodegradation of encapsulated OM and its contribution to soil respiration at
different temperatures, nitrogen availabilities, and water contents; and (3)
incorporate OM pore-filling, water hysteresis, and carbon-nitrogen interactions
into a soil respiration model. Studies will be conducted using soil samples
collected from two organically-managed agricultural sites that have different
climatic and soil conditions. Research will focus on soil microaggregates
because of their critical role in protecting OC against decomposition over the
long term. Also examined will be bulk soil and silt/clay fractions for
comparison. Pore-filling very likely represents a critical mechanism governing
the potential of soil carbon sequestration in ecological systems (particularly
in biomass-productive systems). This study will be the first to characterize
pore-mediated carbon-water-nitrogen interactions in soils by using the
complementary advantages of state-of-art small-angle scattering (SAS) technique
and isotope-based molecular signature technique. The obtained results will
clarify whether a feedback effect between soil OM and water with respect to the
accessibility of biochemical agents that play a key role in controlling long-
term soil carbon preservation in nano-/micro-sized pores. Data on dynamic
changes of OM distribution in differently sized pores under different
environmental conditions (e.g., temperature and water) will reveal relative
susceptibility of soil OM to decomposition. Evaluation of the relationships
between OM pore-filling and soil respiration will add new mechanistic
information to a latest soil respiration model and clarify the conditions under
which soil carbon accrual can be expected within affordable production costs.
Comparative analysis of results obtained from a spectrum of agricultural sites
in the U.S. and China will make this research applicable beyond the borders of
the particular study sites. The research will benefit farmers by providing
strategic guidance on adoption of organic or conservation practices for the
purpose of simultaneously optimizing food production and quality, soil carbon
sequestration, and resistance of crops to adverse environment. The project will
provide education and technical training opportunities to at least three
undergraduate students through bold thinking and hands-on experience in using
novel techniques at national laboratories and in China. The multidisciplinary,
international aspects of this research will prepare undergraduate students for
graduate study and enhance their capacity and commitment in developing
scientifically-sound strategies for sustainable agriculture and climate change
mitigation. The project will facilitate future large-scale US-China
collaboration on environmental sustainability research.