* 1220235
* RUI: Coupled Fold-fracture Evolution in the Stillwell Anticline, West Texas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Benjamin Surpless, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 127,155.00

The linked formation and evolution of faults, folds, and fracture systems
continue to be an important area of research because of the inherent importance
of these features to the movement of fluids in the subsurface. A reconnaissance
investigation of the well-exposed Stillwell anticline in west Texas has revealed
along strike variation in fold geometry tied to different stages of fold
evolution; the fold?s geometry supports formation controlled by propagation of
an underlying basement fault system. Past research has revealed a range of
factors that play important roles in the development of fracture systems in this
context, including the influence of initial and transitional fold geometries,
the influence of pre-existing fractures, the presence or absence of interlayer
slip, and the effects of the underlying fault systems that are responsible for
fold development. However, few studies have integrated a quantitative
description of fracture strain and width or explored how fracture cement
textures can be used to unravel the timing of fracture opening or relict
porosities associated with fracture networks. The goal of this project is to
integrate an array of evidence in an attempt to answer four primary research
questions including: 1) Can structural position within an anticline system be
used as a predictor of fracture intensity?; 2) Can mechanical stratigraphy be
correlated with fracture stratigraphy?; 3) How to do the distributions,
intensities, orientations, and cements of fractures sets vary before, during,
and after fold formation?; and 4) What other (non-fracture-related) modes of
deformation accommodate strain at different positions within a fold system?

The excellent exposure of the anticline provides the opportunity to directly
observe fractures, faults, and deformation bands within the folded layers, which
can be used to help constrain the kinematic evolution of the fold. In addition,
detailed mapping of cross-sectional fracture networks in concert with Schmidt
hammer testing of these lithologies, to provide meter-scale semi-quantitative
information about the rigidity of deformed beds, will generate a detailed
mechanical stratigraphy that can be evaluated in the context of fold and
fracture formation. Closely linked with analysis of mechanical behavior, the
research team will apply fracture intensity analysis based on both layer
thicknesses and structural position within the fold system, taking the wide
spectrum of fracture sizes into account. This approach permits evaluation of the
scale-dependence of fracture intensity, which can be a serious problem in the
evaluation of permeability in subsurface core-based studies. In addition,
standard microscopic petrographic analysis and scanning-electron-microscope-
based cathodoluminescence imaging will help document growth textures in opening-
mode fracture cements to determine synkinematic changes in permeability.
Finally, computer kinematic modeling of fault-related fold formation will be
used to constrain the predicted distribution of strain across the fold system in
order to relate the timing of fracture formation to stages of fold evolution.
The results of the proposed research will provide a new view of how permeability
evolves during fold formation. Important decisions regarding subsurface water
and petroleum exploration are commonly made with incomplete data. If the
proposed research can answer the questions posed above, then this coupled fold-
fracture investigation of the Stillwell anticline system will provide a model
that should reduce uncertainty in permeability evaluation in less well-
constrained systems worldwide. In addition to the scientific objectives of the
research, the project is integrating undergraduate field instruction with field
research, ensuring that undergraduate researchers gain a thorough overall
understanding of fundamental geological processes in the context of their own
work. In addition, Trinity University undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to travel to research labs to perform analyses with faculty at
larger research institutions; will disseminate results of their research through
independent research papers, senior theses, and presentations at both regional
and national meetings; and all project research results and subsequent products
will be made accessible to all Trinity students and to the general public
through a collaborative project with the Trinity University library.