* 1220374
* Crystal Settling, In-situ Crystallization, Melt Migration, and Magma Recharge in a Differentiated Mafic Sill, Victoria Island, Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* H. Richard Naslund, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 170,618.00

Crystal Settling, In-situ Crystallization, Melt Migration, and Magma Recharge in
a Differentiated Mafic Sill, Victoria Island, Canada&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project focuses on the evolution of magmas
emplaced in mafic sills associated with the Proterozoic Franklin Igneous event
as exposed on Victoria Island, Canada. Through cooperation with the Canadian
Geological Survey, the PI has been involved in field mapping of these sills and
has access to three complete drill cores through one of the sills. Detailed
studies of this sill are proposed to decipher the differentiation mechanisms
that have operated during and after emplacement of the intrusion. The sill is
relatively thin (26 to 44 m thick), laterally extensive (&gt;36 kms of strike
length), and remarkably differentiated for such a thin magma body (Mg#s vary
systematically from 35 to 82). Upper and lower chilled margins with ~10% olivine
phenocrysts give way abruptly to olivine-free diabasic rocks in the interior,
suggesting that any suspended phenocrysts settled out rapidly, or were
segregated in some way from the sill margins. Indeed an olivine-rich zone 5 to 8
m thick occurs near the base of the sills. Near-constant olivine composition
throughout isconsistent with injection of an olivine-porphrytic magma, followed
by en-masse settling of olivine. A thin (1 to 2 m thick) layer above the olivine
zone contains abundant, euhedral, sector-zoned augite. Diabase, which makes up
the upper 80% of the sill, becomes progressively Mg-poor and Fe-rich upward from
the base and downward from the roof to an Fe-Ti-excluded element rich "sandwich"
zone near the center of the sill. The variation trend in the diabase cannot be
explained by the removal of olivine and augite phenocrysts from the initial
magma, and must have resulted from in-situ differentiation of the diabase. A Mg#
?kick? in the lower diabase can be traced horizontally for over 10 kms, and
appears to represent a magma recharge event. Although the sill is Proterozoic,
geochemical modeling of preliminary data, suggests that neither major nor trace
elements have been significantly altered. The summed bulk composition of the
sill very closely matches a chilled margin composition. Petrography and chemical
analyses of the constituent minerals is proposed to interpret rock textures with
regards to possible post-emplacement compaction and melt migration in the
crystal mush. CSD grain size variations will be examined to determine the
nucleation and growth history of the major minerals present. Goals of the
proposed study are to evaluate: [1] the origin of, and compaction and re-
equilibration within, the olivine-rich basal zone, [2] mineral textural and
compositional variations above and below the recharge horizon, and [3] the
origin of in-situ differentiation trends recorded in the diabase at the floor
and roof of the sill, and the role of compaction in these two
sequences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project is being carried
out in collaboration with a five-year regional mapping program of the Geological
Survey of Canada. The Victoria Island sills are similar in composition and
tectonic setting to sills in Siberia that host Noril'sk-type Ni-Cu-PGE
mineralization; a better understanding of their emplacement and crystallization
history may lead to improved exploration strategies for similar deposits.
Although these thin sills represent one extreme end-member of the differentiated
magma chamber suite, they may provide critical insights into initial
crystallization processes in larger magma chambers where the record of the early
crystallization history has been overwritten by later re-equilibration during
slow cooling. This project will also provide excellent educational opportunities
for the student participants.