* 1220351
* At a Cross-Roads--Tracking The First Mediterranean Island Colonizers: Interdisciplinary Investigations at Early Neolithic Ais Giorkis, Cyprus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Alan Simmons, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,658.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Alan Simmons and an
international research team will conduct an archaeological investigation of the
initial human colonization of the Mediterranean island of Cyprus. This occurred
during the Neolithic period, which represented the shift from hunting and
gathering to the domestication of plants and animals and settled village life.
The "Neolithic Revolution," one of humanity's most momentous transformations,
first occurred in the Near East around 10,000 years ago. The adjacent
Mediterranean islands were considered marginal to Neolithic research, since
early studies indicated that most of them were not occupied until well after the
Neolithic had begun. Recent research, however, has revolutionized perspectives
on the colonization of these islands, showing that Cyprus was occupied far
earlier than previously believed. These studies have changed how archaeologists
view domestication, its accompanying social changes, and how the Neolithic
spread. &lt;br/&gt;Simmons and his team will conduct two excavation seasons and
one study season at the site of Ais Girokis (ca., 7,500 cal. BC). This site is
one of but a handful of recently discovered settlements that have pushed the
Neolithic colonization of Cyprus back by over a 1,000 years. Ais Giorkis stands
out from other sites due to its unique uplands location, as opposed to the
coastal setting of other early sites. It contains evidence of feasting, has
unique architectural features, and has some of the earliest domestic plants and
animals (including cattle, which previously had not been documented in early
Cyprus) in the entire Near East. &lt;br/&gt;The central theoretical framework of
the project relates to how under-inhabited regions, such as islands, were
permanently colonized. It is hypothesized that Ais Giorkis formed a unique part
of Cyprus' initial colonization strategy that was distinct from coastal
settlements. The intellectual merit of this study views Cyprus within the wider
Near Eastern landscape, providing a broader context for early seafaring
technology and the expansion of the "Neolithic Package" from its continental
cores. This is important since conventional wisdom was that the Neolithic spread
overland from the Near East to Europe. The new Cypriot research, however,
suggests that maritime routes also may have been used. Indeed, a recent DNA
study of a Scandinavian Neolithic burial shows some genetic linkages to both
modern Greeks and Cypriots. The Ais Giorkis project has anthropological
significance that involves global comparisons of island colonization, seafaring
technologies, and adaptations related to economic and social networks involved
in settling new lands. &lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts include how
scientists understand the Neolithic transformation, a critical period in the
evolution of human societies. This research, the only American project in Cyprus
dealing with the Neolithic, partners with international collaborators and
contributes to the professional training of both US and non-US undergraduates
and graduate students. This research also provides insight into how ancient
farming societies adapted to expanding populations, new environments, and
resource depletion. Understanding their choices may help contemporary society as
it encounters many of the same challenges that these early farmers faced.