* 1220635
* Videocases for Science Teaching Analysis Plus (ViSTA Plus): Efficacy of a Videocase-based, Analysis-of-Practice Teacher Preparation Program
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Kathleen Roth, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,687,439.00

Prior studies have demonstrated the positive impact of content-specific
videocases of other teachers' practice on science content knowledge and ability
to analyze teaching when the videocases are incorporated in the methods courses
for preservice teachers. Similar outcomes occurred for experienced, inservice
teachers in a year-long professional development that included analyzing video
of their own and others' teaching, and these teachers changed their practice in
ways that influenced students' science learning. The new ViSTA Plus study
explores implementation of a 2-year program for preservice/beginning teachers
that is fully centered on learning from an analysis-of-practice perspective,
addressing the central research question of "What is the value of a videocase-
based, analysis-of-practice approach to elementary science teacher
preparation?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ViSTA Plus presents a distinctive version of
practice-based teacher education, one that immerses teachers into practice via
scaffolded, collaborative analyses of videocases - starting with analysis of
other teachers' videocases and moving to collaborative analysis of teachers' own
videocases. The ViSTA Plus conceptual framework supports teachers in using
Student Thinking and Science Content Storyline Lenses to analyze science
teaching and in using a set of teaching strategies that support use of each of
these lenses in their planning and teaching. Through this analysis work,
teachers deepen their science content knowledge, develop the ability to analyze
teaching and learning, and improve their teaching and their students' learning.
The current study incorporates a quasi-experimental design to compare the impact
of the ViSTA Plus program to that of traditional teacher preparation programs
when implemented at universities that serve diverse populations, especially
Native American, Hispanic, and low-SES students. Teacher measures are assessing
science content knowledge (pre, mid, and posttests), ability to analyze science
teaching and learning (pre, mid, and post video analysis tasks), and teaching
practice (videorecorded lessons during student teaching and first year of
teaching). Elementary students' science achievement is being assessed using pre-
post unit tests during student teaching and the first year of
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study design addresses a gap in the research
on preservice teacher preparation by following the pathway of program influence
from teacher learning to teaching practice to student learning, and accomplishes
this in the context of ViSTA Plus, an alternative, practice-based approach to
teacher preparation that embeds all phases of teacher learning in practice from
the beginning. Partner universities in this effort are eager to reimagine the
traditional teacher preparation sequence, offering new models for the field. The
project is producing science-specific, analysis-of-practice materials
(videocases, methods course guides, study group guides) to support the
professional development of teacher educators and professional development
leaders using the ViSTA Plus program at universities and in district-based
induction programs.