* 1220318
* Collaborative Research: Spatial and Temporal Growth of Upper Crustal Intrusions, Henry Mountains, Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Eric Horsman, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 209,958.00

The goal of this project is to take advantage of the exceptional exposures of
shallow crustal igneous intrusions in the Henry Mountains of southern Utah to
study in detail the spatial and temporal growth of plutons constructed from
multiple magma pulses. Because the intrusions were emplaced during a tectonic
lull, they are largely free of complicating tectonic structures and specific
variables related to magma emplacement can be evaluated, some that is difficult
to in many other geologic settings. Each of the five separate intrusive centers
in the Henry Mountains preserves a different stage of the evolution of a
shallowly constructed igneous system, ranging from a small-total-volume body
comprised mostly of dikes to a fully mature body comprised of dozens of
relatively large intrusions. This project is focusing on detailed studies of
three of these intrusive centers: one each at an early, moderate, and advanced
stage of development. Using data field, geochemical, geochronogical, and
paleomagnetic data from these intrusive centers, a general construction model
for a shallow igneous complex is being constructed. Synthesis of the data and
construction of models for data emplacement are being facilitated by the
integration of data into geographic information system. Ultimately, a series of
fully 3-D models for each intrusive center will be created using constraints
from the collected data to study growth of the composite intrusions in space and
time. This research will advance our understanding of how igneous intrusions
grow in the shallow crust. These intrusions are important for many reasons,
including that they feed volcanic eruptions, they serve as heat reservoirs for
geothermal fields, and that fluids associated with the intrusions are an
important souce of economic mineral deposits. This project is specifically
designed to further our knowledge of: (1) the geometries of the plumbing system
in shallow igneous systems, (2) how these systems evolve as magma pulses intrude
sequentially, (3) magma intrusion rates and their variability in space and time,
and (4) the manifestation of magma pulses at different spatial and temporal
scales structurally, geochemically, etc. The project is a collaborative effort
between researchers at Eastern Carolina University, SUNY College at Geneseo, and
Central Michigan University. In addition to the scientific goals of the project,
the research is providing for the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in STEM disciplines at all three institutions and results of the study
will be used for the development of resources for teaching, research, and
outreach.