* 1220676
* Orogenic Andesites in an Anorogenic Floodbasalt Province: The Role of the Crust in Generating the Calc-alkaline Trend
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Martin Streck, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2016
* USD 227,700.00

The geological past of Oregon is characterized by many volcanic eruptions that
covered Oregon with layers and layers of volcanic rocks. One particularly
volcanically active period was around 15 million years ago when fissures in the
vicinity of Steens Mountain in SE Oregon, in the Wallow Mountains, NE Oregon,
and other places in eastern Oregon opened to erupt massive amounts of basalt
lavas collectively known as Columbia River Basalt Group (CRBG). All lavas of the
CRBG are of one chemical type known as tholeiitic. However, in the geographic
center defined by the eruptive sites of the CRBG, eruptions gave rise to the
Strawberry Volcanics that are compositionally of a different kind known as calc-
alkaline. Lavas with calc-alkaline compositions are characteristic for volcanic
arcs like the Cascades Mountains that stretch along the West Coast from N.
California into Canada. All volcanic arcs are situated at convergent plate
boundaries where tectonic plates converge. The generation of volcanic rocks with
calc-alkaline composition at convergent plate boundaries has been principally
tied to processes going on deep in the mantle (&gt; ~40 km depth). The calc-
alkaline Strawberry Volcanics situated within a non-convergent plate setting and
within a period dominated by tholeiitic lavas representing the magma supplied
from the mantle at that time suggest that other ways must exist to produce such
compositions. This study will investigate whether and how shallower processes
going on solely in the earth crust (&lt; ~40km depth) can impose calc-alkaline
composition as first order process. Chemical, mineralogical and isotopic data
will be used as means to research this question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In other
words, this study will investigate the role of the crust in generating the calc-
alkaline trend and associated orogenic-like andesites in a non-subduction,
tholeiitic flood basalt province. This setting will minimize the uncertainty of
what type of basalt is delivered from the mantle to the crust thus allowing to
exclude that calc-alkaline signature of basaltic andesites and andesites/dacites
was translated from a primitive basalt which acquired its calc-alkaline
signature directly from the mantle source. The critical time window is ~17 to 15
Ma; that's when the dominant volume (~90%) of the CRBG erupted from fissures
around the periphery to the Strawberry Volcanic Field that itself erupted during
that time tholeitic basalt, calc-alkaline basaltic andesite, andesites and
dacites, occasional tholeiitic intermediates, and rhyolites. Exposures of
crustal rocks in and around this volcanic field provide the opportunity to
obtain compositional data of the crust through which magmas of the Strawberry
Volcanics passed and with which they may have interacted. The goal of this
research is to comprehensively study the effect of crustal interactions (AFC,
assimilation, mixing) in controlling the development of the calc-alkaline trend
by divergence from the ambient tholeiitic trend. This is particularly important
for determining the effect of crustal interactions during the early part of the
liquid line of descent of the calc-alkaline trend that is not well understood.
The calk-alkaline signature observed in the calc-alkaline suite of the
Strawberry Volcanics is as strong as one observes in a very water-rich volcanic
arc environment like Augustine volcano, Alaska and thus highlights why this
study holds important implications not only for the understanding of orogenic
andesites of non-subduction settings but also of those of volcanic arcs.