* 1221888
* Collaborative Research: ATD: Advanced Quickest Multidecision Change Detection-Classification Methods for Threat Assessment in Distributed Sensing Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Alexander Tartakovsky, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/28/2015
* USD 12,572.00

The overarching goal of this project is to develop the next generation of
mathematical and statistical algorithms and methodologies in sensor systems for
the detection of chemical and biological materials based on advanced quickest
change detection and classification methods. To this end, the next generation of
the quickest joint change detection and classification methods will be developed
that are optimal or nearly optimal in a variety of scenarios. Specifically, a
general theory of multidecision quickest change detection and classification for
non-i.i.d. stochastic models will be developed. Developing this general theory
requires novel probabilistic methods for both designing effective quickest
change detection-classification strategies as well as analyzing their
performance. Furthermore, the general theory will be extended to the distributed
sensor setting. In particular, novel techniques for adaptive sampling at the
sensors will be explored, change process detection methods will be developed for
settings where the change might occur at different times at the various sensors,
and techniques for controlling the sensing process to make it energy-efficient
will be designed. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the proposed
theoretical advances in change detection and classification will have a strong
practical impact on future systems that are built for the purposes of detecting
and predicting chemical, biological and related threats using large sensor
networks. Conversely the engineering insights gained from working on this
important problem will lead to significant developments in the underlying
statistical theory of quickest change detection and classification. Advances in
this theory couldpotentially have an impact on a broad spectrum of applications
from qualitycontrol engineering to econometrics.