* 1221065
* Partnerships For Early Childhood Curriculum Development: Readiness Through Integrative Science And Engineering (RISE)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kimberly Brenneman, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,131,492.00

The RISE project is creating curriculum resources for dual language learners
(DLLs) in science, technology and engineering (STE). Participants include
teachers in pre-K programs in the Boston area selected to target Hispanic and
Chinese students and their families. University partners include Tufts, Rutgers,
Miami, and Northern Iowa, who will work with ABCD Head Start. An innovative
feature is the incorporation of family funds of knowledge as a basis for the
curriculum development. There are two research questions. 1. What are the most
productive procedures for appropriate application of the full integrated RISE
curriculum in Head Start classrooms serving DLL children? 2. What is the impact
of the fully integrated RISE curriculum versus the comparison condition on
teacher attitudes, classroom instruction, and quality, home-school
relationships, and DLL children's STE knowledge and approaches to learning? In
years 1 and two, 5 teachers are being supported, with 10 teachers in year 3.
Participating parents are 40, 105, and 180 for years 1, 2 and 3. Professional
development and mentoring is being provided for the teachers, and parent-teacher
discussion groups are facilitating communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research data is based on extensive classroom observations as well as interviews
and surveys. For question 2, the project plans a quasi-experimental study of 10
RISE and 8 randomly selected comparison classrooms sampling 10 students in each
classroom. Data will be analyzed with ANCOVA. The curriculum will be based on
the Massachusetts framework, one of only a few states with pre-K standards. The
evaluation will monitor both the progress of the research and development and
the dissemination to the target audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum
materials are to be posted on the Tufts University website and a commercial
publisher is being sought. Units are to be 6-12 weeks in duration, with a
typical classroom engaging approximately four units. With the growing population
of DLL students and the recognition that early childhood education in STE makes
significant contributions to children's education, this project has the
potential for national impacts.