* 1221188
* Unifying Life: Placing Urban Tree Diversity in an Evolutionary Context
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* W. John Kress, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

City College of New York (CUNY) is conducting a 3-year exploratory project to
develop and test curricular resources built around handheld mobile technology to
study how these materials foster urban middle school student interest and
engagement with local biodiversity and the patterns of evolution. Using
Leafsnap, an iPhone application, the project allows students to use pattern
recognition software to readily identify various species of plants. The project
aims to develop curricular resources for middle school students built around the
Leafsnap app through a co-design process; to pilot test curricular resources in
the classrooms of three New York middle school teachers; to develop and revise
assessment tools to measure student outcomes; and to field-test curricular
resources in the classrooms of ten New York middle school teachers and analyze
results to determine how the Leafsnap app affects urban middle school student
learning of biodiversity and the patterns of evolution. The results will be used
to modify curriculum and disseminate it online with the Leafsnap
app.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the project's first year, the curricular
resources in two middle schools in East Harlem will be used. In the second year,
the resources will be used in the classrooms of ten New York City (NYC) public
middle school teachers. In the third year, these resources will be integrated
into a life science for middle school teachers course as part of CUNY's graduate
program in secondary science education, a program specifically designed to
prepare teacher candidates for careers in NYC public middle schools. Also, in
the project's third year, the curricular resources will be disseminated through
the Leafsnap website to a wider online audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project advances understanding of underrepresented urban middle school student
learning of local biodiversity in a historical evolutionary context by
addressing the three major dimensions of the new Framework for K-12 Science
Learning: core science content, the practice of science, and concepts that
crosscut all scientific disciplines. Pre- and post-treatment clinical interviews
with students will be conducted to provide qualitative insights into how use of
the Leafsnap curriculum impacts students' understanding and motivation for
identifying and organizing tree diversity.