* 1221000
* Materials and Mechanisms of Superconductivity 2012 Conference; Washington, DC, July 29 through August 3, 2012
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Laura Greene, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 10,000.00

NSF funds will be used to support (registration and travel) the attendance of
junior and early career scientists at the 2012 Materials and Mechanisms of
Superconductivity Conference (M2S 2012). This conference, occurring every three
years, brings together world experts and young scientists to discuss open
questions in the fundamental physics and applications of superconductors and to
disseminate the latest theoretical and experimental research results in
superconductors and related novel materials. It represents a training ground
essential to maintaining U.S. leadership in this technologically important area.
This conference will focus on key unanswered questions in high-temperature
cuprate superconductors, high-temperature iron-based superconductors,
topological superconductors, organic superconductors, and heavy-electron
superconductors. The discovery of new materials and novel technological
applications for electronic devices and for energy transmission and storage will
be emphasized. There will be special sessions on superconductivity and energy,
and outreach sessions, including an evening public lecture. There will also be
junior researcher symposia interspersed within the conference and a special
junior researcher networking reception. The conference will provide an ideal
environment for advanced graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to
explore the latest theoretical and experimental methods to investigate
challenging questions in the physics of materials having tremendous importance
to both fundamental science and technological applications. Members of
underrepresented groups have been recruited as conference speakers to provide
role models and potential mentors for the young scientists who will participate