* 1221693
* Exploring Methods for Improving Teachers' Mathematical Quality of Instruction
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Heather Hill, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 11/30/2015
* USD 420,577.00

The Exploring Methods for Improving Teachers' Mathematical Quality of
Instruction (MQI) is an exploratory project at Harvard Graduate School of
Education. Researchers are working with 4th and 5th grade teachers to improve
their mathematics instruction by experimenting with different ways to implement
the MQI model of professional development. The professional development requires
teachers to critique and discuss videos of mathematics instruction. The
professional development experiences are intentionally aligned with the
Mathematical Quality of Instruction (MQI) observation instrument.

The researchers are investigating the impact of several variables on the success
of their professional development model as measured by how well teachers can
assess videos of mathematics instruction. Researchers are exploring the model by
varying the modes of delivery (face-to-face or internet), meeting time (weekly
or bi-weekly), facilitator involvement (high or low) and the type of video used
(project video or personal video). They are producing case studies using the
school group as the unit of analysis.

This research can inform models of professional development by providing more
information about various ways that the same model of professional development
can be implemented. The use of case studies provides an in depth understanding
of the group dynamics and how the variables influence what is learned and
observed by teachers of mathematics.