* 1221984
* IPGA: Characterization, Modeling, Prediction, and Visualization of the Plant Transcriptome
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Karin Dorman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,384,920.00

PI: Volker P. Brendel (Indiana University) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Karin
Dorman (Iowa State University), Shannon Schlueter (University of North Carolina
- Charlotte) and Shailesh Lal (Oakland University) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Personnel: Jon Duvick and Yasser El-Manzalawy (Iowa State University)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise of this project is that the scale of sequence
and other data accumulation in plant genomics necessitates the development of
novel, highly automated, scalable, comprehensive, and accurate approaches to
genome annotation. The depth of transcript data accumulating for many plant
species under numerous experimental conditions provide unprecedented evidence
for the evaluation of all aspects of transcription, including precise mapping of
transcription start sites as well as dominant and alternative splice sites. This
project engages a team of experts in a wide range of fields, including genomics,
molecular biology, bioinformatics, statistics, machine learning, high
performance computing, and software engineering to jointly work toward a
solution for accurately predicting the expressed protein-coding gene
transcriptome from plant genome sequences. Successful completion of the project
will result in the deployment of (1) software that implements the novel
prediction algorithms, (2) visualization and data access portals, and (3) a
cyberinfrastructure environment implementation of the developed tools for
distributed computing, sharing of protocols, and analysis provenance recording.
In the long run, the project seeks to explore the extent to which genomic
biology can transition from a largely descriptive to a highly predictive science
driven by quantitative measurements, with algorithms and computation as the
domain-adapted language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate
standardized, accurate protein-coding gene structure annotation for 25 plant
genomes from a wide range of the phylogenetic spectrum. Initial emphasis will be
on improved annotation of recently sequenced genomes, which will benefit the
entire community of researchers working on these important crops. The
anticipated algorithms for transcriptome prediction will be essential to the
analysis of the thousands of complete plant genome sequences likely to become
available within the next few years. Through the development of reliable gold
standard annotations and the dissemination of training and test sets for
algorithmic development, a larger community of computational data analysts, in
particular from the machine learning community, will be engaged. All software
developed and data generated in this research is freely available through
project Web sites, in particular www.plantgdb.org. The project's plan for
integration of research and education will train a new generation of scientists
to work on genomics data with the broad range of interdisciplinary approaches
represented by the project team.