* 1221861
* Supporting Large Scale Change in Science Education: Understanding  Professional Development and Adoption Variation Related to the Revised Advanced Placement Curriculum (PD-RAP)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Arthur Eisenkraft, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,000,000.00

This proposal leverages the re-design of the Advanced Placement (AP) curricula
currently under way to study the impact of teacher professional development on
student achievement in a natural experiment at scale. Researchers from the
University of Massachusetts Boston, Harvard University, the University of
Michigan, and the Education Development Center, Inc are conducting a quasi-
experimental research study to examine the professional development experienced
by AP Biology, Chemistry and Physics teachers to determines 1) the relationship
between teacher and school characteristics and the professional development
patterns that teachers choose; 2) the relationship between the professional
development patterns that various types of teachers choose and their students'
outcomes; and 3) the challenges encountered in delivering various forms of
professional development at this level of scale. In addition to supporting the
improvment of professional development of AP teachers by the College Board, the
findings contribute to a better understanding of the relationship between
professional development and student achievement more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses the existing context of the AP
Course Audit by which all teachers of AP courses submit a syllabus, descriptions
of laboratory investigations, and information regarding contact hours and the
background of teachers, including the professional development programs
accessed. The teachers who submit audits will be surveyed using the Stages of
Concern Questionnaire together with other items to determine their perceptions
of the AP Science redesign. The experiences of over 20,000 teachers are examined
over the course of the study. Teachers who participate in AP professional
development conducted by the College Board and the Active AP online Teacher
Community (APoTC) will be surveyed about their professional development
experiences. Case studies of 40 using interview, elaborated survey items, and
artifacts from their teaching provide information about the quality of the
teacher implementation of the AP course. Scores on the AP exams of all of the
students will be linked to the teachers and the relationships among those scores
and teacher professional development experiences analyzed using multi-level
regression analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this study have
considerable importance for those individuals who provide professional
development for science teachers. The results will inform the College Board and
others who provide professional development directly to AP science teachers
about how that support needs to change in order to more effectively support
teachers. Improving the support that AP teachers receive has the potential to
improve the learning experiences of the students who participate in those
classes. In addition, this study will provide information about issues and
challenges to providing professional development at scale to a wider audience of
professional development providers. As the Next Generation Science Standards
come online, this information will be useful to policy makers and practitioners.