* 1221614
* SimScientists Assessments: Physical Science Links
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Mark Loveland, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 3,282,523.00

The goal of this project is to develop and validate a middle school physical
science assessment strand composed of four suites of simulation-based
assessments for integrating into balanced (use of multiple measures), large-
scale accountability science testing systems. It builds on the design templates,
technical infrastructure, and evidence of the technical quality, feasibility,
and instructional utility of the NSF-funded Calipers II project. The assessment
strand consists of multilevel (increased thinking levels) assessment designs
grounded on evidence-centered principles that target practices and key
disciplinary conceptual schemes, such as matter, motion, energy, and waves
identified in the National Research Council report "A Framework for K-12 Science
Education: Practices, Crosscutting Knowledge, and Core Ideas". The assessment
model vertically links simulations (interactive with feedback to students,
coaching, and reflection); curriculum-embedded assessments for formative use;
unit benchmark assessment for interim summative purposes; and a set of
"signature tasks" (short-term simulations on recurring problem types). Members
of the Advisory Board and an Assessment Review Panel actively participate in the
development and implementation of this effort. Heller Research Associates is the
external evaluator. The evaluation plan addresses both formative and summative
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's theory of action is based on model-
based learning and evidence-centered design reflective of the notion that the
construct of science is multidimensional, requiring (a) understanding how the
components of a science conceptual system interact to produce behaviors of the
system; and (b) the use of inquiry practices to investigate the dynamic
behaviors and underlying components' interactions of the system. A total of
eight research and development questions guide the scope of work. The questions
focus on: (a) validity (substantive and technical quality) of the individual
simulation assessments; and (b) classroom implementation (feasibility, fidelity,
utility). The methodology for test construction and revision follows the testing
standards of major professional organizations (i.e., American Educational
Research Association, American Psychological Association, and National Council
of Measurement in Education) through three development phases. Phase I
(Assessment Development) focuses on the alignment, quality, and prototype
testing, including leverage and modification of prior work, and design of new
assessment suites and signature tasks. Phase II (Pilot and Validation Studies)
deals with the testing of all assessments, research instruments, and study
methods. Phase III (Cross-Validation Studies) substantiates the multilevel
integration assessment model, cross-validates the assessments piloted in Phase
II, and establishes a reliable argument that the assessments measure the
intended content and inquiry practices suitable for use in district and state-
level assessment systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes are: (1) a
research-informed and field-tested physical science simulations-based assessment
model with high potential for extended use in middle school grades; and (2) a
policy brief that provides recommendations for integrating assessments into
districts and state large-scale, multi-level, balanced science assessments.