* 1221494
* Collaborative Research: An Initial Learning Progression in Chemical Design
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vicente Talanquer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2015
* USD 208,633.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this two-year exploratory project, science
educators at the University of Massachusetts Boston collaborate with those at
the University of Arizona to develop and test a learning progression for the
study of chemistry. Likely pathways are investigated for how grade 8-13
student's implicit assumptions develop on five major threads of chemical design
- chemical identity, structure-property relationships, chemical causality and
mechanism, chemical control and cost-benefit-risks. A focus on chemical design -
the identification and synthesis of chemical compounds - facilitates the
coherent integration of scientific and engineering practices, cross-cutting
concepts, and disciplinary core ideas. This approach should make chemistry more
engaging to a greater variety of students including those in Career and
Technical Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the core
implicit assumptions that can be expected to characterize and constrain novice
and sophisticated student reasoning about each of the five major threads of
chemical design. It also suggests the hypothetical "stepping stones" that
characterize the progression from novice to sophisticated reasoning in chemical
design. Existing research literature on student ideas and on related
developmental psychology and cognitive science research is reviewed. Project
staff together with twelve master high school and middle school science teachers
in the Boston Public Schools develop a framework that can be used to compare and
contrast more or less sophisticated ways of thinking about foundational ideas
for the understanding of chemical design and from them derive hypotheses about
"stepping stones" in understanding the implication of chemical design.
Questionnaires and interview protocols similar to those employed in previous
projects are used with students in grades 8, 10, 12 and college freshmen and
their teachers to refine and enrich initial hypotheses about the evolution of
core implicit assumptions along the five threads. The research is evaluated by
an advisory board of science educators and educational researchers using a
written protocol. Content is reviewed by practicing chemists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A concise and clear summary of the learning progression is
produced with an intended audience of teachers, curriculum developers and
publishers who are implementing or revising curriculum. The dissemination of
this summary includes a brief market research survey of teachers, curriculum
developers and publishers of high school chemistry materials. Versions of
validated open-response instruments that can be easily implemented by teachers
as formative assessments of student understanding in the areas targeted by the
study are also published. An understanding is gained of some of the challenges
associated with implementing the Next Generation Science Standards in a way that
meaningfully integrates science and engineering practice, important content and
cross cutting themes in the context of learning about chemical design.