* 1221564
* Investigations of a 17th-Century Spanish New Mexican Household: Social and Environmental Correlates of Colonization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2014
* John Steinberg, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 29,905.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Heather Trigg and John Steinberg
will conduct remote sensing and revitalize the records for one of the most
important early colonial (AD 1598 - 1680) Spanish sites in New Mexico. LA 20,000
is the largest, most complex, and best-preserved seventeenth-century Spanish New
Mexican ranch thus far identified archaeologically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
seventeenth century is the period of initial colonization when relationships
between colonists and indigenous peoples were established. Spanish colonists'
households provided an important context for intercultural exchanges among
Spanish, Pueblo and Plains peoples. However, as yet, they are untapped sources
of information about colonization processes in the Southwest because most
investigations have focused on Pueblo villages or Franciscan missions within
these villages. This is also a period when colonists' agricultural activities
practices were instituted. Drs. Trigg and Steinberg also seek to investigate the
ecological relationships colonists developed as they introduced new plants,
animals, and land use practices. LA 20,000 has the potential to shed light on
how Spanish colonizers established themselves in this novel social and physical
environment, but the state of the site records makes it difficult to frame the
analyses that would allow one to investigate these beginnings of Hispanic
society in the American Southwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Portions of LA 20,000
have been studied by archaeological field schools in the 1980s and 1990s, but
the information about the collections and maps is insufficient to even ascertain
if the existing samples and artifacts are adequate to tackle questions about
colonists' social and ecological relationships. To address this problem, Drs.
Trigg and Steinberg will examine the site records with the goal of assessing the
quantity and distribution of the material recovered and accuracy of the spatial
data generated during the field schools. Second, they will perform a geophysical
survey (remote sensing) of the site to assess the nature of unexcavated
archaeological features and relocate the field school excavations. With the
results from these two activities, they will engage other personnel in
evaluating the existing data relative to the overall project goals, which seek
to investigate the economic production at the site, the engagement of indigenous
peoples in these activities, and the social and economic links to nearby Pueblo
villages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide for the
education and training of students in various aspects of archaeological
research. This first phase of the project will employ graduate students in data
collection in GIS (geographic information systems) and data management. The
material from the larger project will generate at least one Ph.D. dissertation
and several MA theses. In addition to the students' professional development,
this research will provide information to the general public. The site is owned
by El Rancho de las Golondrinas, a living history museum dedicated to bringing
local Hispanic history and culture to the public. Trigg and Steinberg will
partner with Golondrinas to develop information that can be included in the
museum's educational programs, and the information gathered here will assist the
museum in their collections management strategy for this site.