* 1221513
* VOSS: Crowdsourcing interaction design for citizen science virtual organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Jennifer Preece, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2015
* USD 399,872.00

The objective of this project is to extend the concept of crowdsourcing in
citizen science to the interaction design of the organization as well as to data
collection. Distributed technologies offer new opportunities for conducting
scientific research on a larger scale than ever before by enabling distributed
collaboration. Virtual organizations that use distributed technologies in
scientific organizations have primarily focused on how dedicated, professional
scientists collaborate and communicate. More recently a rapidly increasing
number of citizen science virtual organizations are being formed. Citizen
scientists participate in scientific endeavors and typically lack formal
credentials, do not hold professional positions in scientific institutions, and
bring diversity of knowledge and expertise to projects and challenges. They
participate in scientific endeavors related to their personal scientific
interests and create new challenges for the design of virtual organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of intellectual merit, the project will make
three specific contributions: a new interaction design for collecting
biodiversity data within a nature park, a model for crowdsourcing the design of
an social computing approach to citizen science, and an analysis of the impact
of crowdsourcing the design on motivating participation in collecting
biodiversity data. Interactive tabletop computers will be placed in two nature
parks so that the design of the citizen science environment can be embedded in a
park experience and engage the public in understanding more about their parks,
in data collection, and develop a personal commitment to environmental
sustainability issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the
project provides three types of impact: research training by including graduate
students, broad public dissemination to enhance scientific understanding of
biodiversity, and benefits to society through association with the Aspen Center
for Environmental Studies (ACES) and Encyclopedia of Life (EOL).