* 1221254
* VOSS: Toward a Context Adaptive Theory of the Relationship Between Structural Fluidity and Virtual Organization Performance
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Giuseppe Valetto, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 03/31/2014
* USD 414,944.00

A major advantage of virtual organizations (VOs) is flexible membership and
participation. In many VOs, members are able to join and leave at will, and can
change whom they collaborate with at any point in time. This flexibility can be
a source of increased effectiveness as VO structures are more readily able to
adapt to contingencies and VO leadership can evolve over the course of a VO's
lifecycle. This project examines the relationship between structural fluidity,
VO leadership, and VO performance. The investigators will examine the log data
generated by the technical systems used for coordination and information sharing
in four different types of VOs (software engineering, disaster relief, online
learning, and public discourse communities), will interview VO participants, and
will measure VO performance in context-specific ways. The project will: (1)
develop tools to measure organizational fluidity and make that fluidity visible
to VO participants; (2) examine the relationship between organizational
performance, the fluidity of group membership and fluidity of leadership in
virtual organizations. The techniques pioneered in this proposal will increase
understanding of how to use technical system log data to more quickly identify
the most effective social structures and leadership strategies in VOs. The
results and tools developed in the course of the project will have practical
value for those seeking to improve VO performance for science, industry and
government organizations that increasingly rely on virtual organizations for
their success. A number of undergraduate and graduate students will participate
in the project, furthering their training and education in interdisciplinary
research.