* 1221013
* Diabatic Processes of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO): Enabling and Analyzing THORPEX MJO Task Force and GEWEX Atmospheric System Study Global Model Evaluation Project
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Duane Waliser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2015
* USD 497,408.00

Given the central role of diabatic heating in Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO)
physics and theory along with the demands for reducing model deficiencies in
simulating and predicting the MJO and related phenomena, it is of great interest
and urgent need to explore how MJO vertical heating structures are represented
in current General Circulation Models (GCMs). To address this demand, a joint
research activity has been suggested and formulated by the World Climate
Research Program (WCRP) World Weather Research Program (WWRP)/THORPEX MJO Task
Force (MJOTF) and the GEWEX Atmospheric System Study (GASS). The objectives of
the international research activity are to characterize, compare and evaluate
the heating, moistening and momentum mixing processes associated with the MJO
that are produced by present-day global weather and climate models, with a focus
on their vertical structure. The GASS activity represents the first multi-model
comparison and evaluation of the vertical structure and evolution of diabatic
processes of the MJO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are
to: (i) support a contribution of overall organizational leadership to the MJOTF
and GASS diabatic processes experiment; (ii) provide the logistical and
management support associated with the climatological component of the
experiment; and (iii) undertake the initial/lead analysis of the climatological
component of the experiment. A tangible outcome, of this project is that it will
provide valuable guidance for improving model fidelity in representing a number
of fast processes, including convection, clouds, radiation, and boundary layer,
associated with the MJO and related tropical phenomena. Such improvements have
the potential to improve forecasting at subseasonal time scales. Thus this
project has substantial broader impacts.