* 1221459
* Scale-Up of Selective STEM Specialty Schools: Effi
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Steven Schneider, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,660,132.00

The desire to better empower high-ability STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) students has contributed in the last two decades
to a jump in the creation of selective STEM specialty high schools. These
schools devote all of their attention to a student body comprised only of the
most talented students, ones who are most likely to be able to learn the most
demanding STEM content, reach their STEM learning potential, and pursue
postsecondary STEM study and careers. However, there are mixed views on the role
that selective STEM specialty schools play in achieving their mission. While
commenting on what is known regarding education in the STEM disciplines, a
recent National Research Council report entitled "Successful K-12 STEM
Education" notes that "there are no systematic data that show whether the highly
capable students who attend those schools would have been just as likely to
pursue a STEM major or related career or make significant contributions to
technology or science if they had attended another type of school." To address
the research gap, this impact study addresses the question: Does gaining
admission to a selective STEM specialty school improve students' academic
success on the SAT, SAT II (Math Level 2), and Advanced Placement exams
(Calculus AB, Chemistry, and Physics B)? Other portions of the investigation
follow additional student outcomes, including: participation and success in STEM
competitions; STEM publications; National Merit scholarships; intentions for
postsecondary STEM education and STEM careers; and initial postsecondary STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is based on the most rigorous
possible design for the focal topic: a true experimental investigation of
outcomes for students from many selective STEM specialty schools. The study is
being accomplished through random assignment of equivalent treatment and control
groups, and based on enough students to yield statistical power that can produce
the most clear causal result possible. Researchers are recruiting all qualified
students who apply for admission to 20 selective STEM specialty schools among
the approximately 100 such schools currently in the United States. For the class
entering in fall 2013, study schools are revising their routine selection
process to one of assigning students for acceptance (treatment condition) or not
(control condition) through random assignment of qualified applicants.
Researchers, then, are following treatment students via their STEM schools and
also intensively tracking all control students wherever they continue their
secondary education. The study also investigates relative cost-effectiveness for
educating high-achieving students in selective STEM schools versus educating
them at other schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since there is an acute and growing
U.S. shortage of STEM professionals and technicians, it is imperative for the
nation's education system to ensure that talented STEM students are reaching
their maximum potential and pursuing postsecondary STEM degree programs and
careers. As one strategy increasingly being used to address this need is to
educate talented STEM students in selective STEM specialty schools, this study
is informing considerations of the cost/benefit of directing resources to
support such schools.