* 1221908
* VOSS: Virtual Standards Development Organizations: Enhancing Interoperability in Data-Intensive Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Matthew Bietz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2016
* USD 228,247.00

The success of large-scale data-enabled scientific collaboration depends upon
the development of high-quality, useful and usable standards to enable data
sharing and reuse. While interdisciplinary collaborations continue to
proliferate, the process of community standards development for data and
metadata remains a bottleneck in cyberinfrastructure development. Community-
based standards development virtual organizations are vitally important for the
success of cyberinfrastructure, but little is known about the negotiations and
instantiations of data standards within these organizations. This project will
undertake a three-year qualitative study of open-participation community
standards organizations in the genomic sciences to investigate how they manage
diverse stakeholder interests to develop and deploy community standards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale scientific collaboration is necessary to
answer complex research questions that are crucial for national policy-making
and scientific progress. Significant investments are being made in building
cyberinfrastructure that uses advanced computational resources to support
collaborative science. The success of these cyberinfrastructures depends upon
the development of high-quality, useful and usable standards to enable data
sharing and reuse. This project will provide guidance in effective standards
development processes to the genomics field and others with similar data sharing
requirements.