* 1221019
* BRIGE: Nanostructured Optical Materials for Integrated Optics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Heather Hunt, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2015
* USD 205,275.00

PI: Hunt, Heather&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Missouri-
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;Title: BRIGE: Nanostructured Optical Materials for Integrated
Optics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Novel optical material systems have tremendous potential to revolutionize the
design, fabrication, and performance metrics of micro- and nano-scale integrated
optical devices and systems. Fortuitously, new synthetic techniques are
available to build, at the molecular level, nanostructured materials that can be
tailored for a specific function, such as improved optoelectronic properties.
Nanostructured zeolite materials have physicochemical properties that may be
tailored framework atom substitution, ion exchange, insertion of active guest
molecules, such as laser dyes, etc., and surface functionalization, leading to
intriguing new chemical, mechanical, and optoelectronic properties that have yet
to be leveraged in integrated optical systems. The goal of this BRIGE research
project is to fully characterize the effects of molecular tailoring on the
optical properties of zeolite structures, and to determine their applicability
for and compatibility with integrated optical platforms. Towards this end, three
research objectives will be pursued: synthesis of thin zeolite films of various
orientations and compositions, optical characterization of these thin film
materials, and integration with optical components through standard
photolithographic techniques. The exploration of the unique optical properties
of nanostructured materials will not only significantly improve knowledge of
designing, at the molecular level, material systems for integrated optics, but
will also transform the range of techniques and material systems that can be
used to improve the overall performance of a variety of optical platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A fundamental approach to understanding
the molecular basis of optical properties in nanostructured materials will
advance research in the area of integrated optics technology for communications,
sensing, and computing, with direct applications in health and safety. A
prominent educational component involving "hands-on" educational and outreach
activities, in transformative materials, photonics, and nanotechnology research,
will target students from traditionally underrepresented groups to broaden
participation. Moreover, the broadening participation plan aims to increase
female engineering student participation by improving recruitment and retention
efforts. Recruitment activities will include K-12 outreach during summer camp
programs, and high school and undergraduate student laboratory experiences for
students from local schools and regional colleges, including Lincoln University,
with predominantly Black and Hispanic enrollment. Additionally, the PI is
piloting the Mizzou Engineering Mentoring Program, a new retention effort that
provides professional development and personal support for female students via
one-on-one mentoring, and networking. This plan will create a more diverse and
engaging environment for underrepresented students. These activities will
involve secondary, graduate and undergraduate students, and the general public
with the goal of broadening participation for underrepresented groups in
fundamental science and engineering research in integrated optical systems.