* 1221414
* Collaborative Research: Geochemistry and Tectonics of Cretaceous Gateway Closure in the Central American Isthmus
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Esteban Gazel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 177,361.00

Planet Earth is divided in three main layers at great depth, the core, the
mantle and the crust. The dynamics of the mantle exerts significant control over
the evolution of the crust, which in turn shapes the morphology of the surface
we see today. Although rare, exposed mantle is found where dramatic tectonic
events such as continental collisions have taken place, and these places are
essentially windows into our planet. This study will focus on the Santa Elena
Peninsula, Costa Rica, a practically unexplored segment of exposed mantle. The
observations on the surface will provide valuable information about processes
that result in volcanic activity. One goal is to link the Central American
geologic history to the development of land-bridges and seaway closures that
affected the evolution of global circulation, climate and ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These researchers will explore the paleogeography and
tectonic evolution of the region through geochemical, petrologic and structural
analysis of mantle and associated volcanic rocks of the Santa Elena Peninsula,
Costa Rica. This will be the first time the Santa Elena mantle section will be
studied with modern analytical techniques. The objectives are to constrain the
timing and tectonic environment of formation and consolidation of this terrane.
To address these questions the investigators will map the different lithologies
and conduct detailed structural analysis. Selected samples of mantle peridotites
and other ultramafic lithologies will be studied with electron-microprobe and
in-situ laser ablation ICP-MS. Samples from the volcanic units will be analyzed
for major, trace element and radiogenic isotope compositions. The analyses will
constrain the age of the different lithologies and also the tectonic events that
amalgamated the Santa Elena complex. The identification of the complex with a
fore-arc, back-arc or mid-ocean ridge tectonic setting will help constrain the
large-scale tectonic geometry that led to the closure of the first Central
American Gateway during the Cretaceous.