* 1222607
* Peep's World/El Mundo de Peep
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,549,113.00

WGBH Educational Foundation will create PEEP'S WORLD/EL MUNDO DE PEEP, a Web-
based "Digital Hub," in both English and Spanish, to significantly increase the
impact of the extensive collection of proven preschool science and math assets
from the Emmy Award-winning TV show PEEP AND THE BIG WIDE WORLDÂ®. This project
will: (1) redesign the PEEP Web site, creating interactive media experiences
that will contextualize existing content and take advantage of new Web design;
(2) provide professional development for preschool educators; and (3) reach a
new audience of family childcare educators, one that is woefully underserved
when it comes to educational resources about science. Dissemination through a
network of national organizations, including National Association of Family
Child Care, National Association of Child Care Resource and Referral Agencies,
National Head Start Association, National Education Association, AVANCE, and
Committee for Hispanic Children and Families, will help engage the maximum
number of educators and parents in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PEEP'S
WORLD/EL MUNDO DE PEEP will provide resources for targeted audiences.
Specifically these resources will provide: Children with multiple ways to engage
with science or math content areas, including interactive games, animated
stories, and live-action videos; Parents with guided experiences to facilitate
their child's math and science play; Center-based preschool educators with a
media-rich, year long science curriculum and professional development materials;
and Family childcare educators with curriculum modules, integrated with media,
focused on six science content areas, and professional development materials for
home-care settings in English and in Spanish. The University of Massachusetts's
Donahue Institute will conduct a formative evaluation of the family childcare
educator resources: 200 Spanish-speaking and 200 English-speaking educators will
pilot the curriculum modules and professional development videos. Concord
Evaluation Group, Inc. will conduct a summative evaluation, consisting of a
Family Web Site Experiment and a National Observational Study, to assess the
extent to which the project is successful at achieving its intended impacts. A
multifaceted national dissemination plan will include a robust social media
strategy, implemented by a Spanish-speaking online community manager, to reach
parents, and collaborations with early childhood education statewide systems to
reach educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects intended impacts are to: (1)
help English- and Spanish-speaking preschoolers effectively apply science and
mathematical inquiry and process skills; (2) empower English- and Spanish-
speaking parents to feel more equipped and inclined to facilitate science and
math exploration with their preschoolers; and, (3) provide center-based and
family childcare educators with resources for incorporating math and science
into their curricula and boosting their confidence in teaching these subjects.
While many parents know how to read to their children, they do not typically
know how to approach science or math investigations with their pre-schoolers.
After parents, preschool educators are the most important promoters of a young
child's learning. Yet, center-based and family childcare educators do not
receive significant training in science, and thus lack confidence when
conducting preschool science activities. By providing parents and educators
resources for approaching preschool science and math, which meet their specific
needs, PEEP will help alleviate these challenges.