* 1222355
* Collaborative Research: Supporting the Emergence of a Professional Teaching Community Through Collective Knowledge-building in Assessment and Feedback of Mathematical Thinking
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Stephen Weimar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,083,101.00

This collaborative work involves Drexel University and Temple University where
they are developing an online, professional teaching community that is
addressing issues of assessment in mathematics classes. The developers are
building on the success of the NSF-supported Math Forum's Problem of the Week
program to create a community that is working to increase students' mathematics
learning by helping teachers stimulate student thinking, assess that thinking,
and provide useful feedback to students. The teachers are working together to
create rubrics for assessing the progress of students as they solve challenging
mathematics problems. The program is structured so that the teachers are
learning mathematics and assessment strategies in addition to establishing a
research-based model for online, professional
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers are studying how specific
activities (e.g., discourse, active participation, use of rubrics, feedback, and
reflection) and an online community support teachers' engagement in authentic
and generative assessment. Researchers are using ethnographic methods to
understand the development of the community, and conducting focus groups and
individual interviews to determine the impact of participation in the community
on mathematics teachers. In addition, they are collecting data through discourse
analysis, student work analysis, and rubric analysis to determine the optimal
design of the products. The intentional structure of the online community builds
on research findings on creating professional communities and research on
assessing mathematics learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Online professional
teaching communities offer new venues for communication, professional
development, and shared work among mathematics teachers. The Math Forum provides
an optimal, online context for expanding the popular Problem of the Week into a
productive discussion of assessment of problem solving, the building of specific
rubrics, and the related reflection on how to encourage student thinking. This
collaborative work will offer rubrics for assessing mathematical problem
solving, a new model for online professional development, and extensive
information on building an online mathematics community.