* 1222732
* Collaborative Research:   Assessing, Validating and Developing Content Knowledge for Teaching Energy
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Stamatis Vokos, Seattle Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2017
* USD 821,111.00

This project develops an instrument to measure the content knowledge that
teachers need to teach about energy in high school classroom instruction that
focuses on mechanical energy. There is significant research that indicates that
teacher content knowledge differs from what people in other professions need to
know about particular domains such as mathematics, and the development of a
Content Knowledge of Teaching Energy in mechanics is an extension of those
research and development efforts. The project embeds the development of the
instrument in a program of measuring effective teaching of physics in the
classroom and develops a strong validity argument for the resulting assessment
based on its use as a measure in a professional development project that intends
to improve teachers' understanding of energy in physics. The research team
consists of experts in physics, assessment and classroom teaching of physics.
The collaborative project includes researchers at Rutgers, University of Maine,
Seattle Pacific University, Facets Innovation, and the Educational Testing
Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a framework for effective
teaching developed in the Measures of Effective Teaching project funded by the
Gates Foundation to construct a theoretical framework for the teaching of
mechanical energy. That framework includes items and tasks based on
instructional practices in the classroom that can identify the extent to which
the teacher understands both the disciplinary knowledge and the appropriate
teaching processes that support student learning. A strong framework of
validation based on multiple lines of evidence of the relationship between the
items developed for the study and observations, analysis of video, and artifacts
from the classroom is one element of the study. Another element of the study
examines multiple psychometric lines of evidence to determine the reliability of
the instruments and the validity of the inferences drawn from them. The
resulting instruments will be used in the measurement of changes of teacher
content knowledge for teaching in professional development programs as another
source of validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improvement of teachers' content
knowledge for teaching is an important intermediary goal of professional
development of teachers. Without adequate understanding of the gaps in teacher
knowledge and precise evidence of the improvement through professional
development, the efficacy of different professional development projects is not
possible. This project develops a model of teacher assessment instrument
development that addresses a cross-cutting theme in the Next Generation Science
Standards and contributes an important tool to the research and evaluation
processes that are needed to make those standards a reality in the classroom.
Findings from the use of the instruments across multiple projects inform policy
decisions on local, state and federal levels.