* 1222496
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Secondary Teachers' Algebraic Habits of Mind
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Glenn Stevens, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 903,155.00

Boston University, Education Development Center, Inc., and St. Olaf College are
collaborating on Assessing Secondary Teachers' Algebraic Habits of Mind (ASTAHM)
to develop instruments to assess secondary teachers' Mathematical Habits of Mind
(MHoM). These habits bring parsimony, focus, and coherence to teachers'
mathematical thinking and, in turn, to their work with students. MHoM is a
critical component of mathematical knowledge for teaching at the secondary
level. Recognizing the need for a scientific approach to investigate the ways in
which MHoM is an indicator of teacher effectiveness, the partnership is
researching the following questions:

1. How do teachers who engage MHoM when doing mathematics for themselves also
bring MHoM to their teaching practice? 2. How are teachers' engagement with MHoM
and their use of these habits in teaching related to student understanding and
achievement?

To investigate these questions, ASTAHM is developing two instruments: a paper
and pencil (P&P) assessment and an observation protocol that measure teachers'
knowledge and classroom use, respectively, of MHoM.

The work is being conducted in two phases: (1) an instrument-refinement and
learning phase, and (2) an instrument-testing and research phase. Objectives of
Phase 1 are to gather data to refine the project's existing instruments and to
learn about the bridge factors that impact the relationship between teachers'
knowledge and classroom use of MHoM. Specific research activities include:
administering the pilot P&P assessment to 40 teachers, videotaping Algebra
instructions of 8 teachers, performing initial testing and refinement of the
instruments, and using the data to analyze the bridge factors. Phase 2 is a
large-scale study involving field-testing the P&P assessment with 200 teachers,
videotaping 20 teachers and studying them using the observation protocol,
collecting achievement data from 3000 students, and checking P&P content
validity with 200 mathematicians. With these validated instruments in hand, the
project will then conduct an investigation into the above research questions.
Lesley University's Program Evaluation and Research Group (PERG) is the external
evaluator. PERG is assessing ASTAHM's overall success in developing valid and
reliable instruments to investigate the extent to which a relationship exists
between teachers' MHoM and their classroom practice, as well as student
achievement. Evaluators are also investigating whether users' coding guides for
both instruments enable field-testers to effectively use and adequately score
them.

This work fits into a larger research agenda with the ultimate goal of
understanding the connections between secondary teachers' mathematical knowledge
for teaching and secondary students' mathematical understanding and achievement.
The MHoM construct is closely aligned with the Common Core State Standards-
Mathematics (CCSS-M); especially its Standards for Mathematical Practice. For
example, both place importance on seeking and using mathematical structure. Thus
the instruments this project produces can act as pre- and post-measures of the
effectiveness of professional development programs in preparing teachers to
implement the CCSS-M. Mathematics teacher knowledge at the secondary level is an
understudied field. Through analyses of the practices and habits of mind that
teachers bring to their work, ASTAHM is developing instruments that can be used
to shed light on effective secondary teaching.