* 1222456
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting the Domestication of Energy among Tree Farmers in a Deforestation Context
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Gerald Murray, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 23,140.00

University of Florida doctoral candidate and National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellow Andrew Tarter, under the guidance of Dr. Gerald F.
Murray, will undertake research to discover, document, and understand the
various factors that persuade some farmers to plant or retain trees for harvest
as a cash crop, producing an energy-generating product - charcoal. Tarter's
research will help document the emergence of an earlier posited anthropological
theory, 'the domestication of energy'. This theoretical paradigm was partly
validated through voluntary, widespread farmer participation in an earlier
anthropologically-designed agroforestry project; however, widespread voluntary
tree-planting or -retention has yet to be academically documented to occur
independent of external inputs.

Understanding the causes for this autonomous shift toward a domestication of
energy paradigm calls for the collection and comparison of data on a range of
sociocultural, economical, ecological and spatial factors thought to
differentially affect levels of tree cover on randomly selected plots of
privately owned land. These data will be procured through a variety of methods
including semi-structured interviews, metrics produced from social network
analyses, forest transects, soil classifications, analyses of satellite images,
and the utilization of GIS and GPS technologies. These data will be
contextualized through insights produced from long-term participant observation
and ethnographic interviews in Haiti. What will emerge is a clearer
understanding of the factors that lead to the domestication of energy, the
creation and refinement of existing and new theoretical constructs, and the
production of a predictive land-use model. This model will help predict those
farmers most receptive to or already engaged in the paradigmatic shift toward a
domestication of energy.

Tarter's research has the potential to influence policy-makers; tree-planting
and reforestation efforts remain major priorities of both nongovernmental and
governmental organizations. Additionally, anthropological research in a highly
deforested country will provide important comparative data for policy-makers in
other deforested countries.