* 1222507
* ATD: Blind and Template Assisted Source Separation Algorithms with Applications to Spectroscopic Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jack Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 451,110.00

Spectroscopic sensing techniques are powerful analytical tools for detecting and
identifying chemical and biological substances, and so are widely used in
determining molecular structures, stand-off detection of explosives, imaging of
air composition to name a few. However, the objects being imaged in the real-
world are more often mixtures than pure substances, making difficult direct
identification and quantification of chemical constituents from existing lookup
tables or templates. A fundamental scientific problem is to unmix or decompose
the measured spectral data into a non-redundant and compact combination of basic
components (pure or source spectra) facilitating subsequent verification and
quantification based on look-up tables. The principal investigator (PI) and his
team study three classes of unmixing problems depending on the available
knowledge of the source signals (minimal, partial or full knowledge of a
template of source signals). The research problems are blind, partially blind
and template assisted source separation and identification. The intellectual
merit of the proposed project is a combined geometrical and statistical approach
with associated computational algorithms incorporating sparsity regularized
optimization techniques. The geometric approach is based on the sparseness of
the spectra of the source signals while the statistical approach is on
decomposing the errors of template based data fitting when partial and
statistical knowledge of the source spectra is available. The proposed methods
are shown to be applicable to laboratory data from nuclear magnetic rensonance,
Raman spectroscopy and differential optical absorption
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data analysis and computational
algorithms on unmixing spectroscopic mixtures by the PI and his team can greatly
improve the capability of threat reduction and decision making for public health
and security. Their proposed line of work is well-positioned to generate broad
impact on information technology, biotechnology, safety of civil infrastruture
and environment; in particular the structural understanding and threat
assessment of mixtures of chemical compounds originating in battle fields,
homeland security, air quality monitoring, metabolic fingerprinting and disease
diagnosis. The mathematical tools and numerical data produced in their project
also benefit researchers and graduate students in data sharing and management,
curriculum development and course offerings. The PI actively engages in
mentoring postdoctoal fellows in terms of research and career advancement.