* 1222370
* Collaborative Research: Broad Implementation of Science Festival Alliance
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Steven Snyder, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 11/30/2016
* USD 330,346.00

This broader implementation project will create a professional network of
individuals and institutions increasing their capacity to develop, implement,
and evaluate the impact of large scale community science festivals. The project
builds on a previous award that supported the implementation of science
festivals in Cambridge, MA; San Francisco, San Diego, and Philadelphia. Each
festival reached 50-70,000 attendees, many of them families from low-income,
ethnic communities. Festival organizers and participants include science center
practitioners, Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
researchers, STEM related businesses, public television STEM producers,
universities, K-12 schools, and government and foundation stakeholders. The
summative evaluation indicated significant impacts on participant's STEM
interest, learning, and connections to STEM resources in their community. The
number of science festivals across the country is increasing. Consequently this
new project will create a professional network with numerous benefits to
professionals in the Informal Science Education (ISE) field and other
stakeholders including: timely access to information, knowledge and experience
related to science festivals; rich relationships to draw on when facing
challenges; credibility of the festival concept; ability to partner with
multiple festivals and magnify the reach of existing ISE institutions and
program; diffusion of knowledge and innovation; and collective intelligence and
inclusive consultation. It is expected that the network will involve supporting
approximately 50 science festivals during the grant period. A business plan will
be developed for long term sustainability of the network and the subsequent
growth of science festivals. This is a collaborative proposal with 4 project
partners who have distinct roles in creating and sustaining the network: MIT,
University of California at San Francisco, University of North Carolina/Morehead
Planetarium and Science Center, and The Franklin
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIT's project deliverables include hosting the
central management and administrative functions of the network and providing
conferences, workshops, individual mentoring of new science festival champions,
maintaining the network website, etc. UCSF will develop tools, resources, and
linkages to increase participation of scientists in festivals. UNC/Morehead
Planetarium and Science Center will provide expertise in statewide festival
organizing. The Franklin Institute will help network participants build capacity
for engaging low-income families with programming examples, community asset
analysis tools, and webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-hub approach is a
new innovative strategy for creating and sustaining the first ever professional
network for science festival organizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
evaluation will focus on the network's vibrancy, connectivity and effect.
Network vibrancy impact data will be collected on how members share goals,
enhance leadership, and expand geographic and model diversity. Network
connectivity evaluation will study the strength and growth of the relationships
within the SFA network. Network effects will study the ways the Science Festival
Alliance (SFA) network is achieving science festival organizational capacity
looking at increases in the number of science festivals, geographic spread,
science festival innovations, and the presence of a SFA sustainability
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will add new knowledge about the impact
of networks on the development and impact of science festivals throughout the
country.