* 1222853
* Modeling in Primary Grades (MPG): Science Learning through Content Rich Inquiry
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Nicholas Giordano, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 09/30/2016
* USD 431,916.00

This exploratory project examines how teachers of second grade students scaffold
the development of student conceptual models and their understanding of the
nature of scientific models and modeling processes in physical science
conceptual areas associated with the particulate nature of matter. Teachers
receive professional development around ways in which they can facilitate
productive disciplinary discussions with young children that result in students
coming to understand core ideas in the Next Generation Science Standards. The
project focuses on the topics of matter and sound based on the FOSS units
"Solids and Liquids" and "Water," and the STC unit "Sound". It builds on an
earlier project on life science for kindergarten teachers and students to expand
the research communities understanding of how young children learn in science.
Researchers from Purdue University are working with public schools in Lafayette
that have high Hispanic populations and low SES, as well as a private school
system with a more affluent population.

This project employs a mixed methodological research design that incorporates
rich qualitative data collection and analysis combined with a quasi-experimental
design that examines student learning across a treatment and comparison group
with the same curricular materials but with differing support for teachers to
engage students in disciplinary productive discussions about the science
phenomena that they are studying. Research questions are designed to elicit
descriptions of the differing aspects of learning that are evidenced by students
together with rich descriptions of the teaching strategies that are associated
with the classroom environments. Because this is an exploratory study, no causal
comparisons between teacher practices and student outcomes are drawn, but the
project provides the underpinnings that will support future research that would
take a more rigorous approach. The project further develops the methodology of
examining disciplinary rich description of student models to advance the
understanding of how content and reasoning interact with young children. Recent
research in cognition has demonstrated that young children reason in a more
sophisticated manner than previously understood. The Next Generation Science
Standards has a strong focus on student reasoning practices, and the development
of student explanations of science phenomenon requires that students have the
opportunity to experience classrooms in which discussions of scientific ideas
are scaffolded. Teachers need examples of how to interact with young children
and of how to interpret what students say in ways that move the understanding of
scientific concepts forward. This foundational research provides descriptive
exemplars that can be shared in both the research literature and in practitioner
publications as examples of what cognitively rich pedagogy can achieve.