* 1222709
* Identifying Science Teaching Strategies for Promoting Reasoned Discussions of Concepts and Simulations
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* John Clement, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 342,705.00

A key goal of the New Generation Science Standards is ensuring that students
develop the capacity to not just participate in the discussions of science
phenomenon, but also be able to reason cogently and deeply about those ideas in
the disciplines. This project supports teachers in improving classroom discourse
and reasoning by identifying key teaching strategies for building scientific
concepts in successful discussions. It links these strategies together with the
use of visual displays in classroom instruction with a particular emphasis on
simulations. The focus of the classroom discourse strategy development is on
teachers demonstrating learning of explanatory models of physical phenomena in
three subject areas: high school electricity, high school mechanics, and middle
school states of matter, with an emphasis on the use of visual displays. Based
on previous research that showed preliminary promising evidence for the teachers
orchestration of productive classroom discourse and using video data collected
during the prior research settings, the project uses video case studies to
characterize key elements of effective pedagogical processes and develop
materials for use in pre- and in-service teacher training.

This study uses existing videos of exemplary physics teachers who are using the
CASTLE curriculum to teach units on electricity and magnetism. Research
questions address the identification of whole class strategies that are used
with simulations to support the development of a visualizable particulate model
across a number of time scales in the classroom. Another question addresses how
teachers differ in their use of static as opposed to dynamic display models to
identify the advantages and disadvantages of both types of displays. The
researchers work within the socio-cognitive framework of the ways that students
and teachers construct explanatory models and the socio-linguistic framework by
which discussion strategies can encourage productive engagement in the
development of disciplinary knowledge. The researchers have developed a
framework that codifies the elements of the developing student to identify
particularly productive segments of lessons that illustrate how such discourse
can be scaffolded in the classroom. These segments will be organized into a
video-based teaching manual disseminated through a project website and used in
the pre-service teacher preparation at the university.

This project represents the ways in which research in science education on
student and teacher reasoning around scientific phenomena can be translated from
research into practice. The cognitive research that describes the nature and
elements of students' conceptual models requires concrete resources to make them
applicable within the typical classroom. The teacher video-based workbooks that
result from this study provide such a resource that is open-source and available
to a larger population of teachers than just those in the project. The
connection of the videos to the CASTLE curricular materials provides additional
research evidence to support the adoption of this curriculum that will be
especially cogent as the New Generation Science Standards require deeper
understanding of disciplinary content.