* 1222592
* ATD: Statistical methods for functional metagenomics in biothreat detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Lingling An, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 722,978.00

High-throughput next generation sequencing technologies provide a powerful way
to detect biological threats from metagenomic samples taken directly from the
environment without prior knowledge of sample composition. In the analysis of
metatranscriptomic data sets, researchers can examine and compare the active
gene functions and pathways in the environmental or host-associated metagenomic
samples with the presence or absence of biological threat agents (organisms or
viruses). This is accomplished by identifying which genes are active in a sample
and characterizing which functional patterns are associated with the presence of
biothreat agents. Moreover, functional analysis of metagenomes can explore how
functional diversity of microbial communities correlate with important
biological factors of interest including the presence of a particular threat
organism and its virulence level. In this research the investigators are to
build rigorous statistical models and rapid computational algorithms to define
detectable signatures of biological threats based on metatranscriptomic
sequencing data. In particular, they study to (1) develop a probabilistic
framework for characterizing the gene content in one metatranscriptomic sample,
with sequencing errors considered; (2) compare multiple metatranscriptomic
samples to detect statistically significant functional patterns that are
associated with a biothreat agent; (3)identify "threat marker" based on the
functional patterns that are linked to the presence of a biothreat agent and its
virulence level where a novel statistical approach for high-dimensional variable
selection problem will be proposed; (4) develop an R software package -
FunctionMeta - implementing the statistical models and computational algorithms.
In addition, standalone software - FunctionSim - will be developed for
generating synthesized sequencing data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Known or newly
emerging infectious agents, no matter whether they occurs naturally or dispersed
intentionally, are a potential threat we might have to face in our modern and
globalized society. In this research the investigators develop novel statistical
and computational methodologies for rapid detection of biological threats based
on metatranscriptomic sequencing data. Moreover, the algorithms are applicable
for other functional metagenomics studies. Both the R software package and the
sequence simulator tool will be made publicly available for the research
community. Besides training graduate students and postdoc in the cutting-edge
statistical and interdisciplinary research, the project will develop an online
teaching module (posted as a series of University iTunes videos) for high school
students to have an opportunity to learn the new science of metagenomics and its
applications in forensics and environmental biology with emphasis of statistics
in biological and health science research.