* 1222405
* UNOLS East Coast Van Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2012,12/31/2020
* Timothy Deering, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 12/31/2020
* USD 2,624,253.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;25 April 2012&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1222405&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Delaware&lt;br/&gt;PI: T.
Deering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests CY 2012 operational funding
support for the East Coast Van Pool which is managed by the University of
Delaware. The East Coast Van Pool is located at the College of Marine Studies in
Lewes, Delaware. The East Coast Van Pool supports federally-funded oceanographic
research by providing properly outfitted and maintained portable laboratory vans
of all types to the Academic Research Vessel Fleet. Pooling of portable capital
equipment such as this (1) provides Centers of Expertise with logistical support
for science and ship operators; (2) provides equipment that is Free at the Point
of Use to NSF-funded users which relieves burden on science and ship operations
grants; (3) provides a mechanism for non-NSF funded users to share maintenance
costs by paying established daily rates; (4) reduces the need for duplication of
equipment at multiple institutions which results in a long-term cost savings to
the federal agencies; (5) generates improved budget transparency on actual costs
to operate and properly maintain capital, shared-use equipment; (6) allows NSF
to make proper equipment purchase decisions based on science needs and provide
the appropriate, dedicated, long-term support budgets; and (7) improves the
quality and reliability of equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research projects supported by the equipment pools have been
individually peer-reviewed for scientific merit with all equipment deployments
coordinated with University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS)
ship time requests. During operations, vessels in the Academic Research Vessel
Fleet routinely expose graduate and undergraduate students to seagoing
oceanography. Specifically, the College of Marine and Earth Studies at the
University of Delaware participates in a large number of outreach programs
including open house events (Coast Day) and participation in the MATE program.
UD also owns and operates the R/V HUGH R. SHARP as part of the Academic Fleet.