* 1222368
* Fast level-set methods for large-scale geospatial-information based inverse gravimetry problems and applications to threats detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jianliang Qian, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 386,993.00

The principal investigator and his colleagues will develop fast level-set
methods for large-scale geospatial-information based inverse gravimetry problems
and apply these tools for threats detection. They aim at addressing some
challenging inverse problems arising from geospatial-intelligence applications
and remote sensing from both theoretical and computational perspectives: fast
stable numerical continuation of gravitational potentials and fast high-
resolution reconstruction of subsurface attracting-source inclusions. First,
their proposed fast algorithms for numerical continuation of gravity fields will
overcome significant, long-standing difficulties in inverse gravimetry problems
because the new methods can be applied to gravitational and magnetic potentials
in arbitrary computational domain in any dimension. Second, their proposed fast
level-set methods for large-scale geospatial-information based inverse
gravimetry problems will be the first of its kind which is able to recover both
a domain and its potential density from geospatial-information based
gravitational measurements. Third, the new fast method will be developed into
efficient algorithms and codes on streaming-architecture based high performance
computing platforms. Fourth, the resulting codes will be tested on synthetic
data sets and GRACE satellite data sets. Consequently, this new set of powerful
computational tools will be developed for the first time for large-scale
geospatial-information based inverse gravimetry problems. The project will
address some fundamental issues in geospatial sciences, remote sensing,
geosciences and scientific computing. The US government has been developing
remote sensing technology by deploying advanced radars and satellites to collect
geospatial information for many years. Solving the inverse gravimetry problem is
one of the many essential tasks to analyze and classify the collected
surveillance data. This research endeavor will enable further advances and
breakthroughs in the Defense and Homeland Security sector in the form of fast
and efficient algorithms for the detection of underground tunnels and caves,
including man-made underground structures. This is an example of what this work
concerns. Such underground tunnels can exist along the US border. The problem is
to determine the existence and location of such underground tunnels. The
research done here is relevant to analyzing geospatial information collected by
all such applications in threats detection. Students from the PI's institution
are involved in this innovative interdisciplinary research project.