* 1222819
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Differences to Blame: Agency and Ethnogenesis in Contemporary Suriname
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Webb Keane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 6,628.00

Doctoral candidate Stuart Strange of the University of Michigan, under the
supervision of Dr. Webb Keane, will conduct research on how conceptions of
responsibility, agency, and misfortune influence the ongoing construction of
ethnic difference in contemporary Suriname. Focusing on the wider implications
of cultural attributions of responsibility, the research investigates the
different cultural and religious logics used to recognize and assign agency in
order to ascertain how these differences impact peoples' perceptions and
performances of ethnicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research employs social
science methods to analyze rituals, narratives, and conversations and to
investigate how members from distinct ethnic and religious backgrounds variably
communicate and explain misfortune. The project seeks to grasp how diverse ways
of attributing responsibility for misfortune and describing the agency of
humans, spirits, and ritual objects impact the construction of seemingly
objective differences between ethnic communities. The researcher will record and
analyze how people talk about misfortune and describe responsibility in
different social settings: (1) at a Hindu Surinamese oracle and temple, (2) at
an Afro-Surinamese Shrine and church, and (3) in everyday talk in both
communities. The research also comparatively records and analyzes narratives of
the Surinamese civil war to discern the impact of cultural and religious logics
of explanation on the interpretation of this national crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to a clearer understanding of
how people in contemporary multi-ethnic societies create and understand ethnic
and religious differences, while observing the implication of such concepts for
the practices of all areas of social life, from politics to the market. By
explaining how responsibility and misfortune are attributed and transformed in a
society simultaneously culturally hybrid and socially segregated, the research
will provide an incisive analysis of human social and cultural difference. The
project will also contribute to the training of a social scientist.