* 1222843
* Mathematical Knowledge for Equitable Teaching: Exploring opportunities to enable Elementary pre-service teachers to develop ambitious and equitable teaching practices in both face
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Jennifer Chauvot, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 05/31/2017
* USD 539,355.00

Researchers, at the University of Houston, are designing, implementing and
studying a curriculum that prepares preservice, elementary teachers for
equitable teaching of mathematics. The program increases the mathematical
knowledge of preservice teachers and helps them recognize and implement
equitable instruction. The preservice teachers are learning to recognize
equitable practices by using the Mathematical Quality and Equity Observation
Protocol (MQE) to assess teaching as viewed in video cases. The program includes
mini courses of one hour that are spread throughout the program, ending just
prior to student teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on prior NSF-funded
research, the researchers are investigating ways to help preservice teachers of
mathematics at the elementary level to learn the mathematics needed for teaching
and how to provide equitable instruction that encourages all students to share
their mathematical thinking. Based on data collected in this exploratory study,
researchers will revise the MQE and improve the validity and reliability of the
instrument. They are also developing ways to use the MQE for both assessment and
for instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials, curriculum, and model
produced by this project are helping elementary teachers learn important
mathematics and learn to teach that mathematics in an equitable way. Although
the model includes mini courses that are taught throughout the program, the
materials can easily be adapted to a longer, traditional course for preservice
teachers. The revisions of the MQE are producing an observational protocol that
has the potential to vastly improve the way researchers study teachers'
instructional practices.