* 1222541
* ISE Pathways:  Earthquake!
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Deborah Kilb, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* William Neufeld
* 08/31/2015
* USD 249,464.00

This pathways project would refine and test a game based on the Kinect
technology gaming tool to teach seismology concepts in an informal education
setting and how they apply to phenomenon in other STEM fields. The game will be
developed as a companion tool to the "Quake Catcher Network" a low-cost network
of seismic sensors in schools, homes and offices world-wide and tie-ins with
seismology programs such as the great California ShakeOut with a participant
base of 8.6 million.

The project design would select three new learning modules, chosen by a group of
scientists and educators, to incorporate into the game and evaluate player
experience and knowledge gain. The activities will be conducted at a partner
test site, an aquarium, frequented by area youth 8 - 12 years old. The focus of
the effort is to add to the knowledge of how gaming can be used effectively in
informal learning environments

The game places the player as a scientist, allowing the player to make decisions
about seismic station deployment strategies following an earthquake, installing
the sensors and monitoring incoming data. The game has levels of difficulty and
players accrue points by acting swiftly and correctly. Learning goals for the
project include making abstract math concepts understandable; involve
participants in data collection and the process of scientific investigation,
plus demonstrate how scientists and mathematicians use tools of their fields to
address real-world issues.