* 1222383
* Continued Analysis of Convective System Evolution Using Convection-permitting Grid Spacing Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* William Gallus, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 10/31/2016
* USD 591,797.00

This research team will investigate the predictability and upscale evolution of
mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) and explore techniques designed to improve
quantitative and probabilistic precipitation forecasts of these systems, which
serve as a pivotal source of both beneficial and sometimes damaging warm-season
rainfall over much of the central U.S. and its associated agricultural belt.
Research will focus on numerical model simulations employing fine-mesh
"convection-allowing" grid spacings (CAGS) of 2-4 km which explicitly represent
thunderstorm-scale circulations and related precipitation processes. Two main
research thrusts are planned. The first will emphasize understanding the errors
present in simulations from the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model of
the nocturnal low-level jet (LLJ), planetary boundary layer (PBL) evolution, and
stratiform rain region development and how these features impact simulated MCS
evolution. The second thrust will involve evaluations of basic issues related to
low-level jet intensity and the role they play in the growth of MCSs. An
extensive archive of in-house WRF simulations, output from simulations run by
outside collaborators, and data from various observational sources would be
incorporated, with intellectual merit centered on advancement of the
understanding of (1) relationship of LLJ simulation accuracy to prediction of
MCSs; (2) impacts of cloud-solar radiation deficiencies within the PBL on MCS
simulations; (3) the role of cloud microphysics and near-storm winds on
prediction of MCS evolution; and (4) evaluation of neighborhood methodologies
applied to ensemble output to improve convective rainfall prediction.

Broader impacts of this research will come through expected improvements in
forecasts of warm-season convection, which bring considerable societal benefit
due to the disruptive nature of severe weather and flooding events. The
researchers plan to work closely with NOAA/National Weather Service personnel to
increase the research to operations aspect of the work. Education would also be
emphasized, with multiple students involved in the research.