* 1222869
* Building High School Students' Understanding of Evolution--Both Common Ancestry and Natural Selection--Through Mathematical Arguments, Evidence-Based Explanations, and an Understan
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jo Ellen Roseman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 454,991.00

The University of Utah will develop a plan for a model curriculum and associated
assessments project that integrates science practices, crosscutting concepts,
and core disciplinary ideas through the integration of mathematics and science
and the application of appropriate educational technologies. The unit plan and
prototype lessons will model ways in which quantitative literacy and the Common
Core Standards of Mathematics can be addressed in the biology curriculum. This
two-year exploratory research project will take place in the general biology
classrooms of teachers in Utah, Maryland and Washington, DC.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop the following: a detailed plan for a new,
5-week curriculum replacement unit for high school biology that helps students
build a coherent understanding of evolution; a valid and reliable set of test
items to assess students' understanding of the unit's learning goals using
Project 2061 and to refine these measures using an iterative process of
development, testing, expert review and revision; prototypes of five evolution
lessons from the planned unit. In addition a the researchers will conduct a
small-scale pilot test of the prototype lessons with diverse student
populations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The unit plan and prototype lessons will be
developed using a learning-goals-driven design model that includes iterative
rounds of development, analysis for content coherence using American Association
for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Project 2061's valid and reliable analysis
procedure, reviews by scientists and teachers, and revision.