* 1222340
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Secondary Teachers' Algebraic Habits of Mind
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Ryota Matsuura, Saint Olaf College
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 147,243.00

Boston University, Education Development Center, Inc., and St. Olaf College are
collaborating on Assessing Secondary Teachers' Algebraic Habits of Mind (ASTAHM)
to develop instruments to assess secondary teachers' Mathematical Habits of Mind
(MHoM). These habits bring parsimony, focus, and coherence to teachers'
mathematical thinking and, in turn, to their work with students. MHoM is a
critical component of mathematical knowledge for teaching at the secondary
level. Recognizing the need for a scientific approach to investigate the ways in
which MHoM is an indicator of teacher effectiveness, the partnership is
researching the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How do teachers who
engage MHoM when doing mathematics for themselves also bring MHoM to their
teaching practice?&lt;br/&gt;2. How are teachers' engagement with MHoM and their
use of these habits in teaching related to student understanding and
achievement?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate these questions, ASTAHM is
developing two instruments: a paper and pencil (P&amp;P) assessment and an
observation protocol that measure teachers' knowledge and classroom use,
respectively, of MHoM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is being conducted in two
phases: (1) an instrument-refinement and learning phase, and (2) an instrument-
testing and research phase. Objectives of Phase 1 are to gather data to refine
the project's existing instruments and to learn about the bridge factors that
impact the relationship between teachers' knowledge and classroom use of MHoM.
Specific research activities include: administering the pilot P&amp;P assessment
to 40 teachers, videotaping Algebra instructions of 8 teachers, performing
initial testing and refinement of the instruments, and using the data to analyze
the bridge factors. Phase 2 is a large-scale study involving field-testing the
P&amp;P assessment with 200 teachers, videotaping 20 teachers and studying them
using the observation protocol, collecting achievement data from 3000 students,
and checking P&amp;P content validity with 200 mathematicians. With these
validated instruments in hand, the project will then conduct an investigation
into the above research questions. Lesley University's Program Evaluation and
Research Group (PERG) is the external evaluator. PERG is assessing ASTAHM's
overall success in developing valid and reliable instruments to investigate the
extent to which a relationship exists between teachers' MHoM and their classroom
practice, as well as student achievement. Evaluators are also investigating
whether users' coding guides for both instruments enable field-testers to
effectively use and adequately score them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work fits
into a larger research agenda with the ultimate goal of understanding the
connections between secondary teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching and
secondary students' mathematical understanding and achievement. The MHoM
construct is closely aligned with the Common Core State Standards-Mathematics
(CCSS-M); especially its Standards for Mathematical Practice. For example, both
place importance on seeking and using mathematical structure. Thus the
instruments this project produces can act as pre- and post-measures of the
effectiveness of professional development programs in preparing teachers to
implement the CCSS-M. Mathematics teacher knowledge at the secondary level is an
understudied field. Through analyses of the practices and habits of mind that
teachers bring to their work, ASTAHM is developing instruments that can be used
to shed light on effective secondary teaching.