* 1222715
* ATD Collaborative Research:  Theory and Algorithms for High Dimensional Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ronald DeVore, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 248,870.00

The investigators and their collaborators study how to organize and query high
dimensional data in order to extract relevant content while avoiding the so-
called curse of dimensionality. The team is developing new analytical and
numerical methods based on sparsity, adaptivity, and variable reduction. The
focus is placed on developing a coherent theory that results in sophisticated
state-of-the-art numerical algorithms that can be applied in a variety of
settings. This activity is a critical component of many scientific problems
since it complements and supports the scientific methods of theory,
experimentation, and simulation. A setting of particular interest to this
project is learning tasks such as regression and classification. The research
team is developing quantifiable frameworks and algorithms for learning that
systematically break down the high dimensional barriers and exploit empirical
data collections.

Many scientic problems, vital to the security, economy, and health of our
nation, are so complex that they challenge this nation's most sophisticated
computational resources. Examples occur in modeling physical and biological
systems, e.g. in atmospheric modeling; in optimal design (optimal control and
shape optimization); and also in understanding social networks such as those
that occur in threat detection. The complexity of these problems prohibits the
use of traditional off-the-shelf computational techniques for their solution.
This research team develops new computational tools that lead to state of the
art algorithms for detecting and the capturing critical information held in the
solution of such complex systems. An emphasis in this project is the processing
of data that arise in threat detection, damage assessment, and containment. This
requires the simultaneous analysis of data obtained from different modalities
and a variety of sensors. The new algorithms are applied, for example, to
identify and track the migration of airborne biological and chemical
contaminants. Another application area is the development of new approaches to
high dimensional problems related to gene sequencing.