* 1222515
* 2012 Environmental Sciences: Water GRC, Plymouth, NH, June 24-29, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* David Sedlak, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 09/30/2012
* USD 23,500.00

CBET-1222515 Tratnyek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the Gordon
Research Conference on Environmental Sciences:&lt;br/&gt;Water to be held June
24-29, 2012. The conference will bring together 150 participants in an informal
setting, for a program of plenary talks by established and emerging researchers
who are doing the most innovative and significant research on diverse aspects of
environmental aquatic science. The scope will span multiple disciplines
(chemistry, biology, geology, engineering, health science), media (soil,
groundwater, surface water, atmospheric water, drinking water, wastewater), and
scales (molecular, nano, cellular, ecosystem, global). This year, the unifying
theme will be the scientific "grand challenges" that form the foundations and,
at the same time, the frontiers of aquatic environmental science. These grand
challenges, which include topics related to free radical reactions, natural
organic matter, nanoparticles, biotransformation, reactive transport and surface
chemistry, will provide the general themes for each session. Overall, the
program will highlight the crosscutting significance of these grand challenges
through sessions that represent the depth and breadth of each grand challenge
issue with speakers engaged in innovative and significant research on diverse
aspects to environmental aquatic science. The conference offers a platform for
graduate student and postdoctoral researchers to present their research and
participate fully in the conference activities. The conference promotes broad
participation from a diverse background, both through the speaker selection and
through special GRC funding mechanisms that target underrepresented groups.