* 1222637
* Special Meeting: Torsors, Nonassociative algebras and Cohomological invariants Thematic Program at the Fields Institute Toronto January - June 2013
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Alexander Merkurjev, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2013
* USD 80,300.00

A series of three workshops and conferences will be held in Toronto, Canada in
the spring of 2013, as part of the Fields Institute Thematic Program on Torsors,
Nonassociative Algebras, and Cohomological Invariants. The Workshop on Geometric
Methods in Lie Theory will take place March 18-29, 2013, the Spring School and
Workshop on Torsors, Motives, and Cohomological Invariants will be held May
6-17, 2013, and the Conference on Torsors, Nonassociative Algebras, and
Cohomological Invariants will conclude the program on June 10-14, 2013. The
theory of torsors and the associated linear algebraic groups has recently seen
two fundamental advances. The first is the proof of Milnor's conjecture by V.
Voevodsky (Fields Medal, 2002), based on the computation of the motivic
cohomology of the norm quadric. Among other things, this inspired an intensive
study of quadratic forms, e.g. torsors for orthogonal groups, their motives and
cohomological invariants, surveyed by Karpenko's ICM 2010 lecture). The second
discovery is due to Z. Reichstein and deals with the notions of essential and
canonical dimensions of linear algebraic groups (Reichstein's ICM 2010 lecture).
Roughly speaking, these numerical invariants characterize the complexity
(splitting properties) of a torsor. There are several classical open conjectures
in algebraic geometry which are closely related to torsors (Grothendieck-Serre,
Serre II). This is the central theme of the Spring School and Workshop on
Torsors, Motives and Cohomological Invariants. The theory of nonassociative
(Lie, Jordan, etc) algebras have many applications in representation theory,
combinatorics and theoretical physics. Many interesting infinite dimensional Lie
algebras can be thought as being finite dimensional when viewed as algebras over
their centroids, instead as algebras over the given base field. From this point
of view, the algebras in question look like twisted forms of simpler objects.
The quintessential example of this type of behavior is given by the celebrated
affine Kac-Moody Lie algebras which have particular importance in theoretical
physics, for example conformal field theory, and the theory of exactly solvable
models. Much of the recent activity in the area has been devoted to extended
affine Lie algebras, roughly speaking higher-dimensional analogues of the affine
Kac-Moody Lie algebras. The impact of the algebra-geometric "forms" point of
view on the theory of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras will be one of the
central theme of the Workshop on Geometric Methods in Lie Theory. The bridge
between torsors and nonassociative algebras, which is the central theme of the
final conference on Torsors, Nonassociative Algebras and Cohomological
Invariants, is provided by various cohomological invariants, e.g. de Rham and
Galois cohomology, motives, Chow groups, K-theory, algebraic cobordism. This
provides a strong connection between the theory of nonassociative algebras and
torsors. For instance,the celebrated Rost-Serre invariant of exceptional Jordan
algebras gives a cohomological invariant in Milnor K-theory and is related to
the (3,3)-case of the Bloch-Kato conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
nonassociative algebras and the theory of torsors are well-established areas of
modern mathematics. The first deals with the study of nonassociative algebraic
structures (Lie, Jordan, alternative algebras). The second studies and
classifies so-called twisted forms of algebraic objects, e.g. groups, algebras,
algebraic varieties. Both have many applications in engineering, computer
science and mathematical physics. For instance, the representation theory of Lie
groups and Lie algebras is used in particle physics to describe the different
quantum states of elementary particles; the theory of transformation groups
plays an important role in describing the 2D and 3D-motions; the compact form of
the Lie group of type E_8 appears in the Ising model for magnetic interactions.
To describe and classify nonassociative algebras and torsors one uses the
language of cohomology theories and cohomological invariants. The latter has
been a central theme of algebraic geometry for decades, e.g. the Hodge
Conjecture, whose proof is one of the Millennium Prize problems established by
the Clay Mathematical Institute, concerns the structure of the cohomology ring
of an algebraic variety. The purpose of the program is to bring together
specialists and young researchers working in these areas to discuss recent
developments and results, to provide an overview of the current research and
applications, and to stimulate new advances. The URL of the conference is:
http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/programs/scientific/12-13/torsors/index.html