* 1222560
* Mini-Symposia: The Results of the African Diaspora: Developing Black Scholars in Science Education for the 21st Century in the United States, Part II
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Mary Atwater, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2016
* USD 157,515.00

Utilizing a conference and work group format, project investigators will convene
a group of 15 African American science educators, scientists, and doctoral
student scholars and assign them to small work groups to design and conduct
multi-site micro-research studies on learning activities that promote
elementary, middle school, and secondary science learning and teaching. A
mentoring network will be established among project participants, as well,
partnering experienced educators and scientists with upcoming scholars. Work
groups will investigate different learning and teaching approaches used in K-12
rural and urban school settings to identify effects on student science learning
using quantitative, qualitative, or mixed design studies. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is the development of a network of science education
faculty members to conduct research on issues related to science learning and
teaching of rural and urban students in the United States; to develop and
conduct multi-site micro-research studies leading to successful scholarly
publications on science learning and teaching effectiveness; to increase numbers
of African American science education and science faculty members from
traditionally White and Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are
prepared to design and conduct rigorous research studies on science teaching and
learning and to seek funding for their projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project design includes a summer 2013 mini-symposium that will employ breakout
sessions, plenary speakers, and work group time for the design of multi-site
micro-research studies and assistance with Institutional Review Board
applications. During the 2013-14 academic year, the work groups will stay in
contact via electronic media as studies are conducted following the summer mini-
symposium. The second symposium will take place during the 2014 National
Association for Research in Science Teaching international meeting so that teams
can analyze data, prepare ideas for funding projects, and begin to prepare
journal articles and other means to disseminate findings. Formative and
summative project evaluation will take place at different stages of the project,
including one year from project completion, to determine if the project made
satisfactory progress in meeting its three goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
studies on effective science learning and teaching strategies in different
school settings will eventually provide students access to more innovative
science instructional materials and science instruction. This access is
paramount if students are to understand science concepts and ideas and engage in
meaningful scientific data collection, analysis, and interpretation. When
students experience effective science activities, especially at the middle
school level, there is a greater likelihood they will perform well in science
and may consider science-related college majors and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two critical areas in science education will be
positively affected by this project: instructional practices in K-12 schools and
the number of African American science educators and scientists conducting
research, especially funded projects. Understanding science practices that are
most innovative and effective in K-12 rural and urban classrooms will lead to
increased student science literacy, achievement, and pursuit of science careers.
These practices will be refined and shared across school systems. Collaborative
research efforts advanced by the mentoring network will result in a group of
science and science education scholars who can continue to build on the work
begun during this project as they complete their initial round of conference
paper presentations, manuscripts for publication consideration, and grant
proposals.