* 1222220
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Tracks: Investigating Marine Migrations in a Changing Ocean
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Barbara Block, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2015
* USD 311,290.00

Ocean Tracks: Investigating Marine Migrations in a Changing Ocean, a
collaboration between Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC), and Stanford
University's Hopkins Marine Station, is developing a unique model of how to
enable high school students to use authentic scientific data via an interactive
Web-interface. Ocean Tracks is developing and classroom testing powerful Web-
based visualization and analysis tools derived from state-of-the-art knowledge
about how to support student inquiry with data. An interactive website provides
access to near-real-time and archival data from electronically tagged marine
animals, drifting buoys, and Earth-orbiting satellites collected through the
Global Tagging of Pelagic Predators, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's (NOAA) Adopt-a-Drifter, and MY NASA DATA programs. Powerful
Web-based visualization and analysis tools, derived from state-of-the-art
knowledge about how to support student inquiry with data, allow students to
learn and apply core concepts in ecology, biology, environmental science, earth
science, oceanography, and climate science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concurrently,
agencies such as the NSF, NOAA, and NASA are making significant investments in
sophisticated cyberinfrastructures (CI) that will make available a treasure
trove of scientific data via the Internet to scientists and educators; there is
tremendous potential for this data to transform teaching and learning by
engaging students in authentic scientific work. However, modifying expert-data
interfaces for use by students and supporting students as they engage in
scientific inquiry with data are significant challenges. There is an urgent need
for model programs such as Ocean Tracks that instantiate the best knowledge of
experienced educators and education researchers, practicing scientists, and
technology experts. Ocean Tracks harnesses the promise of emerging CI to engage
high school students in the use of data visualization tools to study the
movement patterns and habitat usage of marine animals (e.g., sharks, tunas,
turtles, seals, and seabirds) in relation to oceanographic variables (e.g., sea
surface temperature, chlorophyll, and current speed and direction). The
knowledge gained from Ocean Tracks will have broad impact by serving as a model
for designing and implementing projects in which students, teachers, and
scientists collaborate to conduct scientific research, even in classrooms that
are far from the ocean and scientists' laboratories.