* 1222944
* Learning Trajectories to Support the Growth of Measurement Knowledge: Pre-K through Middle School
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Douglas Clements, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,092,005.00

This project is studying measurement practices from pre-K to Grade 8, as a
coordination of the STEM disciplines of mathematics and science. This four-year,
mixed methods research project tests, revises and extends learning trajectories
(LTs) for children's knowledge of geometric measurement across a ten-year span
of human development. Specifically, research teams from Illinois State
University and the University at Denver are working with children in urban and
suburban schools to (1) validate and extend prior findings from previous NSF-
funded research developing measurement learning trajectories with children in
pre-K to Grade 5, and (2) generate and extend portions of trajectories for
geometric measurement for Grades 6-8. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs
a form of microgenetic studies with 24-50 children per grade from pre-K through
Grade 5 representing a stratified random sample from a specific set of suburban
schools. These studies will test the validity, replicability and
generalizability of the LTs for length, area, and volume. The goal will be to
validate all components of each learning trajectory, goal, developmental
progression, and instruction tasks, as well as revising each LT to reflect the
outcomes of the experiments. Analysis of variance measures with pre/post
assessments in an experimental/control design will complement the repeated
sessions method of microgenetic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore and
extend LTs for children in Grade 6-8, the project employs teaching experiments.
This design is used to generate and extend portions of trajectories for
geometric measurement, and to explore critical aspects of measurement in
clinical and classroom contexts. This work is coordinated with the teaching and
learning standards issued by the Council of Chief State School
Officials/National Governors Association, the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics, the National Science Teachers Association, the American Association
of the Advancement of Science, and the National Research Council with cognitive
and mathematics/science education literature. Emerging constructs for the
hypothetical LT levels in relation to relevant frameworks generated by other
researchers and those implied by standards documents to establish ongoing
sequences of the experimental interventions for grades 6-8 are being compared,
critiqued and evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a
longitudinal account of pre-K to Grade 8 children's ways of thinking and
understanding mathematical and scientific concepts of measurement based upon
empirical analysis. The resulting learning trajectory will represent state of
the art integrated, interdisciplinary, theoretically- and empirically-based
descriptions of increasingly sophisticated and complex levels of thinking in the
domain of measurement (albeit, more tentative for Grades 6-8). This account will
be used to verify and/or modify existing accounts of children's development of
reasoning from short-term analyses of learning or cross-sectional studies. There
are not yet integrative longitudinal studies describing this cognitive domain
for area or volume measurement. This trajectory-based analysis of development
and instruction supports the design and testing of integrative, formative
assessment of individuals and groups of children. Such learning trajectories
will be useful in implementing the standard-focused curriculum described in the
Common Core State Standards Mathematics and in supporting the multiple large
assessment projects currently underway.