* 1222700
* Locality, markedness and phonetic factors in speaker knowledge of non-local ejective phonotactics in South Bolivian Quechua
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Gillian Gallagher, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates the knowledge that native speakers have about the
sound structures in their language. Languages differ in what sounds they use,
and one of the structural properties of a language is the set of sounds that
that language uses. Within a language, some combinations of the sounds of that
language may not exist. For example, English has a sound 't' and a sound 'l',
but the combination 'tl' does not exist at the beginning of a word; there are
words like 'tad' and words like 'lad', but no words like 'tlad'. Speakers are
generally aware of absent combinations of this type and find that they sound odd
or foreign. This project investigates two main questions about speaker knowledge
of non-existing structures: (1) Do speakers of a language find certain
unattested structures more strange than others, and do these asymmetries
correlate with which structures are more commonly found in the world's
languages? (2) Do speakers notice only very specific combinations of sounds that
are unattested, or do they make broad generalizations about the types of sounds
that may not combine?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions are addressed by a
series of experiments conducted by Dr. Gillian Gallagher in Cochabamba, Bolivia,
with speakers of South Bolivian Quechua, a language with many systematic
combinatorial restrictions on its sounds. The project contributes knowledge and
documentation of the sound structures of this indigenous language, which will be
made publicly available. The project also trains graduate students to carry out
experimental work with indigenous languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
contributes to understanding how humans make generalizations in the course of
learning, a question central not only to linguistics but to the study of
cognition more generally. The available learning data (e.g., the words of a
language) are often compatible with multiple generalizations; this project
investigates what criteria help humans choose between these possible
generalizations in a manner that is consistent across learners.