* 1222745
* Collaborative Research:   Developing a probabilistic model for gene family evolution
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Liang Liu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 172,888.00

Accurately estimating the timing and mode of gene duplications along the
evolutionary history of species can provide invaluable information about the
underlying mechanisms by which the genomes of organisms evolved and the genes
with novel functions arose. The major challenge is the lack of an appropriate
modeling framework for gene family evolution. To address this challenge, the
investigators develop a probabilistic model for gene family evolution that is
able to describe the relationship between the history of a gene family and the
history of species by taking into account the effects of different evolutionary
mechanisms of gene retention (neofunctionalization, subfunctionalization, dosage
balance). The model involves two stochastic processes - a non-homogeneous birth
and death process and a mutation process. The probability distribution of a gene
family tree given the species tree is derived from a non-homogeneous birth and
death process in which a hazard function is employed for modeling the loss rate
associated with different evolutionary mechanisms. The probabilistic model
provides a systematic way of handling the estimation error of gene family trees
when analyzing gene family data and is thus able to more accurately estimate the
gene duplication and loss events along the phylogeny of
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced biotechnologies provide a vast amount of
genetic data for the studies on gene family evolution. The main goal of the
project is to develop a probabilistic model for gene family evolution, which can
be used to effectively analyze gene family data. Gene duplication is the major
resource of evolution novelty and plays an important role in gene family
evolution. Thus this project will significantly advance our understanding on the
process and biological consequences of gene duplication. As gene duplication
played a pivotal role in evolution, the outcomes of the project will have
significant impacts and important applications on a variety of fields, including
evolutionary biology, phylogenetics, and cancer genetics that are closely
related to human health and medicine.