* 1222656
* TWC: Small: Run-Time Prediction and Preemption of Stuxnet-Like Attacks in Embedded Process Controllers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Cameron Patterson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Perimeter security and air gap approaches to preventing malware disruption of
industrial and infrastructure processes are challenged by the complexity of
modern control systems incorporating networked heterogeneous and software-
updatable components such as personal computers and programmable logic
controllers. Global supply chains and proprietary third-party hardware
components, tools, and software limit the reach of static design verification
techniques. As a consequence, attacks such as Stuxnet have demonstrated that
these systems can be surreptitiously compromised. We are developing a run-time
method for process control violation prediction to enhance system resilience
against configuration attacks on embedded controllers. This approach copes with
either malicious or unintentional errors in any software layer of any
programmable component. The run-time system includes a second instance of the
active controller connected to a model of the plant, giving a short-term
projection of future controller actions and process state. To maintain
convergence with the physical system, the model's state is periodically
synchronized with the plant's state. The predictor is combined with run-time
guards implemented in a configurable hardware-anchored root-of-trust to quickly
detect when the projected process state violates specifications. Aberrant event-
or time-triggered controller behavior is anticipated before it affects the
physical process, allowing preemptive switchover to a minimal and static
stability-preserving controller. A productive model-based design flow is being
extended to synthesize the active and backup controllers, prediction module, and
specification guards into a single commercially-available chip. The root-of-
trust can be formally verified due to its hardware implementation and
independence.