* 1222566
* Community-Based Engineering Design Challenges for Adolescent English Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Christine Hailey, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 09/30/2016
* USD 403,423.00

The purpose of this exploratory study is to conduct in-depth ethnographic
studies in Latino neighborhoods, documenting the funds of knowledge, social
networks, and linguistic and representational repertoires that are available in
the adolescents' online and offline communities. This study is based on a
theoretical model that embeds engineering design within social, cultural, and
linguistic activity, seeking to understand (a) how adolescent English learners
draw from various linguistic, representational, and social resources as they
work toward solving community-based engineering design challenges; (b) the
problems they face in working on the challenges and how they seek to overcome
those problems; and (c) adolescents' willingness to conceptualize themselves as
future engineers before and after participating in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ethnographic research is being conducted over
the course of three years. The first year includes a pilot study in which
approximately four Latino adolescents from the same community identify an
engineering design project and work toward implementing it. Upon completion of
the pilot project, the advisory committee reviews the data collection
instruments, the observation and interview techniques, and the data analysis
methods. Year two includes a scaled-up version of the ethnography, in which two
groups of five to seven adolescents identify a need in their respective
communities and spend the remainder of the school year addressing that need
through an engineering design. Student participants are members of both the MESA
and Upward Bound programs which target ethnically diverse adolescents. In all,
up to 18 participants (4 in the first year and 14 in the second year) are
selected through a combination of direct recruitment and peer
recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will generate frameworks for
understanding the types of social resources and the types of literacy practices
that are relevant to engineering processes. The knowledge generated in this
study is essential for creating future curricular materials and professional
development models that will enhance engineering education for culturally
diverse students.