* 1222359
* Developing Principles for Mathematics Curriculum Design and Use in the Common Core Era
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Corey Drake, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,288,668.00

This project is developing principles for supporting middle school mathematics
teachers' capacity to use curriculum resources to design instruction that
addresses the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM). These
principles are intended for: (1) curriculum developers to help in the design of
curriculum materials; (2) professional development designers and local
instructional leaders, to help teachers understand and better utilize curriculum
materials with respect to the CCSSM; and (3) teachers, so that they can use
curriculum resources to design instruction that addresses the CCSSM. The study
addresses the following research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. What design features of
materials support effective instructional design?&lt;br/&gt;2. What teacher and
district characteristics support effective instructional design?&lt;br/&gt;3.
How do teachers use materials to design instruction that addresses the new
CCSSM?&lt;br/&gt;4. What design practices lead to instruction that addresses the
progressions and practices in the CCSSM?&lt;br/&gt;A sample of teachers across
grades 6 - 8 and their instructional leaders will be selected, up to a maximum
of 72 teachers. The sample of teachers is purposefully diverse in terms of
demographic, geographic, and curriculum contexts. The curricula include NSF-
funded programs as well as commercially-developed programs. The ways teachers
understand and access curriculum resources in fully digital environments as well
as more conventional media will be studied. Partnering institutions include the
University of Rochester, Michigan State University, Western Michigan University,
and Washington State University Tri-Cities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
collection includes surveys, assessments of teachers' mathematical knowledge for
teaching, observations of teachers' use and enactment of curriculum materials,
analyses of student text and associated teacher resource materials, and teacher
logs. These data are used to test conjectures about: (1) how curriculum
materials, particularly the teacher resources, can be better designed to help
teachers productively design instruction, especially with regard to
incorporating the mathematical practices in the CCSSM; and (2) how teachers can
be better supported to understand and use curriculum resources. The project
evaluation includes formative and summative components, providing information
and assistance to ensure that the project addresses its stated goals and employs
rigorous methodology. Multiple methods are being used to collect evaluation
data, including observations, interviews, and document review.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deliverables are aimed at audiences who can impact
large numbers of teachers and students, such as curriculum developers, designers
of professional development, and researchers. The deliverables include: (1)
guidelines for curriculum developers that are intended to make curriculum
resources more transparent and accessible; (2) guidelines for instructional
leaders to support teachers to use curriculum materials to design instruction
that addresses the rigorous features of the CCSSM, and (3) refined instruments
for studying teachers' curricular practices.