* 1222705
* Collaborative Research: Climate controls on the formation of tropical glacier moraines in the Rwenzori Mountains, Uganda-Congo
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Meredith Kelly, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2015
* USD 48,073.00

Collaborative Research: Climate controls on the formation of tropical glacier
moraines in the Rwenzori Mountains, Uganda-Congo

Glaciers on the world's high tropical mountains are among the most sensitive
components of the Earth's climate system. The current melting of these glaciers
is a spectacular example of anthropogenic climate change. However, tropical
glaciers are strongly sensitive to precipitation, humidity, and various other
climate processes, not just air temperature. A major objective of glaciology and
climate research is thus to understand the responses of tropical glaciers to
climate change, and to evaluate which aspects of past climate change control
glacier advance and retreat. This project seeks to test whether changes in
temperature control the behavior of tropical mountain glaciers by reconstructing
past temperature changes and glacier movement in the Rwenzori Mountains, Uganda-
Congo. Specifically we will generate new records of glacier advance by dating
glacier moraine deposits using cosmogenic radinulides, generate a new
temperature record based from lake sediment cores, and compare the timing of
periods of cooling with the timing of glacier advances. The Rwenzori Mountains
host the most extensive glacier and moraine systems in Africa, but there are
virtually no direct dates to constrain the age of past glaciations. Moreover,
there are virtually no quantitative temperature reconstructions from tropical
African mountains derived independently of glacial mass balance estimates. Our
work will provide new insight into the timing of major glaciations, glacier
sensitivity, and temperature changes in tropical Africa, where few such
chronologies exist, and will elucidate the climate processes that control
tropical glacier dynamics.