* 1222531
* Geomorphic Response and Recovery to Hurricane Irene Floods: Characterizing Reach-Scale and Regional Controls on Fluvial Adjustments and Fine Sediment Deposition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Francis Magilligan, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 344,999.00

This project will document the pattern of river bank and floodplain erosion and
deposition associated with Hurricane Irene flooding across an array of
watersheds in central New England. The response of watersheds to extreme floods
is a long-standing research focus in fluvial geomorphology, hydraulic
engineering, and flood risk management. Previous studies demonstrated that
rainfall, peak discharge, and sediment transport rates alone cannot fully
explain the ability of a flood to shape the landscape. Initial attempts to more
fully generalize the factors that enhance the geomorphic effectiveness of floods
were hindered, in part, by a focus on flooding impacts within a single river
basin. Some success in developing a generalized comparative cause-effect
analysis of the geomorphic impact of extreme flooding has been achieved through
the use of unit stream power. The investigators will explore the concept that in
addition to a threshold value in unit stream power, the response of a channel to
extreme floods with respect to major morphological changes (e.g. channel
reconfiguration or widening) and fine-grained sediment transport and deposition
is sensitive to the geomorphic context of individual reaches. In conjunction
with previously collected baseline data, they will collect data that will
provide a rare opportunity to test this novel framework for predicting reach and
regional-scale geomorphic controls on channel response and recovery to large
floods. The investigators will derive and map watershed scale relationships of
well-established metrics linked to fluvial processes, such as stream power, from
the rapidly expanding resources of readily available geospatial data (e.g.,
aerial imagery, high-resolution topography). To gain insight into how channel
morphological changes impact fine sediment dynamics, they will use the short-
lived fallout radionuclides 7Be and 210Pb to determine the longitudinal
variations in fine sediment aggradation. They will focus on fine sediment
dynamics because of its well-established controls on riparian ecological
processes and its control on the transport and fate of particle-bound
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results will help develop process-
based metrics for evaluating the response and recovery of watersheds from a
profound disturbance in terms of both channel morphology and fine sediment
sedimentation. The project has potential for transformative impact through its
development of a simple but robust field-tested methodology that will enable
land managers to use readily-available GIS datasets to predict and plan for
future stream channel changes. These outcomes will help guide state and federal
agencies in future flood mitigation efforts and provide a template for natural
processes of river restoration. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in
this project will benefit from participation in professional development
opportunities, such as Dartmouth College's GK-12 program and its Center for the
Advancement of Learning, and through educational outreach programs, such as
Junior Science Cafes in regional secondary schools.