* 1222892
* Sensing Science: Heat and Temperature Readiness for Early Elementary Students
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Carolyn Staudt, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca A. Kruse
* 09/30/2016
* USD 832,466.00

Concord Consortium is exploring K-2 students' understanding of heat and
temperature in two Massachusetts school districts using sensors that display
temperatures as colors. The project is investigating the following research
questions:

- How can visualizations, data collection linked to everyday experiences, and
student reflection integrated into creative exploration address student
preconceptions and promote K-2 student understanding of temperature and heat? -
How can the use of replay of video and reflection aid in addressing K-2 student
preconceptions and improve student understanding of heat and temperature? - Can
the use of visualizations and data collection via digital sensing technology
advance K-2 students past the goals of the K-2 science frameworks?

The project is being implemented in 10 classrooms for about 250 children
representing diverse populations. Exploration activities are being created, and
students are being videotaped carrying out the activities. Students complete a
short assessment for each activity. Project staff will revisit the videos with
the students to explore student concepts at a deeper level. David Reider of
Education Design Inc. is conducting the evaluation which will focus on 1)
program efficacy and design and 2) alignment with research design. It is
formative in design with annual summative reports. From their data, the project
is constructing a progressive hierarchy of student theories of heat and
temperature. The project is also producing a protocol that teachers can use to
have better dialogues with children that support children's reconstruction of
their initial conceptions. The exploration activities, assessments, and project
data are available via open source through a website at Concord Consortium and
are being presented to multiple professional audiences.