* 1222986
* Full Scale Development NOVA Making Stuff Season Two
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Paula Apsell, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,053,989.00

The NOVA/WGBH Science Unit will produce a second season of the popular PBS
multimedia project, Making Stuff, hosted by The New York Times technology
columnist David Pogue. The project follows on the heels of the successful first
season, which reached over 14.5 million people, and took the discipline of
materials science--a topic that most people rarely think about even though it
impacts them every day--and turned it into a highly visible public television
event with broad appeal. For the second season, the series content will be
expanded to cover not only materials science but also a broader range of STEM
topics, including technology and engineering, with an emphasis on innovation. In
addition to reaching a large general audience, the project is being designed
this season to target new audiences--specifically, underserved teens and college
students--thanks to anticipated new partnerships with organizations such as the
New York Hall of Science, UC Berkeley's Lawrence Hall of Science, the National
Science Foundation Quality of Life Technology Engineering Research Center, and
the Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network (NISE Net). Professional
organizations, such as the Materials Research Society, IEEE, Alpha Sigma Mu, and
the National Engineers Week Foundation, among others, will also provide support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centerpiece of the project is a four-part PBS
miniseries that will take Pogue and his viewers on a fast-paced odyssey from
labs to factory floors, from cities to remote landscapes--in search of the
remarkable work coming from multiple fields that is making stuff Colder, Faster,
Wilder and Safer. The broadcast series is accompanied by an extensive outreach
campaign that expands the coalition of partners from the first season to create
a national "community of practice." These new partnerships will be dedicated to
increasing public engagement around engineering and innovation through outreach
activities, events and science cafes, as well as professional development
webinars and educational resources for informal and formal science educators.
The project also includes robust digital content and an active social media
presence for general audiences. Through these various project components, Making
Stuff will show the importance of basic science research and the transformative
process by which it yields discoveries and inventions that affect our lives.
Evaluation will be conducted by Concord Evaluation Group to determine how
successful the project is in achieving its intended impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are: 1) to increase public understanding
that basic research leads to technological innovation; 2) to increase and
sustain public awareness and excitement about innovation and its impact on
society; and 3) to establish a community of practice that enhances the frequency
and quality of collaboration among STEM researchers and informal educators. The
second season of Making Stuff is designed to capture the excitement of
discoveries at the frontiers of research while making the underlying science
accessible to a wide audience