* 1222079
* Using the RO/ED Method to Isolate Low-Ash Dissolved Organic Matter in High Yield along a Salinity Gradient
* GEO,OCE
* 01/09/2012,03/31/2016
* E. Michael Perdue, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2016
* USD 347,440.00

The chemical characteristics of dissolved organic matter (DOM) are expected to
be modified by an array of biogeochemical processes (sources, sinks,
transformations) along a salinity gradient such as the river-estuary-ocean
system. To quantify such changes in the quality and quantity of DOM, scientists
have relied upon methods of isolation such as solid-phase extractions (SPE) and
ultrafiltration (UF), for which yields of DOM typically decline substantially
along the salinity gradient. Observed changes in the chemistry of isolated
samples of DOM along a salinity gradient are the integrated result of
biogeochemical processing and salinity-dependent fractionation of DOM as the
retention characteristics of individual compounds are modified by increased
salinity. Most prior work has interpreted measured compositional changes solely
in terms of biogeochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers
at the Georgia Institute of Technology will conduct laboratory experiments to
optimize a coupled reverse osmosis/electrodialysis (RO/ED) method to maximize
the yield of DOM and minimize co-concentration of inorganic solutes. Field
experiments along the full salinity gradients of the Satilla and Altamaha rivers
in southeast Georgia will provide feedback to the design and optimization of the
modified RO/ED method. High-quality, low-ash samples of DOM will be collected
across a range of salinities and characterized chemically and spectroscopically
(elemental analyses (CHONS), acid-base titrations, 13C NMR and FTICR
spectrometry). The goals of the proposed research are: (1) to extend the range
of water chemistries over which the RO/ED method can be applied, (2) to develop
new capabilities for removing residual inorganic materials to obtain low-ash
samples of marine DOM, and (3) to isolate DOM in high yield along several
complete river-estuary-ocean salinity gradients and to test the hypothesis that
DOM is not significantly fractionated by the RO/ED isolation method..
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will provide financial
support for the doctoral research of one graduate student. Knowledge gained
during the project will be shared formally through publications in the peer-
reviewed literature and presentations at national and international meetings and
directly with current collaborators and other scientists who have requested the
PI?s formal support in using the RO/ED method to isolate DOM from a variety of
natural waters.