* 1222588
* Laboratory for the Study of Extra Solar Planets: Fostering Data Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Roy Gould, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 09/30/2015
* USD 990,674.00

The Laboratory for the Study of Extra Solar Planets: Fostering Data Literacy
provides a virtual environment in which high school students in physics classes
engage in the cutting edge science of studying exoplanets. The project builds on
previous work and serves as an example and test bed for integrating science
practice, crosscutting concepts and science content as called for in the
Framework for the Next Generation Science Standards. The project produces seven
mini-labs that scaffold students in the detection of orbits of exoplanets around
their stars. These include learning to use models, learning to use the
telescope, working with data, applying concepts to interpret data and creating a
3-D interactive model based on their data. In three more laboratories on
infrared and spectroscopy, students learn to apply core concepts and modeling to
identify some of the properties of the exoplanets. Using online telescopes and
learning software, students gain a deeper understanding of science inquiry,
including reasoning from models, gathering assessing, and interpreting authentic
data, and drawing conclusions from multiple line of evidence. Teacher support
includes in-class support on start-up, online professional development, and
interaction with the scientific community. The previous work has been shown to
have strong potential for engaging girls and also students in underserved
communities in urban areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research
question is how students learn to make sense of data. What are the tools that
can help them move efficiently from their initial ideas to more sophisticated
understandings? The research focuses on three areas that are fundamental to data
literacy: reasoning from models, assessing the quality of the data and
interpreting data and understanding uncertainty. Qualitative data are gathered
in the first year and scored using a rubric developed by experts. In year two,
more quantitative measures are employed. Assessment instruments, using items
from validated assessments, are created and psychometrically validated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project are a unique online
Laboratory that is universally accessible to all classrooms and that engages
students in meaningful scientific data collection, analysis, visualization,
modeling and interpretation at one of the most exciting research frontiers in
current science. The activities and assessments transform astronomy into an
inquiry-based subject that significantly increases students' understanding of
science practice and content as well as their science attitudes, interest, and
identity. The research advances our understanding of ways to increase students'
knowledge of data literacy, which is widely useful in science education across
all disciplines.