* 1223233
* TWC: Small: Physically Unclonable Function (PUF) Enhancements Via Lithography and Design Partnership
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ankur Srivastava, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,559.00

Silicon physically unclonable function (PUF) is a supplemental circuit embedded
in an IC which generates signatures unique to its native IC. This signature
could be used for authentication, protection of data and secure communication.
PUFs rely on the presence of uncontrollable variations in the fabrication
process causing the circuit parameters to exhibit randomness. Current approaches
for PUF design have mostly investigated circuit and architectural aspects. PUF
quality is severely marred by a lack of understanding of exactly how fabrication
process variations impact the PUF responses. Much of the existing work assumes
the fabrication process to be a black box. This results in several opportunities
being unutilized. This research investigates fundamentally different approaches
to PUF enhancements. It leverages quantified models for fabrication randomness
that have been developed in Design for Manufacturability related research
endeavors. This research looks into mask, circuit and layout level techniques
along with their interdependence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work enables
improved silicon PUFs thereby increasing the possibility of their adoption. Our
approaches would be useful for both semiconductor manufacturing companies and
fab-less design houses. On an education front, PhD students shall be involved in
the core aspect of this work while undergraduates shall be used for data
collection, analysis and test-bed development. Lastly, this project plans to
enhance infrastructure for research and education by making available all the
artifacts produced by this research in public domain. Further outreach efforts
such as tutorials, panel discussions, etc. shall also be organized.