* 1223119
* Exploring intrasite variability at Upward Sun River (Xaasaa Na'), a terminal Pleistocene site in central Alaska: foraging behaviors and paleoenvironmental contexts.
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Ben Potter, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/28/2018
* USD 780,094.00

This project consists of exploration of Upward Sun River (USR) (Xaasaa Na'), a
deeply buried site in central Alaska, associated with the earliest human remains
and residential structure in the Arctic or Subarctic of North America (~11,500
years old). This exploration will focus on understanding technology and
subsistence economy (of both plants and animals) at the transition from the last
Ice Age to the modern interglacial. The research team will explore how both
technology and subsistence are conditioned by site structure and organization,
social organization, seasonality, and paleoenvironmental contexts. These
contextual controls will be analyzed within a multi-disciplinary framework,
incorporating stone tools, fauna, plant macrofossils, phytoliths, and stable
isotope analyses. Results will also inform us on adaptive strategies associated
with the initial colonization of the New World through Beringia. Additional
questions involve the extent to which adaptive strategies remained constant or
changed under changing climatic conditions at the end of the last Ice Age. Given
the importance of the USR site to local and regional Alaska Native communities,
the project has a robust education component, including support for Alaska
Native participation. This research has the potential to contribute
transformative data to our understanding of this important time period in the
Western Hemisphere.