* 1223199
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Judicial elections and the three properties of legitimacy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Segal, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 31,086.00

This proposal uses an experimental design embedded in a nationally
representative survey to test the impact of the four main varieties of judicial
selection method (JSM) - appointment system, retention election, non-partisan
election and partisan elections - on the legitimacy of state supreme courts. The
experiment determines the impact of JSM by manipulating the salience of each
institutional arrangement in a person's thoughts. Legitimacy varies on three
properties called magnitude, persuasiveness and stability, and JSM impacts each.
Magnitude is the amount of legitimacy an individual attributes to an
institution. The persuasiveness of legitimacy is legitimacy's power to induce
the mass public to accept displeasing decisions. The stability of legitimacy is
the ability of an institution's legitimacy to withstand the negative pressure of
displeasing decisions without a reduction in legitimacy. The legitimizing power
of elections is predicted to increase the magnitude of legitimacy, but elections
are predicted to reduce the persuasiveness and stability of legitimacy. The
predictions are developed using a synthesis of Positivity Theory, framing
theory, and the fundamental differences between legitimacy derived from
elections and that derived from principled decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential question in any political system is
how to select public officials. While normative arguments are important in
answering this, empirical reality should not be ignored. The question of
legitimacy is especially important for courts that cannot rely on the purse or
sword to enforce their decisions. This proposal provides new evidence about how
the various JSMs impact judicial legitimacy, and for the first time uses an
experimental design to answer this question. Using an experiment allows stronger
claims of causation than extant research based on cross-sectional correlations.
Additionally, the proposed experimental design and analysis examines all three
properties of legitimacy while existing research concentrates solely on
determining what causes changes in the magnitude of legitimacy.