* 1223146
* Visitors' Laboratory at the University of Guam Marine Lab
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Robert Rowan, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2014
* USD 18,204.00

The University of Guam is awarded funding to remodel an existing indoor, air-
conditioned space at its Marine Laboratory (UOGML)to create a dedicated
laboratory for visiting researchers and thus providing a resource currently
lacking at the facility. Established in 1970, the UOGML
http://www.guammarinelab.com/ serves the US-affiliated islands of Micronesia,
including the Territory of Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Belau, and the
Republic of the Marshall Islands. As the only U.S. marine research station in
the equatorial Pacific that includes a modern research laboratory, UOGML is
important in meeting the research and educational needs of the region as well as
supporting research by visiting scientists. No other U.S. facility provides both
a well equipped laboratory and easy access to the diverse flora and fauna near
the epicenter of marine biodiversity in the tropical western Pacific Ocean, thus
serving as a research and educational gateway to a wide variety of biomes from
shallow coral reefs to the Mariana Trench (the deepest biome in Earth's oceans).

UOGML provides access to Guam's marine and terrestrial habitats with access to
research assets and equipment as well as project support. The dedicated
visitors' laboratory will help visitors make the most of these assets, increase
visitor productivity and encourage the wider use of the UOGML by visitors. As a
resource for scientific discovery, the new laboratory will also encourage
scientists from around the world to conduct research at a geographically and
academically isolated marine laboratory, thus expanding productive research
activity at UOGML and also providing both faculty and students with a more
vibrant intellectual atmosphere. The lab will promote new and higher levels of
scientific collaboration between UOGML and other researchers, especially across
disciplines and across biomes given Guam's unique geographical setting.

UOGML is especially important to the under-served people of the U.S.-affiliated
Pacific-island nations who depend on UOGML for training and scientific
expertise. This group has relatively few other opportunities locally for
academic training in marine biology or scientific research in general and also
limited opportunity for interacting with the larger international scientific
community. Thus, increasing visiting-scientist activity at UOGML will benefit
the scientific and educational capacity of the region directly.