* 1223107
* Collaborative Research: ATD: Integrated statistical algorithms with ultra-high performance computing for discovering SNPs from massive next-generation metagenomic sequencing data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Xinping Cui, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 532,114.00

Recently, the emerging new field of metagenomics facilitated by the advent of
next-generation sequencing technology enables genome sequencing of unculturable
and often unknown microbes in natural environments, offering researchers an
unprecedented opportunity to delineate bio-diversity of any microbial organism.
Mining single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from metagenomic sequencing data
offers an unique opportunity to rapidly and accurately detect known or novel
strains related to multiple biothreat agents. While the sequencing technologies
are evolving at unprecedented speed, researchers engaged in this enterprise are
facing major computational, algorithmic and statistical challenges in the
analysis of the massive metagenomic data. It is clear that both current
analytical and computational methods are inadequate for this challenge. In this
project, the investigator and his colleagues develop a family of statistically
sound and computationally efficient algorithms to detect SNPs from metagenomic
data to characterize microbial diversity in natural environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides the national security and
biodefense agencies new tools for rapid and accurate detection of biothreat
agents. It also provides researchers in microbiology with new tools for
producing abundant, high throughput SNPs for detailed analysis of the genetic
basis of microbial diversity and evolution. Since this informatics tool can be
used to study a wide variety of microbial communities, it helps accelerating
scientific advancements of our knowledge in microbiology and evolution. The
multidisciplinary nature of the project will promote collaboration between
biologists, computer scientists and statistician. The multidisciplinary nature
of the project will also provide postdoctoral fellows and graduate students
training in statistics, genomics and scientific computing through hands-on
experience.