* 1223236
* The Truth About Trees: A Natural and Human History
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Ross Spears, James Agee Film Project
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,480,546.00

This media project would raise awareness of the critical role of trees for
humans and the biosphere. Trees are essential for life on earth and are
currently threatened by changing climate patterns. Trees offer an accessible
path to learning about the science of climate change. The project will test a
new model for integrating direct citizen participation into a nationally
distributed film project. The project is projected to reach at least 15 million
Americans during the grant period and many more during the 10-year project
lifespan of the films. Principal public audiences include PBS viewers and
citizen foresters. The professional audience is broadcast meteorologists.
Partners include U.S. Forest Service, National Environmental Education
Foundation, and Alliance for Community Trees.

Project deliverables include a 3 part PBS documentary series, a multimedia story
project that develops capacity of volunteers in forestry organizations (citizen
foresters) to craft evidence-based stories about forest and trees; website,
social networks, a mobile app; and capacity building of broadcast meteorologists
to report on tree science in the context of current weather/changing climate.

Innovative strategies of the project include working with Community Partners to
build the capacity of local citizen foresters to create evidence-based digital
media stories about forests and trees. Citizen Foresters is a term to describe
large and diverse groups (paid staff or volunteers) who are motivated by a
desire to help the environment and a desire to learn. The project has identified
7 cities where they will conduct digital media workshops providing coaching and
support to local Citizen Foresters who will then craft digital stories about
trees. These stories will be shared nationally through an interactive, geo-coded
website and some segments will be used in the national television programs.
Social media apps such as Facebook, YouTube, Pinterest, and Instagram will be
used to facilitate sharing and engagement. This is a new model of local/national
collaborative storytelling and community engagement designed to increase
knowledge, awareness and interest in the ecology of forests.

The formative evaluation of the project will include a series of studies to test
different elements of the multi-platform system during development, including
the films, multimedia story project, website, social media, mobile app and the
trees information service for broadcast meteorologists. The summative evaluation
will assess impact of the project on two audiences: PBS viewers and citizen
foresters. A quasi-experimental design test will be used to more deeply
understand contextual factors related to audience impact.