* 1223187
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Citizen Input, Policy Outcomes, and Local Representation.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Andrea Campbell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2014
* USD 13,973.00

One of the most difficult choices for democratic societies is whether
representatives are to be elected by voters or appointed by other officials.
This project asks how the choice affects representation, testing two hypotheses
from existing political science research. First, do direct elections lead to
more representation of the majority's preferences, relative to appointment?
Second, do direct elections cause certain groups - special interests" - to
receive better representation than others? I address these questions by
leveraging the substantial variation in local institutions, assembling original
data sets on three local offices in three states: property tax assessors; school
board members; and fire protection district trustees. Upon completion of the
project, these unique data sets of political institutions and policy outcomes
will be disseminated to the broader scholarly community, constituting a
significant public good.

The intellectual merit of this project is related to its contribution to the
study of institutions and local governance. The project focuses on these three
cases for two key reasons. First, each case includes a significant number of
political jurisdictions (towns, school districts, or fire districts) that change
from direct elections to appointment (or vice versa) over time. If the analysis
were to simply compare jurisdictions that elect or appoint at a single point in
time - the approach of most existing studies of this question - it would be
difficult to assess whether any difference in policy was due to direct
elections, or due to pre-existing differences that are associated with the
decision to elect. In contrast, the focus on jurisdictions that change permits
comparison of policy outcomes between jurisdictions that elect or appoint, while
controlling for any differences that existed prior to the switch. Second, each
of the offices under examination is responsible for making decisions that have
tangible impacts on citizens' lives. Thus, by examining how direct elections
shape property tax assessments, standardized test scores, and fire department
response times, the research will facilitate an evaluation of the link between
citizens and government more precisely than other studies of representation that
analyze indirect measures of policy outcomes.

The broader impacts of the project are associated with its contributions to the
study of political institutions and local government. More practically, the
findings from this project will help to inform a public policy question - how
officials should be selected - with which countless organizations, from state
and local governments to private boards, actively wrestle with. Through stronger
research designs and original data gathering, this project seeks to offer more
credible policy prescriptions than do the handful of conflicting findings from
existing studies.