* 1223850
* TWC: Small: New Foundations for Secure JavaScript
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ranjit Jhala, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

JavaScript has transformed the way in which software systems are developed,
deployed and extended. It is now used to build complex, security sensitive
applications for communications, retail, and banking, and is even a primary
building block of web browsers themselves. Unfortunately, the advent of
JavaScript has also opened the door to new classes of security vulnerabilities,
as applications manipulate security critical client information like browsing
history, passwords, bank account numbers, social security numbers and so on.
Worse, the absence of language-level isolation mechanisms makes it hard to
establish confidentiality and integrity of key software
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe that the key to making the web more
secure is to develop a practical, precise and expressive type system for
JavaScript and to use it as a foundation for developing security policies,
analyses and enforcement mechanisms for JavaScript browser extensions and
applications. Thus, we propose to develop a type system for JavaScript that is
expressive enough to support JavaScript's dynamic idioms, practical enough to
require minimal programmer intervention and hence, be capable of highly
automated analysis of large code bases, and easily extensible enough to allow
developers to specify and enforce different kinds of fine-grained security
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research will lead to the following
contributions: End Users will be able to freely run extensions, plugins and rich
browser applications from trusted sites, without having to suffer the plagues of
code-injection, information exfiltration or the unpalatable cures of fully
dynamic enforcement whose overhead can render sites unusable. Developers will be
able to fully enjoy the fruits of static verification, in a familiar package:
namely types. Types will allow developers to specify at the right granularity,
the permissions required for some functionality, and will prevent the
inadvertent vulnerabilities that are introduced by overprovisioning, or under-
sanitization of data. Curators that aggregate third party applications (e.g.
``app stores" for various mobile platforms) will be able to use type-based
certificates to quickly vet applications, thereby determining if an application
is safe to host without compromising the reputation of the platform.