* 1223271
* Collaborative Research: Perturbation Methods for Markov-Switching Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,800.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Perturbation Methods
for Markov-Switching Models&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES - 1223198
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop new tools for the
computation and estimation of dynamic models in macroeconomics and for the
application of those tools to relevant policy questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic models have become a standard instrument in modern
macroeconomics. Because they are built to analyze how the economy evolves over
time, they are used to study growth and business cycles, to design monetary and
fiscal policy, or to investigate the aggregate aspects of financial and labor
markets, among many other tasks. However, many instruments are still missing in
the toolbox of the applied macroeconomic researcher. For instance, economists do
not have a good understanding of the effects of changes in policy regimes ?that
is, variations in the way in which economic policy is systematically conducted
in opposition to changes within one regime- or how the beliefs about future
policies affect current behavior by households and
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to provide some of the
required tools for these tasks and show how they can be used to address
important questions in the design and evaluation of public policy. Consequently,
much of this new research may have positive externalities for other economists
within macro and, more generally, for researchers in other fields where dynamic
models are also employed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this proposal
focuses on how to use perturbation methods to solve Markov switching rational
expectations (MSRE) models starting from first principles, that is, from the set
of non-linearized optimality conditions that describe the behavior of the
economic agents, rather than from the set of linearized ones, as the literature
has previously done. Perturbation methods, commonly used in natural sciences and
economics, built approximated solution to models that are analytically
intractable. MSRE models allow for different possible policy regimes (for
instance, a hawkish central banker and a dovish central banker) that evolve and
switch over time (hawkish central bankers are followed, with some probability,
by dovish central bankers and so on).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal derives
the set of algebraic equations to be solved to find the first-order Taylor
expansion to the policy functions using a perturbation. Next, it shows how the
traditional approach, based on singular value decomposition (SVD) algorithms and
used in the constant parameter case, does not work in the case of MSRE models.
Instead, the proposal uses a Gr√∂bner basis method. Then, it studies how to check
for determinacy and, as an example, it solves a business cycle model with
nominal rigidities. Finally, the proposal points out how the perturbation
approach also allows us to find higher-order approximations to the solution of
MSRE models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy-making institutions in the U.S. and
abroad can apply the methods presented in this proposal. For instance, the
Federal Reserve Board and several regional Federal Reserve Banks, the
International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and
the central banks of Austria, Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain, and Sweden
(just to name a few) are actively formulating and estimating dynamic
macroeconomic models for policy analysis and forecasting that can benefit from
the type of extensions presented in the proposal. Moreover, the economics
profession is accumulating evidence of the good forecasting performance of this
class of models, even when compared with judgmental predictions from staff
economists. The newer and better tools that this proposal outlines are designed
explicitly for the purpose of helping the Federal Reserve Board and other
policy-making institutions to develop more flexible models that will contribute
to the implementation of an effective public policy in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the development of new computation techniques has
potential applications in other fields of economics (such as international
economics, industrial organization, or labor economics), and other social
sciences where researchers want to solve and estimate dynamic models using
flexible, yet powerful tools.