* 1223074
* Enhancing Mathematics Teaching and Learning in Urban Elementary Schools: A Cluster-Randomized Efficacy Trial of a Novel Professional Development Approach
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* J.Michael Shaughnessy, Teachers Development Group
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,488,354.00

The Enhancing Mathematics Teaching and Learning in Urban Elementary Schools
project is working with all teachers in grades three through five in the
Portland, OR Public Schools in order to test the feasibility and efficacy of the
Mathematics Studio Model of professional development. The model requires
professional development to occur at the school level involving both teachers
and principals. The professional development is conducted at the school and is
integrated with instruction. The goal of the project is to improve students'
engagement and learning in mathematics by fostering effective instruction.
Partners in the project include Teachers Development Group, Portland State
University, Portland Public Schools and Horizon
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are identifying the key
ingredients that make the professional development successful. They are using a
cluster-randomized research design to examine the efficacy of their model. They
are using observational measures to identify successful teaching practices as
well as student discourse patterns. They are studying the fidelity of
implementation of the model and are looking for specific variables that may be
particularly helpful for students who have not been successful in learning
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is difficult to implement professional
development at a large enough scale to make a significant difference in student
achievement within a district. This research is important because it tests the
use of a practice-based, professional development model within a large, public
school system, and documents the challenges of implementation as well as the
variables that contribute to student learning of mathematics.