* 1223600
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-Method Approach to Determine the Role of Semiconducting Oxide and Sulfide Surfaces in Catalyzing As, Cr, and Se Redox Reactions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Devon Renock, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 242,538.00

Technical description.

Redox reactions are the driving force behind the mobilization and geochemical
(and biogeochemical) cycling of As, Cr, and Se at the Earth's surface. The
kinetics of these reactions are known to be catalyzed by sulfide and oxide
mineral surfaces based on the development of empirically derived rate laws from
macroscale experiments, but the actual reaction mechanisms (occurring at the
nanoscale) are far from being understood. Previous studies by the Principle
Investigators have demonstrated the importance of processes such as proximity
effects, spintransitions, and oxygen dissociation to control the rate of redox
reactions. This project will attempt to quantify these atomic scale processes in
the context of the known rate laws, thereby linking the macroscale observables
with the nanoscale processes that may be rate limiting.

The strength of the U. of M. and Dartmouth College approach is their unique
combination of molecular simulations (quantum mechanical to account for charge
and electron spin transfer), electrochemical methods, and surface probe
techniques to describe surface-mediated redox mechanisms and to resolve
individual rate-determining steps. Molecular simulations will predict possible
activated states that can occur between co-adsorbates on the surface and give
insight into the reaction mechanism itself, especially steps that may be rate
limiting, such as spin transfer, ligand reorganization, bond breaking, or mass
transport (to name a few). Microelectrode techniques that have not traditionally
been applied to study environmental reactions will be used to rapidly evaluate
surface-specific mechanisms and kinetics in multivariable space. Finally, redox-
dependent scanning probe microscopy will allow to observe these processes in
situ.

This study is a necessary - transition state - for the development of more
comprehensive kinetic redox models in the future that will include bacterially-
mediated redox processes, biomineralization, and the role of sulfide and oxide
mineral surfaces as templates for the formation of complex organic molecules
(i.e., precursors for origin of life).

Broader significance and importance.

Answering the aforementioned questions has profound implications for
understanding the geochemical cycling of toxic elements and, maybe most
importantly in this regard, provides a necessary foundation for future
investigations on microbe-mineral interfaces. The results of this study will be
important to the engineer developing permeable reactive barriers to immobilize
toxic elements or to the geoscientist developing predictive models to describe
the mobility of these species in the near-surface environment. The potential
implications for technology development are widespread, including heterogeneous
catalysts, chemical sensors, anti-corrosion processes, and photovoltaics, to
name a few.