* 1223495
* TWC: Small: Secure Data-Intensive Computing on Hybrid Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The ongoing effort to move data intensive computation to low-cost public clouds
has been impeded by privacy concerns, as today's cloud providers offer little
assurance for the protection of sensitive user data. This problem cannot be
addressed by existing cryptographic techniques alone, which are often too
heavyweight to manage the computation involving a large amount of data. As a
result, many computing tasks have to be run on individual organizations?
internal systems whenever they touch even a very small amount of sensitive
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project seeks practical
solutions to this critical security challenge. The PIs are working on an
approach to split a computing job over a hybrid-cloud platform, delegating to a
public cloud the computation over public data, while keeping the computation on
sensitive data within a private cloud. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
PIs are developing a privacy-aware MapReduce system, which transparently
partitions a computing job and schedules its components across the
public/private clouds according to the security levels of the data involved. The
system is designed to achieve high security assurance and outsource most of its
workload when possible, at small computational and communication overheads. It
includes support for analyzing and transforming the code for legacy jobs as well
as developing new jobs. We are also working to extend these techniques to
facilitate other secure work-flow processing over hybrid clouds. This research
involves industry collaborators and contributes to secure processing of a wide
range of computing jobs, from commercial data analysis, to DNA analysis, to
intrusion detection.