* 1223868
* Full Scale Development:   Collaborative Research--Using Narrative in a Digital Learning Evironment to Engage Children and Teens in Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Glenn Ellis, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,807,650.00

This full scale research and development collaborative project between Smith
College and Springfield Technical Community College plans to improve technical
literacy for children in the area of engineering education through the Talk to
Me (TTM) website. The approach for the TTM curriculum draws on Bransford's "How
people learn" and Egan's Imaginative Education and Knowledge Building to
structure the activities. The research questions are: What is the quality of the
knowledge building discourse? Does it get better over time? Will students, given
the opportunity, extend the discourse to new areas? What scaffolding does the
learning environment need to support novice participants in this discourse? Does
the use of narrative influence participation in knowledge building? Are certain
types of narratives more effective in influencing participation in knowledge
building?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The website Talk to Me (TTM) will provide
engineering education curriculum that facilitates interactive knowledge building
through the use of narratives and interactive multimedia. The TTM website will
include evaluative feedback for usability, value effectiveness and ease of
implementation from informal educators and leaders from the Connecticut After
School Network. Outcomes include demonstrated understanding of the nature of
engineering and engineering concepts, increased interest, integrative thinking
and ability to apply engineering concepts, and incorporate TTM resources. The
evaluation will include: documentation on the impact of narrative and multimedia
tools in the area of engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently,
there is very little research regarding children and young teen engagement in
engineering education activities using narrative as a structure to facilitate
learning engineering concepts and principles. This online education program will
deliver narratives that are developmentally structured by Imaginative Education
through the engagement of children and young teens via interactive forums and
blogs, young adult novels (audio and text with English and Spanish versions),
eight extensive tie-in activities, social network connections and electronic
portfolios for middle school age students and afterschool program site
directors. The research and activities developed from this proposed project
contributes to the field of Informal Science and Engineering Education. The
results from this project could impact middle-school aged children and members
from underrepresented communities and girls in a positive way.