* 1223210
* Pathway to BioTrails: DNA-assisted Species Identification for Citizen Science
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Abraham Miller-Rushing, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2015
* USD 249,849.00

The Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory, the National Park Service, and
the Schoodic Education and Research Center Institute are investigating whether
DNA-based identification of organisms (DNA barcoding) can enhance the public's
understanding of biodiversity by helping volunteer citizen scientists identify
unknown species. DNA barcoding allows non-scientists to identify unknown
organisms at the species level by comparing short DNA sequences taken from
unknown organisms to DNA sequences in a reference library for known species.
Project deliverables include preliminary data on science learning outcomes among
adult citizen scientists; preliminary biodiversity data for invertebrates
collected from two habitats in Acadia National Park (forest and eelgrass); and
two DNA barcode reference libraries for park invertebrates.

Eighty adult volunteers are collecting invertebrates along two transects (one
terrestrial; one marine) in Acadia National Park in Maine. Volunteers are
sorting and identifying the unknown organisms by (1) traditional morphological
analysis, (2) morphological analysis supplemented with existing DNA barcoding
data, or (3) generating DNA barcoding sequencing data through hands-on
laboratory work. Project personnel are using observation, interviews,
questionnaires, and evaluation instruments to determine how the three species
identification strategies impact volunteers' science awareness, knowledge,
understanding, attitudes, and behavior.