* 1223206
* Diversity in fossil decapod Crustacea based upon a unique species-level database
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Rodney Feldmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Diversity in Fossil Decapod Crustacea Based Upon a Unique Species-Level Database
Carrie Schweitzer Kent State University

The Decapoda - shrimp, lobsters, and crabs - are an economically important,
diverse group of animals whose geologic history extends back 400 million years.
Living representatives, numbering over 15,000 species, are global in
distribution and nearly ubiquitous in oceanic and non-oceanic environments. They
exert a major impact on ecosystems; understanding the dynamics of their fossil
record will illuminate their historical impact on ecosystems. We will test the
hypothesis that decapods are arrayed in a series of discrete evolutionary
faunas; remarkably, the vast array of living and fossil decapods in diverse
interrelated groups have exploited four basic body plans repeatedly. Other
hypotheses to be tested are that the Decapoda have repeatedly adopted a limited
number of baupl√§ne, or generalized architectures, throughout their history; that
they have experienced explosive evolutionary radiations followed by periods of
no determinable change; and that they are generally resistant to mass extinction
events. These hypotheses will be tested using a unique dataset compiled and
assessed by the Principle Investigators: a compilation of all fossil decapod
species, arrayed in a classification scheme including fossil and living taxa,
with geologic and geographic ranges of all species, including a phylogeny (i.e.
"family tree") for many sub-groups within the Decapoda. The dataset will be
expanded to include ecological data for each taxon and will be entered into the
Paleobiology Database, an NSF-supported vehicle for analyzing the fossil record.
Employing its methodology, patterns of diversity and macroevolution of the
decapods will be generated at levels ranging from the entire Order to species
level. This will result in a comprehensive analysis of macroevolutionary
patterns of this major group for the first time. Available paleoecological data
derived from field studies and published records will be used to determine the
effects of various environmental factors such as seafloor conditions, reef
development, water depth, and temperature on morphology, extinction
survivorship, and diversity. Because decapods have a remarkable range of
morphological variation preservable in the fossil record, the diversity of the
groups of decapods can be assessed in relation to their morphological
characteristics. Defining the history of taxa with specialized morphology will
permit recognition of body plans that have been exploited by different decapod
groups throughout the history of the clade.

Intellectual merit. This study will provide the most comprehensive analysis of
macroevolution of the Decapoda yet conducted, all based upon a unique dataset
that is internally consistent by virtue of its having been developed entirely by
the investigators. It will document the significance of employing a high
resolution, species-level database for interpretation of diversity. The
hypotheses and conclusions derived here will provide a model and the foundation
for future work on Decapoda, Arthropoda, and macroevolution of well-constrained
groups. It will provide a test for the efficacy of PBDB data versus a
constrained dataset assessed by specialist systematists.

Broader impacts. The work will introduce undergraduate students at Kent State at
Stark, an undergraduate campus, and Kent State at Kent, to research that
involves paleoecological, paleogeographical, and functional morphological
elements which, in turn, will be communicated to other students. Because
decapods are known to virtually everyone, they form an excellent group to use to
inform the public about ancient patterns of diversity and the relationship
between the morphology of organisms, variations in their environmental
requirements, and their adaptability to different physical conditions. This will
be conveyed in a professionally constructed display which has the potential to
be exhibited in museums and universities around the country. Small kits designed
for use in elementary and middle schools will be available to allow students to
make their own observations about the adaptations of decapods to their
environment and its effect on diversity. Published papers and presentations on
results of research at meetings will be prepared throughout the course of the
research. Because the study of modern biodiversity is a concern of the general
public, presentations to broader audiences as well as geology classes will
provide a broad historical context for understanding modern patterns of
diversity. Data entered into Paleobiology Database and Ohio Data Resource
Commons will be openly available to other researchers and the general public.
Combined, the databases will assure archival storage and public access,
following a proprietary period.