* 1223407
* A Full-scale Development Proposal -Informal Community Science Investigators (iCSI): Next Generation Engagement for Informal Science Institutions
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Eric Klopfer, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* William Neufeld
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,486,882.00

Informal Community Science Investigators (iCSI) creates a network of four
geographically diverse informal science institutions working together on
strategies to engage youth ages 10-13 through location based augmented reality
(AR) games played on smartphones. These high-interest, kid-friendly games will
be used by families visiting the institutions and by youth who enroll in more
intensive summer camp programs. Using AR games, participants will engage in
playful but scientifically-grounded investigations drawing on each institution's
research, exhibits, and natural spaces. For example, a botanical garden might
engage young visitors through AR games with themes related to native and
invasive species, while a zoo might create a game experience focusing on illegal
wildlife trade. Participants in the iCSI summer camp program will have more
intensive experiences, including work with the host institution's scientists,
opportunities to develop original augmented reality games, and experiences with
game-related service learning and citizen science programs. For both target
groups (families and campers), the location specific games build understanding
of both the institution's mission and the broader realm of scientific research
and application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test the notion of
participants as "learner hero," the link between game play and the individual's
development of competency, autonomy and the relationship to real world
experience, in this case through community action on the subject of the game
developed. To that end, participants will be encouraged to extend their
involvement through related investigations on site and participation in
community activities and projects that can be done at home. Social media tools
such as Facebook and web sites managed by the host institutions will provide
recognition for this extended engagement, helping participants maintain ties to
the program. Additionally, program resources provide assistance to adult family
members in nurturing and sustaining youth interest in STEM activities and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major effort of the project will be development
of a new software infrastructure called TaleBlazer for the augmented reality
game that will enable teachers and students to develop their own game that
incorporates real data collection and scientific model building. The new
platform will enhance the game play platform MITAR developed with NSF funding.