* 1223727
* EAGER: A First Principles Test of the Current Sheet Heating Hypothesis for the Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Michael Goodman, West Virginia High Technology Consortium Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 03/31/2013
* USD 74,981.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) will test a long-standing hypothesis that solar
coronal heating occurs in sub-resolution current sheets. The PI notes that
theoretical estimates suggest that the thickness of such current sheets in the
solar corona would be on the order of 100 meters or less, but there is no firm
evidence that such sheets exist. These current sheets cannot be observed
directly due to the inadequate spatial resolution of current observing
technology. Since these sheets cannot yet be detected, the PI asserts that an
indirect test for their existence would be to determine if magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) models can give rise to such phenomena from first principles physics,
without in any way predisposing the MHD model to have current sheet solutions in
the corona. The PI will create such a model and require that such solutions
"arise naturally" from the intrinsic, nonlinear transport and radiation physics
within the model. The PI's model will be designed to provide exact, self-
consistent solutions for sub-resolution, heated, radiating current sheets under
solar coronal conditions, and include realistic mathematical expressions for the
radiative cooling rate and the anisotropic transport coefficients that determine
solar coronal heating.

If the PI finds his anticipated current sheet solutions, then these would
constitute the first theoretical evidence for the existence of current sheets in
the solar corona and would lend support to the current sheet coronal heating
hypothesis. Such solutions would contribute to our fundamental understanding of
radiation generation and anisotropic transport processes in current sheets and
would permit more accurate multi-dimensional MHD simulations for increasing our
understanding of magnetic reconnection, a phenomenon that is pervasive in space
physics, astrophysics, and plasma physics. Magnetic reconnection is also a key
phenomenon in the most energetic space weather events.