* 1223770
* Prairie Science: Integrating Informal Science and History Learning through Family Dialogue
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Cathy Ferree, Conner Prairie Museum, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,283,652.00

This Informal Science Education project is about facilitating learning STEM
concepts by integrating a historical perspective (Conner Prairie Museum) and a
science center-based perspective (Science Museum of Minnesota). This unique
integration coupled with the well established protocol of the Conner Prairie
Historical Museum interactive learning suggests the development of a new
approach to learning STEM concepts that may be helpful to families. Further,
this approach will be adapted and piloted in four additional historical museum
venues in order to gain confidence in broadening the reach of the idea. Finally,
an open source template will be generated enabling other museums to adapt the
ideas generated in this project.

This project builds on the extensive studies of Conner Prairie on learning
strategies in the historical context and the learning strategies and development
of the exhibit by the Science Museum of Minnesota. The integration is fairly
complex deriving sufficient understanding of each other's approaches and
professional development. It is anticipated that both participants will gain
from the experiment. Included in the plan are an additional two to four STEM
concepts, but the first experiment will concentrate on energy and electricity.
Museum visitors will experience the decorum of a period-dressed docent, the
history of energy derivation and progressions to the present with opportunities
to experiment with energy driven efficiency (wind-charger blade design, for
example) and the newest generators. In addition, there will be opportunities for
the families to learn more about electricity use and storage. During the
development phases and on-the-floor time, visitors and staff will be evaluated
not only to assess the success of the concepts, but also in an effort to enhance
the learning and experience. Evaluation of visitors will occur at the site as
well as various periods after the visitation. Finally, four additional history-
based museums will be participating in the design and development of the exhibit
from the initial phases as well actually setting up adapted exhibits in their
own facilities near the end of the experiment. These museum participants
include: The Museum of America and the Sea, Mystic, Connecticut; The Oliver H.
Kelley Farm, Minnesota Historical Society, Elk River, Minnesota; The California
State Railroad Museum, California State Parks, Sacramento, California; and The
Wabash County Historical Museum, Wabash, Indiana.

The careful and documented effort of this integration and subsequent
implementation is to generate a model for the concept so that it can be adapted
broadly both in history museums and science centers. An open template shall be
generated to facilitate adaptation by other sites. Further, the issue of
learning under this regimen will be reported with the evaluation results. An
additional distinction in this endeavor is that most of the visitors are rural
families.