* 1223137
* ATD: Detection of Clusters in Spatial Data and Images
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 884,959.00

The investigators will address the inter-related problems of anomaly detection
in spatial/temporal data (such as images or sensor networks) and the estimation
and characterization of dependencies in such data. One objective is to develop
efficient multiscale algorithms for approximating the scan statistic (aka a
matched filter), as well as alternative methods to the scan statistic based on
proximity graphs. These methods will be analyzed in the context of data that
exhibit spatio-temporal dependencies. The analogous problem of detecting
dependencies, which in the context of images can be applied to detecting
textured objects, will also be tackled. Of related interest in this era of
datasets of enormous sizes, is the question of how much of the data is required
to be observed when the goal is to detect a signal at a given (or assumed)
signal-to-noise ratio. The investigators will also develop multiscale methods
for estimating long-range dependencies in one and higher dimensions. In the case
of discrete data, they will analyze possible correlation structures in Bernoulli
networks, an interesting question both in theory and practice, since their
simplicity makes such networks appealing as test beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
large number of applications, space-time data are collected to monitor an area
of interest. These are as varied as target tracking based on an array of
sensors; man-made object detection and fire prevention based on satellite
images; or syndromic surveillance based on hospital emergency department visits,
ambulance dispatch calls and pharmacy sales. These huge quantities of data being
collected are not useful until properly analyzed, and their analysis requires
novel methodology that is both well-understood (with mathematical backing) and
scalable. The focus of this proposal is on novel approaches to detection in the
context of surveillance data, either from sensor networks or images,
particularly when the data exhibit dependencies, which is often the case; and on
the characterization and quantification of dependencies. The research in this
proposal will have an impact on the sciences at large, for example, in medical
imaging when detecting tumors or visualizing the brain activity in fMRI. This
research plan has an important educational component in that it will involve at
least one graduate student and one postdoctoral researcher.