* 1223830
* Creating A Community Of Practice Around A Proven Teen Science Cafe Model
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Michelle Hall, Science Education Solutions Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,697,291.00

This broad implementation project will create a professional network and
community of practice for implementing Teen Cafes that engage high school teens
in STEM. The Café Scientifique model for engaging adults in science has proven
very effective and has been widely implemented. This project builds on a new
successful model for Teen Cafes implemented over the past five years in New
Mexico (NSF award 0714762). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 5 years the model will be
scaled up in eight diverse regions across the country focusing particularly
where there are large numbers of underrepresented teens. Core partners include
Science Education Solutions in New Mexico; Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville; the Florida Teen SciCafe Partnership; North Carolina Museum of
Natural Science; and Science Discovery at the University of
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build capacity for a broad range
of ISE and STEM communities by encouraging and nurturing others wishing to start
a Café program and join the network. The evaluation will study the impacts of
both the local Teen Café sites as well as the national network. The evaluation
of the local Café sites will analyze the challenges and opportunities when
setting up local Cafes and how they are addressed; how well the national
network's resources and support meet local needs; and how local adaptations
affect outcomes for teens and professional audiences. The evaluation of the
national network focuses on the processes for facilitating communication and
management across the sites; the usefulness of the resources provided to sites;
and the sustainability of the community of practice.