* 1223477
* TWC: Small: Knowing Your Enemy: Understanding and Counteracting Web Malvertising
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 478,160.00

With the Internet becoming the dominant channel for marketing and promotion,
online advertisements (ad for short) are also increasingly used for propagating
malware, committing scams, click frauds and other illegal activities. These
activities, which we call malvertising, systematically deliver malicious ad
content and victimize visitors through an infrastructure, which includes
malicious advertisers, ad networks, redirection servers, exploit servers and
others. Our preliminary study shows that most of such malvertising activities
are missed by popular detection services such as Google Safe Browsing and
Microsoft Forefront. This points to a disturbing lack of understanding of such
web malvertising activities, which renders existing countermeasures less
effective, and an urgent need to study the features of this threat to better
prepares us to defend against it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
endeavors to gain a holistic, in-depth understanding about the scope and
magnitude of malicious display, search and contextual advertising, features of
their infrastructures and ad content, behavior of malicious ad-related parties,
and economics of this underground business. Based upon such a understanding, we
continue to develop novel infrastructure-aware technologies to detect these
malicious activities, which include effective malvertising analysis techniques
that capture malicious ads, advertisers and ad networks through web patrol,
client-side defense that protects a user from stepping into exploit servers and
publisher-side countermeasures that empower legitimate publishers and ad
networks to shield their customers from such attacks. This research involves
industry collaborators and also contributes to mitigation of other related
threats such as black-hat Search Engine Optimization, SPAM-based phishing and
drive-by-downloads.