* 1223630
* SBES: Small: Cyber Security Workshops for Social Science Researchers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Lance Hoffman, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 09/30/2013
* USD 68,439.00

This project brings together computer scientists, social scientists, and other
stakeholders in an attempt to integrate social sciences into the design of
future cyber security mechanisms and systems. The workshop fosters the
development of new models of and paradigms for cyber security, and will lead to
the development of communities of researchers who today do not interact, but
whose cooperative work is necessary for the development of cyber security
mechanisms and systems. It will also produce a research agenda in economics and
other social sciences related to cyber security that addresses user, economic,
and sociopolitical realities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Established economists will
interact with computer scientists who believe that a better alignment of
incentives is necessary in order to produce more secure systems. Established
social scientists will interact with computer scientists and others who believe
that advanced technological security systems must also satisfy non-technological
constraints (such as easy to use human-computer interfaces and societal
acceptability) in order to be effectively used to provide more secure computer
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will generate interdisciplinary
dialogue among experts in cyber security, computer science, economics, business,
government, and public policy. It will catalyze and inform new scholarship on
the economic impact and effectiveness of global and national cyber security
policies using social sciences perspectives and expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By highlighting where current marketplace and other
incentives fail and building on the tools from economics and other social
sciences to address these issues, this work could lead to the development of
actual, working incentives for building cyber security into systems -- rather
than the much less effective and much more prevalent security mechanisms that
have been added to existing systems. Armed with these results, designers of
cyber security systems in mobile, desktop, and network environments will be able
to develop more effective mechanisms to solve or mitigate cyber security
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber security may present challenges for
existing social science theories, since cyber security has global and digital
underlying problems, rapidly changing and sometimes unidentifiable actors, and
accountability difficulties. Thus, this workshop may lead to the refinement of
existing theories. Adapting previous work in the social sciences may inform
changes in the architecture and design of hardware and software to ameliorate
cyber security problems in the future. Clearer understanding of incentive
mechanisms to design cyber security systems will encourage the production of
more secure systems in the future, thus promoting the progress of science and
advancing national defense and international welfare by having more secure
systems in place.