* 1223988
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: A Combined Computational and Spectroscopic Study of Structure and Charge Transfer Dynamics of Ionic Liquids in Heterogeneous Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Hyung Kim, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 398,000.00

Hyung Kim of Carnegie Mellon University is supported by the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms program of the Division of Chemistry through the
International Collaboration in Chemistry initiative to carry out computational
and spectroscopic study of structure and dynamics of ionic liquids in
heterogeneous environments in collaboration with experimental groups at
University of Aberdeen, UK headed by Dr. Johannes Kiefer and Prof. James
Anderson. The research component of the UK collaborators will be funded through
EPSRC. The US investigator, Professor Kim, will perform molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations of room-temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) based on imidazolium
cations in metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and in carbonaneous environments,
including carbon black, carbon nanotubes and graphenes, and analyze RTIL
structures and dynamics with special attention paid to the environmental effect.
Using the equilibrium structure thus obtained, quantum chemistry calculations
will be performed in the QM/MM (quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics) framework
to determine RTIL vibrational spectra. Reorganization of electron density of
RTIL ions, in particular, imidazolium cations, will be analyzed and
heterogeneous charge transfer at the interface with graphitic materials will be
investigated. An empirical valence-bond description for electron transfer
between cations and graphene surface will be constructed and incorporated into
MD simulations. Several different anionic species, such as
bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide and bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide, will be
considered to understand how redox chemistry of imidazolium cations could be
modulated by anions. Detailed comparison of computational results will be made
with the experimental results that will be obtained via, among other methods,
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), x-ray absorption spectroscopy
(XAS) and inelastic neutron scattering (INS) by the UK collaborators.
Experimental results for RTILs in MOFs with well-defined pore size and shape
will be used to calibrate computational results and fine-tune force field
parameters. Later, RTIL systems will be extended to mixtures with organic
solvents and the influence of co-solvents on RTIL structure, dynamics and charge
transfer at the interface with carbon-based materials will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Room-temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) have many
unique properties that make them promising solvents for green technology: they
are non-volatile, non-flammable, chemically inert and thermally stable. RTILs
are also promising as components of systems for energy conversion and storage
because of their high ion conductivity and large electrochemical window. These
electrochemical properties also make RTILs potentially useful in catalysis and
other industrial processes. Prof. Kim's research helps to provide detailed
microscopic insight into the structure and properties of RTILs by studying their
interactions with interfaces similar to those used in such applications using a
combination of theory/computation and experiment/spectroscopy. As such, the
research will have long-range impacts on both the fundamental understanding of
RTIL interfacial processes and their many potential applications. Key results of
the research will be incorporated into ChemCollective, a digital library of
educational materials for introductory chemistry courses at both the college and
high school level, developed at Carnegie Mellon University, to disseminate the
results to a broad audience, including high school students, undergraduates and
their instructors.