* 1223785
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: The Chemical Basis for Allosteric Regulation of G Protein Coupled Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Brian Shoichet, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award in the Chemistry of
Life Processes (CLP) program in the Division of Chemistry, supports
collaborative work by Professors Brian Kobilka of Stanford University and Brian
Shoichet of University of California, San Francisco in the United States, and
Professor Takuya Kobayashi of Kyoto University in Japan, who is supported by the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). The goal of this proposal is
to elucidate the chemical basis for the effect of allosteric ligands on
muscarinic receptor structure and to develop new allosteric probes. Muscarinic
receptors are members of the family of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs).
GPCRs are nature's most versatile chemical sensors. There are over 800 GPCRs in
the human genome and they respond to a broad spectrum of chemical entities.
Among the large family of GPCRs, the muscarinic receptors stand out for their
ability to detect and respond to two distinct chemical entities that interact
with two different binding sites: the orthosteric and allosteric binding
pockets. The orthosteric binding pocket is the binding site for the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine. The amino acids that form the orthosteric
binding site are highly conserved among all five muscarinic receptor subtypes.
As such, developing subtype selective chemical probes that regulate muscarinic
receptor function has not been successful. There is a higher degree of chemical
diversity outside of the orthosteric site including potential allosteric binding
sites. Thus, allosteric ligands have the potential for highly subtype-selective
chemical interactions with receptors. However, much less is known about the
structural basis of allosteric ligand binding or how chemical interactions
between amino acids that form this allosteric site and allosteric ligands lead
to changes in receptor function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative US-
Japanese team will use the M2 muscarinic receptor as a model system for the
proposed project, the methods developed during this collaboration will be
generally applicable to other GPCRs, and allosteric tools developed during this
project may ultimately be developed into more effective therapeutics. The
proposed research will take advantage of complementary expertise in the three
collaborating labs using pharmacological, biophysical and computational
approaches to develop new highly selective chemical tools that can be used to
modulate the activity of muscarinic receptors. Postdoctoral fellows from the
three collaborating institutions will gain experience in all aspects of the
proposed research.