* 1223754
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  Non-statisticality, selectivity and phase space structure in organic  reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Gregory Ezra, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* James Lisy
* 07/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Gregory Ezra of Cornell University is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to
engage in collaborative research with Prof. Stephen Wiggins (Bristol University,
UK) and Professor Barry Carpenter (Cardiff University, UK). This is an
International Collaborations in Chemistry (ICC) award, and the research of
Wiggins and Carpenter is supported by the UK EPSRC. The researchers are
undertaking a theoretical and computational exploration of nonstatistical
dynamics in organic reactions and its relation to phase space structure in
classical Hamiltonian models for polyatomic molecules. This work, motivated by
recent experiments, addresses problems of reactivity and selectivity in organic
reactions exploiting state-of-the-art methodology and concepts from the theory
of Hamiltonian dynamics. The overall aim is the development of a phase space
approach to understanding and ultimately predicting nonstatistical dynamics in
thermal reactions of organic molecules. The research applies recent theoretical
and computational advances in applied dynamical systems theory to study reaction
dynamics and phase space structure in multimode molecules, and to probe the
dynamical origins of nonstatistical behavior.

Understanding the factors that control selectivity is of essential importance
for chemical synthesis, and this work provides a rigorous dynamical foundation
for the ongoing paradigm shift in the interpretation of organic reaction
mechanisms. Annual exchange of postdocs between collaborating institutions
ensures that the coworkers involved in the project receive a broad
interdisciplinary education in a wide range of research methodologies, spanning
the subfields of chemical dynamics, dynamical systems and the study of organic
reaction mechanisms.