* 1223819
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  Mechanism of operation of the BLUF domain: blue light sensitive biosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Peter Tonge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 325,000.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award in the Chemistry of
Life Processes (CLP) program in the Division of Chemistry supports collaborative
work by Professor Peter J. Tonge of Stony Brook University and Professor Stephen
R. Meech of the University of East Anglia in the UK, who is supported by the
EPSRC, to carry out fundamental studies on photoreceptor function.
Photoreceptors are proteins that have evolved specifically to convert light
energy into structural change, and as such serve as prototypes for light driven
molecular and biomolecular devices. The team at the University of East Anglia
investigates "how" the protein environment of the photoreceptor modulates the
excited state chemistry of the embedded chromophore on the ultrafast timescale.
The principal investigator at Stony Brook University and his international team
study how light absorption by the photoreceptor chromophore is coupled to
structural changes in the protein that lead ultimately to signaling.
Investigation of the mechanism of photoreceptor function in real time will
provide a picture of a photoreceptor protein in action and requires measurements
over many decades in time from femtoseconds to milliseconds. Unraveling the
protein reorganization which follows from the primary light absorption process
will underpin the development of optical devices for controlling genetic
responses in vivo and the application of optogenetics to problems at the
intersection of physics, chemistry and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the proposal range from the training of students at the interface
between chemical dynamics and chemical biology, to a fundamental understanding
of how photoproteins control and respond to light absorption which is central to
such diverse biological processes such as vision, circadian rhythms and DNA
repair. Students at Stony Brook University will make multiple trips each year to
the UK to visit the UK collaborator and also to collect ultrafast spectroscopic
data at the Research Complex at Harwell which is a key component of this ICC
project.