* 1223977
* TWC: Small: Redesigning Mobile Privacy: Helping Developers to Protect Users
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Marco Gruteser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 318,636.00

The objective of this project is to help developers in making applications?
usage of personal information transparent to mobile phone users, system
integrators, and other evaluators. Recent well-publicized mobile privacy
incidents have demonstrated all these parties have lost count of what
information mobile devices collect, store, and transmit. A successful project
would lead to improved privacy and application transparency, and would help
prevent future privacy compromises. Project results could be adopted into mobile
operating systems and could guide FTC policy on mobile privacy. The project
includes close collaboration with industry stakeholders to facilitate
dissemination of new ideas. Work will be conducted with graduate and
undergraduate students, which will not only provide them with training in
research methodology, but also expose them to important ethical questions
surrounding privacy issues in mobile applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will aid developers and nudge them to follow privacy principles by
making their usage of personal information transparent. Towards this end, this
project will develop guidelines for privacy-aware system APIs that encourage
developers to employ privacy-by-design techniques. For example, system APIs
designed from a privacy perspective will make it easier to obtain more general
information, rather than potentially more sensitive, fine-grained personal
information. Through case studies with developers and users, this project is
expected to lead to novel insights into the effectiveness of these techniques.