* 1223235
* Collaborative Research: Full Scale Development: Skynet Junior Scholars: Engaging Youth in Authentic Science Using Research Grade Robotic Telescopes
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Daniel Reichart, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 341,673.00

The University of Chicago's Yerkes Observatory, the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory, the University of North Carolina, the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific, and 4-H are collaborating to provide professional development to 180
4-H leaders and other informal science educators, and engage 1,400 middle school
youth in using research-grade robotic telescopes and data analysis tools to
explore the Universe. Youth participating in 4H-based out-of-school programs in
Wisconsin, West Virginia and North Carolina are learning about the universe and
preparing for STEM careers by conducting authentic astronomy research,
completing astronomy-related hands-on modeling activities, interacting with
astronomers and other professionals who are part of the Skynet Robotic Telescope
Network, and interacting with other youth who part of the Skynet Junior Scholars
virtual community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative because it is
providing a diverse community of 4-H youth (including sight- and hearing-
challenged youth and those from underrepresented groups) with opportunities to
use high-quality, remotely located, Internet-controlled telescopes to explore
the heavens by surveying galaxies, tracking asteroids, monitoring variable
stars, and learn about the nature and methods of science. Deliverables include
(1) online access to optical and radio telescopes, data analysis tools, and
professional astronomers, (2) an age-appropriate web-based interface for
controlling remote telescopes, (3) inquiry-based standards-aligned instructional
modules, (4) face-to-face and online professional development for 4-H leaders
and informal science educators, (5) programming for youth in out-of-school clubs
and clubs, (6) evaluation findings on the impacts of program activities on
participants, and (7) research findings on how web-based interactions between
youth and scientists can promote student interest in and preparedness for STEM
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation plan is measuring the
effectiveness of program activities in (1) increasing youths' knowledge, skills,
interest, self-efficacy, and identity in science, including youth who are sight-
and hearing-impaired, (2) increasing educators' competency in implementing
inquiry-based instruction and their ability to interact with scientists, and (3)
increasing the number of Skynet scientists who are involved in education and
public outreach.