* 1223703
* ISE Research:  Contextualizing Science Learning and Motivation in Rural and Indigenous Adolescents through Mapping Sustainable Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Eleanor Abrams, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,480.00

ISE Research: Contextualizing Science Learning and Motivation in Rural and
Indigenous Adolescents through Mapping Sustainable Practices is a three-year
interdisciplinary research project. Researchers from the University of New
Hampshire will investigate impacts of contextualization on science learning,
motivation, and positive attitudes toward science of early adolescents from
rural and Indigenous populations. The project will yield research findings that
can help identify contextualization as a means to engage rural and Indigenous
adolescents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team uses a systematic approach
that incorporates mixed methods of data collection and analysis to learn more
about how culture and community (contextualization) impact STEM learning. They
hypothesize that contextualizing science learning to culture and community will
enhance rural majority and Indigenous early adolescents' science knowledge and
positively strengthen motivation and attitudes toward science. Local community
and Indigenous group members provide expertise that contributes to the design of
the research and the related curriculum as well as the interpretation of the
findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to what
we know about how underserved and underrepresented youth engage in STEM learning
in relation to their world views. This work will help advance the informal
science education field in terms of providing rigorous evidence that can inform
theory on learning and motivation among disadvantaged STEM learners as well as
address practical issues around the design of STEM programs for rural and
Indigenous groups.