* 1223710
* TWC: Phase: Small: Software Cruising for System Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peng Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,745.00

Software bugs and vulnerabilities are primary causes for cyber-security breaches
in today's society. Runtime monitoring, a technique to enforce safety and
security properties at program execution time, is essential to detect intrusions
and keep the system healthy. One of the main obstacles to adopt runtime
monitoring techniques in practice is high performance overhead. Inlined security
monitoring enforcement often delays and blocks the execution of protected
programs. Conventional concurrent runtime monitors have not been able to
leverage the multicore architectures for performance due to synchronization
issues. If conventional synchronization primitives are used, when the monitor is
crashed or blocked due to external events, the protected program will also be
blocked even if the monitor is not monitoring. The goal of this proposal is to
develop an innovative security monitoring technology, called Software Cruising,
to explore multicore architectures for non-blocking concurrent security
monitoring using lock-free data structures and algorithms. Software cruising
eliminates the blocking effect and achieves efficient and scalable security
monitoring. This can result in a game-changing capability in large-scale
security monitoring for both cloud-based and traditional computing systems and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software cruising applications include,
but are not limited to, heap buffer integrity checking, kernel memory cruising,
data structure and object invariant checking, rootkit detection, and information
provenance and flow checking. Three related sets of prototypical
toolkits?Cruiser, Kruiser, and iCruiser?will be developed to demonstrate the
effectiveness and practicality of large-scale software cruising. Cruiser is for
lock-free heap buffer overflow monitoring of user-space programs. Kruiser is for
kernel cruising on OS kernel heap buffer overflows and other security
vulnerabilities. iCruiser is for user- and kernel-space data structure and
object invariant cruising. The proposed research, upon completion, would make
large-scale security monitoring more efficient and scalable in the increasingly
popular multicore architecture and cloud environment, and thus significantly
enhance system security. With the proposed tech transfer effort, applications as
well as OS kernels will have better protection with the deployed software
cruising technology. Broader impacts will also result from the education,
outreach, and dissemination initiatives. Educational resources from this
project, including course modules on software cruising and teaching laboratory
designs, will be incorporated into online courses and disseminated through a
dedicated web site. The project outcomes of this project will be disseminated
broadly through publications, software releases, and technology transfer.