* 1223482
* Provision of Research Vessel at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Stephen Sulkin, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 162,300.00

Western Washington University is awarded a grant to acquire a new research
vessel that provides the Shannon Point Marine Center (SPMC) with the capacity to
process samples from the water column at the site of collection in real time.
The vessel will provide protected laboratory capacity to measure processes in
the plant and animal marine microscopic community, providing a more accurate
picture of the oceanic processes that regulate and drive the productivity of
such systems. This new capacity will greatly expand the scope of the field
research that SPMC can conduct in marine waters and the training in such
processes that can be provided to both undergraduates and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPMC focuses on providing undergraduate with hands-on
training in the most up-to-date field and laboratory investigative techniques
and in actual research experience. SPMC annually provides such training to at
least 18 such students, both from under-represented minority and general student
populations, including community college students. The proposed vessel will
provide an additional source of training to these students recruited from around
the nation. SPMC also operates a Marine Public Education program that translates
research activities to both K-12 and general public audiences in an effort to
improve ocean science literacy. The programs targeting schools and public events
include descriptions of the techniques used and information about the outcomes
of research activities. Issues of water quality, harmful algal bloom ecology and
fisheries productivity are common themes that occupy local discussions of land
and water use. Use of the proposed vessel will enhance the ability to contribute
to such discussions as a source of credible information. For more information
about Shannon Point Marine Center, visit the web site at
http://www.wwu.edu/spmc/.