* 1223361
* QUEST Beyond Local
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Sue Ellen McCann, KQED Inc
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,500,000.00

QUEST Beyond Local is a consortium of six public media providers across the
country coming together in a unique collaborative structure to foster widespread
STEM literacy for general audiences; support formal and informal education
outcomes in the sciences; and revive ailing science and environment journalism
in the face of its rapid decline. QUEST Beyond Local is built on the success of
the local, cross-editorial QUEST model, in which media making professionals from
multiple disciplines--radio, television, web, and especially education--
collaborate to distribute high-quality content to general and underserved
audiences. Two years ago, KQED (serving Northern California) introduced a
capacity-building effort with five other public media stations serving markets
across the nation: Seattle (KCTS), Wisconsin (WPT/WPR), Nebraska (NET),
Cleveland (ideastream), and North Carolina (UNC-TV). On the heels of this pilot
process, QUEST Beyond Local will expand production in all markets and focus its
multimedia efforts around the theme "Science of Sustainability" so as to achieve
maximum effect on critical STEM outcomes in formal and informal education
settings, and to foster science/environment literacy among a wide general
audience.

QUEST Beyond Local is defined by an organizationally and technologically
innovative model of content creation: a newsroom structured according to a hub
and spoke model; with common branding, technical, and style guidelines; and with
a central coordinating and editorial office liaising between local production
teams. Under the guidance of this central office, the collaborative seeks to
create content with both local authority and national relevance. Building on
existing media impact research, and previous research and evaluation of QUEST,
research firm Rockman et al will apply evaluation theory to determine: (1) the
structures and strategies to a successful STEM collaborative that contribute to
a greater understanding of and engagement in science and environment topics; and
(2) determine the interests, priorities, and media consumption habits of local
and national STEM audiences.

Primary project deliverables include three diverse multimedia packages for
general and professional audiences, focusing on three main themes and anchored
in STEM disciplines. In total, the three packages will include: 18 television
segments; 6 half-hour television programs; 20 radio reports; 18 "web extras"
(slide shows, maps, etc.); 12 web-based videos; 144 blog posts; 18 education
"explainers"; 5 educator trainings; and a comprehensive distribution and social
media campaign. All efforts will be supported by at least 18 science community
partners, including zoos, museums, aquariums, research centers, and others.
Through these efforts, the collaborative seeks to repair the systemic damage
done by years of neglect to science/environment journalism--particularly the
marked decline in this type of coverage over the last decade. This decline is
perhaps related to the observed disconnect between the public and scientific
knowledge, despite a demonstrated public appetite for science content and
educators' reported desire for more resources and professional development
opportunities focused on STEM topics. At a time when an evolving workforce and
economy increasingly demand STEM skills and environmental literacy, QUEST Beyond
Local will contribute resources to address these challenges.