* 1223284
* Collaborative Research: SUNY/NYAS STEM Mentoring Program Statewide Scale Up Project
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Phillip Ortiz, SUNY Empire State College
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 639,894.00

The State University of New York (SUNY) and the New York Academy of Sciences
(NYAS) are collaborating to implement the SUNY/NYAS STEM Mentoring Program, a
full scale development project designed to improve the science and math literacy
of middle school youth. Building upon lessons learned through the implementation
of national initiatives such as NSF's Graduate STEM Fellows in K-12 Education
(GK-12) Program, university initiatives such as the UTeach model, and locally-
run programs, this project's goals are to: 1) increase access to high quality,
hands-on STEM programs in informal environments, 2) improve teaching and
outreach skills of scientists in training (graduate and postdoctoral fellows),
and 3) test hypotheses around scalable program elements. Together, SUNY and NYAS
propose to carry out a comprehensive, systemic science education initiative to
recruit graduate students and postdoctoral fellows studying science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines at colleges and universities
statewide to serve as mentors in afterschool programs. SUNY campuses will
partner with a community-based organization (CBO) to place mentors in
afterschool programs serving middle school students in high-need, low-resource
urban and rural communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project deliverables include
a three-credit online graduate course for mentor training, six pilot sites, a
best practices guide, and a model for national dissemination. The online course
will prepare graduate and postdoctoral fellows to spend 12-15 weeks in
afterschool programs, introducing students to life science, earth science,
mathematics and engineering using curriculum modules that are aligned with the
New York State standards. The project design includes three pre-selected sites
(College of Nanoscale Science &amp; Engineering at the University of Albany,
SUNY Institute of Technology, and SUNY Downstate Medical Center) and three
future sites to be selected through a competitive process, each of which will be
paired with a CBO to create a locally designed STEM mentoring program. As a
result, a minimum of 192 mentors will provide informal STEM education to 2,880
middle school students throughout New York State. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
comprehensive, mixed-methods evaluation will address the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Does student participation in an afterschool
model of informal education lead to an increase in STEM content knowledge,
attitudes, self-efficacy, and interest in pursuing further STEM education and
career pathways? &lt;br/&gt;2) Do young scientists who participate in the
program develop effective teaching and mentoring skills, and develop interest in
teaching or mentoring career options that result in STEM retention?
&lt;br/&gt;3) What are the attributes of an effective STEM afterschool program
and the elements of local adaptation and innovation that are necessary to
achieve a successful scale-up to geographically diverse locations? &lt;br/&gt;4)
What is the role of the afterschool model in delivering informal STEM education?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This innovative model includes a commitment to scale
across the 64 SUNY campuses and 122 Councils of the Girl Scouts of the USA, use
an online platform to deliver training, and place scientists-in-training in
informal learning environments. It is hypothesized that as a result of greater
access to STEM education in an informal setting, participating middle school
youth will develop increased levels of STEM content knowledge, self-efficacy,
confidence in STEM learning, and interest in STEM careers. Scientist mentors
will: 1) gain an understanding of the context and characteristics of informal
science education, 2) develop skills in mentoring and interpersonal
communication, 3) learn and apply best practices of inquiry instruction, and 4)
potentially develop interest in teaching as a viable career option. It is
anticipated that the project will add to the research literature in several
areas such as the effectiveness of incentives for graduate students; the design
of mentor support systems; and the structure of pilot site programs in local
communities. Findings and materials from this project will be disseminated
through presentations at local, regional, and national conferences, publications
in peer-reviewed journals focused on informal science education, and briefings
sent to more than 25,000 NYAS members around the world.