* 1223006
* ATD Collaborative Research: New theorems and algorithms for comprehensive analysis of metagenomic data via statistical phylogenetics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Aaron Darling, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 329,998.00

Current whole-metagenome analysis tools are primarily based on sequence
similarity (assembly, BLAST) and taxonomies ("binning" approaches); while
useful, these approaches have the following limitations. Assembly methods
require read overlap and thus only reconstruct the most abundant organisms in a
mixed sample. Sequence similarity approaches such as BLAST cannot relate reads
to ancestral organisms and do not indicate the evolutionary significance of
mutations. Taxonomic methods are too coarse to reflect the subtle DNA sequence
changes that may characterize a biological threat. The investigators propose to
overcome these limitations by developing the theoretical underpinnings of
methods to: reconstruct the cellular compartmentalization of DNA in
environmental samples, even when read counts are small, detect synthetic genomes
and evidence of directed evolution within a metagenomic sample by performing a
phylogenetic comparison with extant genomes, detect combinations of genetic
material that are anomalous given their location or time of observation,
statistically distinguish meaningful shifts in microbial community composition
from noise, even when those shifts happen at a level below that detectable using
currently available methods.

The tools of genetic engineering are in the hands of scientists of many
countries; these tools can be used to synthesize biological weapons. Prevention
of casualties from these weapons depends on their prompt detection and
identification. Although high-throughput DNA sequencing could be used to monitor
biological threats, the currently available tools for analyzing the wealth of
information it generates are insufficient to statistically analyze threat risk.
A biodefense monitoring approach informed by a statistical analysis of
evolutionary signal could yield a means to detect genetic anomalies and threats
directly from "metagenomic" data: high throughput shotgun sequencing data from
environmental samples.