* 1223732
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Single-molecule FRET
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Scott Blanchard, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry award from the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation
supports Dr. Scott Blanchard, from the Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College
of Cornell University, to study a mechanism of translation control whereby
elements typically residing within the 5'-untranslated region of messenger RNA
(mRNA) bind small-molecule metabolites to control gene expression. Such elements
are generally referred to as riboswitch domains. The work includes an
international collaboration with Dr. Ronald Micura, from the Leopold-Franzens
University (Innsbruck, Austria). Dr. Micura's work is supported by the Fonds zur
Forderung der wissenshaftlichen Forschung (FWF) in Austria.

A critical aspect of gene expression in all cells is the translation of mRNA
templates into specific protein molecules that carry out a broad array of
essential life processes. Translation of mRNA is carried out by the ribosome, a
two subunit RNA-protein assembly composed of more than fifty individual gene
products. Control of gene expression at the level of translation, which is
essential to cell survival, can be mediated by numerous mechanisms. The goal of
the research is to understand which specific steps in the translation process
are affected by the riboswitch response to small-molecule binding. To achieve
the goal, the research team will engage a battery of physical and organic
chemistry initiatives that will directly image riboswitch-mediated regulation of
ribosome-catalyzed translation at the single-molecule scale. In so doing, the
team will explore fundamental aspects of the riboswitch regulation mechanism
with a special emphasis on the dynamic properties of the system and how such
features are regulated by ligand/metabolite binding interactions.

The international collaborative research proposed is designed to provide an
opportunity for undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate students from distinct
research programs to receive interdisciplinary training in organic chemistry and
single-molecule fluorescence. This experience will enable the development of new
biophysical approaches and experimental techniques for single-molecule research
that can be generally applied to the imaging of dynamic life processes at the
molecular scale.