* 1223173
* Seeding the Future:   Growing STEM Learning and Interest through Hydroponic Food Production
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* George Barnett, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2015
* USD 249,661.00

This pathways project from Boston College will test the efficacy of an
intergenerational interdisciplinary hydroponics program involving curriculum
development and activities at the Salvation Army's Kroc Center and the STEM
Garden Institute for 4-6th grade youths and seniors. The primary research
includes an examination of the efficacy of intergenerational interdisciplinary
community based research. Additional goals of the hydroponic program include the
examination of the ways in which urban community-based hydroponic programs
foster motivation and self-efficacy, and how well youths and seniors understand
the scientific inquiry process involving technology, economics and plant
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design includes qualitative and
quantitative methods. The project will evaluate the ways in which the
instructors implement the program with youth and seniors. The project will also
evaluate the effectiveness of the technologies associated with plant production
and knowledge acquisition in the area of hydroponics from the development
through the delivery of the plant products to sell at the local Farmer's Market.
Interviews, focus groups and survey will be administered to seniors and youth
throughout the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will disseminate a
science inquiry based instructional guide for informal providers and youth who
are involved with informal science education programs. The guide will focus on
hydroponics with an emphasis on the electromagnetic spectrum, photosynthesis,
pH, and nutrients, and electrical conductivity science concepts. More than
120-150 youth and 200 seniors will participate in the hydroponics program.
Additional materials on the development of economic and business planning will
be developed for the use of planning and setting up a Farmer's Market retail
business. The materials will be available through the Salvation Army's Kroc
Center. The Kroc Center averages 500-1000 visitors per day in addition to the
Center's website, which averages 1200 unique visits per day.