* 1223828
* TWC: Small: Detection and Prevention of Prior Known Software Security Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Tien Nguyen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2017
* USD 479,446.00

Software is a critical element in a wide range of real-world applications.
Attacks against computer software can cause substantial damage to the cyber-
infrastructure of our modern society and economy. In fact, many new software
security vulnerabilities are discovered on a daily basis. Therefore, it is vital
to identify and resolve those security issues as early as possible. This
research aims to investigate a scientific foundation and a novel methodology for
automated detection, prevention, and resolution of prior-known software security
vulnerabilities in software systems. The results will help to detect and prevent
prior-known security vulnerabilities from recurring in other software systems.
In this research, the key philosophy is that the software systems having the
same/similar software security vulnerabilities share the protocols, algorithms,
procedures, libraries, frameworks, modules, or source code with the same flaws,
and they suffer the same/similar exploitation mechanisms. Based on that,
empirical studies are conducted to investigate the nature and the
characteristics of recurring software vulnerabilities in different software
systems, and to validate that hypothesis. Based on the knowledge gained from the
studies, new vulnerability models, representations, and similarity measurements
are developed to capture recurring software security vulnerabilities, and the
corresponding vulnerable code and exploitation mechanisms. Novel algorithms and
techniques are designed to (semi-)automatically build graph-based vulnerability
models from vulnerability reports and from vulnerable code and patches, aiming
to construct a database of prior-known vulnerabilities. A new methodology is
developed to help to identify the prior-known vulnerabilities in other systems
and to suggest the resolution. Specifically, the automated methods and advances
include 1) an algorithm to compare and match against vulnerability models in the
database, 2) a technique to map software concepts between security reports and
from a report to the corresponding source code fragments, modules, or
components; 3) an algorithm to determine the modules and source file locations
in the new system that correspond to the vulnerable modules and locations in a
system with a prior-known vulnerability; and 4) a technique to suggest the patch
to the new system from the prior fixes. In brief, the results of this research
help to resolve early software security vulnerabilities. They will lead to more
reliable software because the process of detecting and patching for recurring
security vulnerabilities will be more efficient and effective.