* 1223634
* SBES TWC: Phase: Small: Protecting the Bazaar: The Ecology of Cybersecurity in Weakly Fortified Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Gary LaFree, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 647,804.00

While policy interest and empirical research on cyber attacks have both
increased substantially in recent years, very little attention has been focused
on the local ecology of actively operating computer networks. In the research
proposed we focus on a bazaar computing environment (i.e. weakly fortified
computer networks where a wide variety of users engage in a range of activities
with minimal security in largely unregulated settings) and seek to answer three
broad research questions: (1) can users within bazaar environments be educated
to engage in less risky on-line behavior? (2) can hackers within bazaar
environments be deterred through available options? and (3) if users can be
educated and hackers can be deterred what is the optimal environment in which IT
management can maximize education of users and deterrence of hackers within
weakly fortified environments? The proposed research represents a collaboration
between criminologists, psychologists, and computer security experts and will
evaluate criminological theories within cyberspace using, in addition to survey
data and experimental design, detailed network and target computer data drawn
from the real time operation of an organization network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;A major goal of this project
is to move toward a new integrated social science perspective on cybercrime. The
pathway to such integration is through the social ecology of a local computing
environment. The research proposed here, which simultaneously examines the
characteristics of users-victims, offenders-hackers and the computing
environment where they interact, will provide a rare opportunity to integrate
these situational components. In addition to providing new insights into
criminology theory, the proposed research will provide detailed information on
the interaction of hackers and users within the context of a weakly fortified
computing environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;We believe
that our ecological approach to cyber security will offer useful insights for
ways of improving online security by identifying those system configurations
that discourage victim behaviors that are especially likely to result in attacks
and deter attackers from malicious activities. Bringing information together
from potential victims and offenders within the world of an operating computer
environment will allow the development of more efficient safety programs and
strategies and has the potential to increase the security of computer systems
and strengthen users' confidence and trust in their systems and the cyber
environment more generally.