* 1223290
* Collaborative Research, Pathways Project: Project SOS - Making Connections Using The Science Of Sustainability
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Katherine Dawes, Palouse Discovery Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2015
* USD 182,998.00

This Pathways Project connects rural, underserved youth and families in Eastern
Washington and Northern Idaho to STEM concepts important in sustainable building
design. The project is a collaboration of the Palouse Discovery Science Center
(Pullman, WA), Washington State University and University of Idaho, working in
partnership with rural community organizations and businesses. The deliverables
include: 1) interactive exhibit prototype activities, 2) a team cooperative
learning problem-solving challenge, and (3) take-home materials to encourage
participants to use what they have learned to investigate ways to make their
homes more energy-efficient and sustainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
introduces youth and families to the traditionally difficult physics concept of
thermal energy, particularly as it relates to sustainable building design.
Participants explore how building materials and their properties can be used to
control all three types of heat transfer: conduction, convection, and radiation.
The interactive exhibit prototypes are coupled with an Energy Efficient
Engineering Challenge in which participants, working in cooperative learning
teams, use information learned from the exhibit prototype activities to retrofit
a model house, improving its energy efficiency. The project components are
piloted at the Palouse Discovery Science Center, and then travel to three
underserved rural/tribal communities in Northern Idaho and Eastern Washington.
Front-end and formative evaluation studies will demonstrate whether this model
advances participant understanding of and interest in STEM topics and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will yield information about ways that other
ISE practitioners can effectively incorporate cooperative learning strategies in
informal settings to improve the transferability of knowledge gained from
exhibits to real-world problem-solving challenges, especially for rural and
underserved audiences. This project will also provide the ISE field with: 1) a
model for increasing the capacity of small, rural science centers to form
collaborative regional networks that draw on previously unused resources in
their communities and provide more effective outreach to the underrepresented
populations they serve, and 2) a model for coupling cooperative learning with
outreach exhibits, providing richer experiences of active engagement.