* 1224437
* FSML:   Walk-up towers for research, education, communication, and outreach at the Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 389,921.00

Harvard University has been awarded a grant to construct two walk-up canopy
towers and tramways for instrumentation at Harvard Forest, a 1,600-hectare field
station for education and research. The towers will: (1) allow researchers,
educators, and students to access canopies of hemlock- and oak-dominated
forests; (2) be equipped with permanent arrays of environmental sensors; (3)
provide a hub for a wireless communications network linking Harvard Forest
research data and facilities to university researchers, K-12 classrooms, and
anyone else who is interested in learning more about forest ecosystems; and (4)
create a "platform-in-the-sky" so visitors to Harvard Forest can learn about
forest ecology from the ground up.

Research in forest canopies is at the frontier of ecological research, and
Harvard Forest is a leader in studies of temperate-forest canopies. These two
canopy towers will: create new opportunities for research and education; enable
data from canopy-based experiments to be streamed onto the Internet in real
time; and forge stronger linkages among existing installations, including: the
25-year-old Harvard Forest Long Term Ecological Research Site; a 25-year-old
Summer Research Program in Ecology; a 35-hectare Smithsonian Institution Global
Earth Observatory forest dynamics plot; and the core site of the Northeast
Domain of the National Ecological Observatory Network. For more information
about Harvard Forest, please see the website at
http://harvardforest.fas.harvard.edu.