* 1224172
* Full-Scale Development: In Defense of Food
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Kiran Kapany, Kikim Media, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,750,000.00

In Defense of Food (IDOF) is a media and outreach project based on Michael
Pollan's best-selling book of the same title. Through the lens of food science,
IDOF is designed to engage diverse audiences in learning about: (1) how science
research is conducted, (2) how research findings are used in media, marketing,
and public policy, and (3) how to apply food science research in everyday life.
IDOF will be created by Kikim Media, an independent production company,
broadcast and distributed by PBS and supported by an extensive outreach campaign
and interactive website. The project's educational materials will be developed,
in part, by the Teacher's College at Columbia University's Center for Food and
Nutrition, with dissemination supported by the Coalition for Science After
School and by Tufts University's Healthy Kids Out of School initiative, which
involves nine of the leading out of school time (OST) organizations, such as
Girl Scouts USA, and the National Urban League. The project advisory committee
includes highly respected researchers in food, nutrition, and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDOF will use an integrated strategy of learning
resources, combining a television documentary with online/social media,
community outreach, and youth activities. Knight Williams Research
Communications will conduct formative and summative evaluation of all major
components of the project. The results will advance the informal science
community's understanding of how the combination of a documentary with outreach,
website/social media, and afterschool activities impacts motivation and
learning. The evaluation study will pay special attention to the degree to which
participation in the community events, social media/website, and afterschool
activities motivates deeper or extended engagement with the subject. Project
evaluation results and educational resources will be widely disseminated to the
informal science community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDOF includes a two-hour
documentary film that will be produced in both English and Spanish; a community-
level outreach campaign focused on reaching underserved audiences who may not
watch public television; a set of activities for use in afterschool programs,
youth programs and schools; and an interactive and content-rich website with
tightly integrated social media tools. IDOF will be nationally broadcast by PBS;
the Spanish-language version of IDOF will be broadcast by Vme Television. The
ambitious IDOF educational materials and outreach campaign, combined with
interactive web and social media, will reach large and diverse audiences. The
intended impacts on audiences include increased knowledge and understanding of
the scientific process by learning what food scientists do, what techniques they
use, and how scientists arrive at their conclusions; the development of critical
thinking skills audiences can use when evaluating messages about food and
nutrition in media and advertising and when making decisions about what food to
buy and eat; and becoming active learners and consumers regarding food.
Evaluation results will be widely disseminated to science media producers and
the informal science community via professional publications and presentations
at conferences. The ultimate value of the In Defense of Food documentary and
learning initiative will be to enhance public understanding of the crucial
importance of science in people's everyday lives and in shaping dozens of daily
decisions.