* 1224158
* INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION IN CHEMISTRY: THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHEMICAL PROBES FOR HOPANOID FUNCTION
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dianne Newman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,997.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award in the Chemistry of
Life Processes (CLP) program in the Division of Chemistry, supports
collaborative work by Professor Dianne K. Newman (Caltech/HHMI) in the United
States, and Professor Stuart Conway (University of Oxford) in the UK, who is
supported by the EPSRC to develop new chemical probes and apply chemical
techniques to investigate the biological function of hopanoids, steroid
surrogates in bacteria. Specifically, they will create probes to be used in in
vitro and in vivo experiments studying the effects of hopanoids on membrane
curvature, their sub-cellular localization and identify their protein binding
partners. Prof. Newman's laboratory has been developing R. palustris into a
model system for the study of hopanoid cell biology for over seven years. She
and her research group bring experience in bacterial physiology, genetics,
biochemistry and cell biology to the project. Prof. Conway's laboratory has been
developing small molecule probes for biological systems for eight years. He
brings experience in synthetic organic chemistry applied to biological problems.
Thus, the expertise of the researchers is complementary and synergistic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal are significant and
range from the interdisciplinary training of postdocs to providing us with key
tools to understand hopanoid cell biology. The investigator at Caltech/HHMI
recruits undergraduate minority students to participate in this project over the
summer to further diversify the scientific community. In addition, both
researchers regularly participate in outreach efforts to the general public.