* 1224217
* Advancing Engineering Education through Virtual Communities of Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Norman Fortenberry, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 592,605.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is creating a virtual
community of practice (VCP) model for professional development that enables
faculty members to gain an understanding of research-based instructional
approaches and to implement them in their classrooms. The VCP approach builds
on: 1) existing face-to-face faculty development models, 2) engaging community
of practice models, and 3) rapidly developing web-based social networking and
content management tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort is using a two-tier
structure; consisting of a first-tier Leadership VCP that is, in turn, training
leaders of second-tier group of Faculty VCPs. The project is conducting two
cycles of Leadership/Faculty VCPs within a two-year period, establishing twelve
Faculty VCPs with 20 to 30 faculty members each. Five VCPs are initially being
established that involve faculty who teach specific introductory engineering
courses (electric circuits, mechanics, thermodynamics, digital logic, and mass
transfer); while a sixth VCP is focusing on the NAE's Frontiers of Engineering
Education (FOEE) members. Each VCP meets weekly using Internet conferencing
software and interacts asynchronously through a web portal. In order to identify
VCP best practices, the project team is developing methods for characterizing
the operation of VCP implementations and for relating the characterizations to
effectiveness and impact. Subsequent topics will focus on specific course areas
or pedagogical approaches that are selected from those proposed by the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific project goals are to: (1) establish
a knowledgeable community of leaders committed to supporting faculty development
VCPs; (2) establish twelve faculty VCPs organized to support participants as
they explore and implement research-based instructional approaches; (3) develop
approximately 300 faculty members that have gained a deeper understanding of
these approaches and have implemented some of them in their courses; and (4)
generate new knowledge about the factors that make VCPs effective and identify a
set of best practices to guide future VCP
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
SIGNIFICANCE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engaging faculty members virtually - over a
sustained period - moves well beyond conventional professional development
models and offers a cost-effective, scalable approach for faculty development.
The project is producing a knowledgeable and skilled community of leaders and
implementers with a deeper understanding of and experience with research-based
instructional approaches. The project is specifically recruiting faculty from
minority serving institutions, including those that are involved as principal
investigators in targeted NSF-funded projects (e.g., HBCU-UP, LSAMP, and
CCLI/TUES). When scaled-up, the VCP approach has the potential to engage large
numbers of faculty members in understanding and implementing engaging, authentic
instructional approaches and, ultimately, will have a significant impact on
classroom teaching practices. Through the involvement of the American Society
for Engineering Education (ASEE), the premier engineering education society, the
project has a significant presence at national engineering education meetings
and is also developing plans to expand the VCP approach to other STEM
communities.