* 1224161
* Building Informal Science Education and Literacy Partnerships: A Collaborative Project of the National Writing Project and the Association of Science-Technology Centers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Elyse Eidman-Aadahl, National Writing Project
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,572,644.00

The National Writing Project (NWP) is collaborating with the Association of
Science-Technology Centers (ASTC) on a four-year, full-scale development project
that is designed to integrate science and literacy. Partnerships will be formed
between NWP sites and ASTC member science centers and museums to develop, test,
and refine innovative programs for educators and youth, resulting in the
creation of a unique learning network. The project highlights the critical need
for the integration of science and literacy and builds on recommendations in the
Common Core State Standards and the National Research Council's publication, "A
Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core
Ideas." The content focus includes current topics in science and technology such
as environmental science, sustainability, synthetic biology, geoengineering, and
other subjects which align with science center research and exhibits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design is supported by a framework that
incorporates a constructivist/inquiry-based approach that capitalizes on the
synergy between rigorous science learning and robust literacy practices. Project
deliverables include a set of 10 local partnership sites, professional
development for network members, a project website, and an evaluation report
highlighting lessons learned. Partnership sites will be selected based on
interest, proximity, history, and expertise. Two geographically and
demographically diverse cohorts, consisting of five partnerships each will be
identified in Years 2 and 3. Each set of partners will be charged with creating
a comprehensive two-year plan for science literacy activities and products to be
implemented at local sites. It is anticipated that the pilot programs may result
in the creation of new programs that merge science and writing, integrate
writing into existing museum science programs, or integrate science activities
into existing NWP programs. Interest-driven youth projects such as citizen
science and science journalism activities are examples of programmatic
approaches that may be adopted. The partners will convene periodically for
planning and professional development focused on the integration of science and
literacy for public and professional audiences, provided in part by national
practitioners and research experts. A network Design Team that includes
leadership representatives from NWP, ASTC, and the project evaluator, Inverness
Research, Inc., will oversee project efforts in conjunction with a national
advisory board, while a Partnership Coordinator will provide support for the
local sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverness Research will conduct a multi-level
evaluation to address the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;-What is the nature and
quality of the local partner arrangements, and the larger network as a
whole?&lt;br/&gt;-What is the nature and quality of the local science literacy
programs that local partners initiate, and how do they engage local
participants, and develop their sense of inquiry and communication
skills?&lt;br/&gt;First, a Designed-Based Implementation Research approach will
be used for the developmental evaluation to assess the implementation process.
Next, the documentation and portrayal phase will assess the benefits to youth,
educators, institutions, and the field using surveys, interviews, observations
of educators, and reviews of science communication efforts created by youth.
Finally, the summative evaluation includes a comprehensive portfolio of evidence
to document the audience impacts and an independent assessment of the project
model by an Evaluation Review Board. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
result in the creation of a robust learning community while contributing
knowledge and lessons learned to the field about networks and innovative
partnerships. It is anticipated that formal and informal educators will gain
increased knowledge about science and literacy programs and develop skills to
provide effective programs, while youth will demonstrate increased understanding
of key science concepts and the ability to communicate science. Programs created
by the local partnerships will serve approximately 650 educators (450 informal
educators and 200 K-12 teachers) and 500 youth ages 9-18. Plans for
dissemination, expansion, and sustainability will be undertaken by the sub-
networks of the collaborating national organizations drawing on the 350 ASTC
member institutions and nearly 200 NWP sites at colleges and universities.