* 1224632
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconfiguring Local Knowledge of Remedies: Hybridity at the Interface of Production and Consumption
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Kathleen DeWalt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 12,596.00

University of Pittsburgh doctoral student, Nora C. Bridges, supervised by Dr.
Kathleen M. DeWalt, will undertake 12 months of field research on how indigenous
people inform and build local knowledge of health remedies in a context of
increasing engagement with diverse outsiders. She will investigate whether and
to what degree local knowledge is a resource through which, 1) health is
maintained, 2) indigenous identity is asserted, and 3) sociality is supported.
It is hypothesized that agility in local knowledge repertoires provides
successful livelihood strategies. This research seeks to examine the
simultaneous roles of innovative production and strategic consumption in the
provision of scarce medical resources in increasingly pluralistic settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out among Indigenous
Amazonians in the Upper Napo of Ecuador. The researcher will document shifts in
local knowledge of remedies shifts across rapidly changing environmental and
socioeconomic contexts. Data collection methods will include structured surveys,
formal elicitation techniques, participatory mapping, home garden inventories,
in-depth semi-structured interviews, participant observation, and document
collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to theories of
local knowledge production in contexts where indigenous curing repertoires co-
exist with market penetration and altered environments. In addition to
theoretical development, this research is intended to help devise a more
sophisticated and nuanced framework to better describe how health decisions are
made and scarce resources are allocated in order to enhance human health
programs, generate recommendations for sustainable livelihoods, and fortify
cultural and biological diversity. Funding this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.