* 1224007
* TWC TTP: Small: Security, Privacy, and Trust for Systems of Coordinating Medical Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Eugene Vasserman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2016
* USD 482,125.00

To lower costs and improve outcomes in current medical practice we need
integrated interoperable medical systems to provide machine-assisted care,
interaction detection, and improved alarm accuracy, to name just a few uses.
This project is developing both the theory and practice to ensure the safety of
next-generation medical devices by allowing secure coordination and composition,
in facilities as small as a local doctor's office or as large as a multi-campus
hospital. Connected devices are part of a "medical coordination platform," which
allows execution of "clinical workflows," such as having a blood pressure cuff
automatically take a reading once an infusion pump stops delivering medication,
or determining in real time whether prescribed medications are contraindicated
by a patient's past health history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such manufacturer- and
integrator-agnostic communication is difficult to bootstrap and perform
securely, but security is required, since networked insecure systems are
fundamentally unsafe. Furthermore, medicine is more complex than many other
domains: security and quality of service properties must hold even environments
where many different people have physical access to devices and communication
infrastructure. Without fully trusting individual components, we must provide
strong resource isolation, patient privacy protection, and real-time trust
reasoning in highly-dynamic, adversarial, and life-critical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We aim for speedy transition to practice by
providing reusable security, privacy, and logging components for existing open
medical application platforms, supporting varying hardware capabilities, laws,
regulations, and facility-local policies, as well as software for pre-deployment
and run-time trustworthiness reasoning about the system and individual devices.