* 1224185
* Water for Life: Community Education for Water Conservation and Rainwater Harvesting in the United States Affiliated Pacific Islands
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Ethan Allen, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,842,492.00

Water for Life (WfL) is a full scale development youth and community based
program; centered on freshwater literacy, water conservation and rainwater
harvesting led by the Pacific Resources for Education Learning (PREL) in Hawaii.
The goals of the project are to: (a) promote an understanding of water
conservation and stewardship in areas lacking adequate quality water supplies
and (b) build local capacity among rural communities to develop and employ site
specific freshwater harvesting strategies proven to improve water quality. Rural
communities within four Pacific Island entities in the U.S. affiliated Freely
Associated States (FAS) will participate in WfL activities. PREL will work
collaboratively with a host of organizations such as the Federated States of
Micronesia National Department of Education, Marshall Islands Conservation
Society, and the Micronesian Conservation Trust, to develop and implement all
phases of the initiative. This work could potentially impact the quality of life
for hundreds of people in the FAS through water conversation education and
improved water quality in local areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working closely
with PREL staff and local water resource managers, a core team of 15-20
individuals, primarily teachers and community leaders, will participate in a 5
day short training course to develop and facilitate onsite and web-based water
conservation and encatchment activities at the four target sites in the FAS.
Three core team members per site will train local implementation teams of
approximately 10 individuals per year (n=160) to redeliver the program and
rainwater encatchment system strategies within their local communities. The
implementation teams will redeliver the program to local youth and community
groups (n=640). In addition, youth and community groups will be given
opportunities to address specific needs through site specific service learning
activities. These activities may vary and might include: new encatchment
systems, repair/upgrade of existing catchment systems, community education of
decontaminated collected or stored water, and groundwater contamination
reduction efforts. Each individual will participate in WfL learning experiences
for a minimum of 24 hours over the course of a year. The experiences of all
project participants will be captured, analyzed, and reported in front-end,
formative, and summative evaluations conducted by David Heil &amp; Associates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project deliverables include: onsite and distance learning
programs, professional development short courses for teachers and community
leaders, and service learning opportunities for community and youth groups. Over
800 individuals will be directly impacted by the project. The results of this
work may be applicable to other remote and rural communities outside of the
Pacific distressed by poor water quality and ineffective freshwater harvesting
systems.