* 1224720
* Geomorphic Response of Glacial Decoupling in Alpine Regions in Response to Climate Warming: Icy Debris Fans and Early Paraglacial Landscape Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* R. Craig Kochel, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2016
* USD 275,552.00

In recent decades, the impacts of climate warming have been especially
significant in alpine glaciated regions. Many valley glaciers have decoupled
from high-level icecaps to expose major escarpments now experiencing rapid mass
wasting by processes dominated by ice, including ice avalanching, rockfalls, icy
debris flows, and slush avalanches. This project will conduct the first detailed
study of a suite of dynamic ice-dominated landforms (here termed icy debris
fans) that are evolving at the base of these escarpments. Previous studies of
deglaciating landscapes, formed during periods known as paraglacial, have
described rapid development of alluvial fans and talus cones, however, the
influence of ice-dominated mass wasting processes on landform evolution has
mostly gone unrecognized. Research will occur at study sites in Alaska and New
Zealand that provide maximum variety of morphogenetic settings and temporal
stages needed to develop an accurate evolutionary model for landforms associated
with icy debris fans. This research will focus on field investigations aimed at
deciphering the depositional processes that form icy debris fans, the influence
of catchment morphometry on fan morphology, and distinguishing sedimentological
characteristics of icy fans compared with similar landforms not dominated by
ice. By using a novel combination of ground-based LiDAR mapping surveys, time-
lapse photography, and remote-control aircraft, we will quantify variations in
the rates and volumes of depositional processes and morphology of fans formed in
different settings through time. Surficial sedimentological data and subsurface
geophysical surveys will document the sedimentary architecture of icy debris
fans. Once integrated, these datasets will yield important constraints on the
formation and evolution of icy debris fans and hold implications for evaluating
landscape evolution through time, including distinguishing the deposits of icy
debris fans from related but more thoroughly studied landforms such as alluvial
fans and talus cones.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent climate warming has had major
impacts on glaciers delivering ice from high-level icecaps to lower elevation
valley glaciers. Warming has resulted in decoupling of many valley glaciers from
their source icecaps, thereby exposing major bedrock escarpments. These
escarpments are highly unstable and characterized by extreme erosional processes
dominated by ice ? such as ice avalanches, icy debris flows, slush avalanches,
and rockfall. Rapidly-forming landforms known as icy debris fans dominate this
newly-forming landscape immediately following deglaciation where hundreds of
catastrophic ice avalanches and icy debris flows are common during summer weeks.
This research directly addresses several key scientific problems linked to
modern global warming and will advance research methods of landform analysis in
rugged alpine environments by developing a novel methodology involving time-
lapse photography, ground-based radar imaging, and remote-controlled aircraft.
Given that icy debris fans are newly discovered landforms, our research holds
promise for providing new perspectives on the nature of landform evolution in
deglaciating alpine environments. The anticipated outcomes will have direct
implications towards improving assessment of geohazards and watershed management
in deglaciating alpine settings. Specifically, results will provide a better
understanding of changes in sediment and water flux downstream, improving our
understanding of hazards and safety in back country areas of national parks in
Alaska and New Zealand. As glaciers continue to melt and thin in alpine
environments, a wide range of glacial hazards are expected to increase,
including rockfalls, breakout floods from ice dams, and ice avalanches. Icy
debris fans will become more prevalent as slopes become increasingly unstable.
Better characterization of the nature and frequency of these poorly understood
processes and landforms will help mitigate the impacts of these hazardous
phenomena that are affecting increasingly larger geographic
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Geomorphology and
Land Use Dynamics Program, NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering, and EAR's Education and Human Resources program.