* 1224183
* The Really Big Questions: Science and the Search for Meaning
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Barinetta Scott, SoundVision Productions
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,201,225.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multiplatform media and science center
project is designed to engage audiences in humanity's deepest questions like the
nature of love, reality, time and death in both scientific and humanistic terms.
Project deliverables include 5 hour-long radio programs for broadcast on NPR
stations, public events/museum exhibits at the Exploratorium in San Francisco,
kiosks in venues throughout the city, and a social media engagement campaign.
The audience of the project is large and diverse using mass media and the
internet. But the project will specifically target young, online, and minority
audiences using various strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
designed to help a diverse audience understand the impact of new scientific
developments as well as the basic science, technology, engineering and math
needed to be responsible, informed citizens. Innovative elements of the project
include the unique format of the radio programs that explore complex topics in
an engaging and compelling way, the visitor engagement strategy at the
Exploratorium, and the social media strategy that reaches niche audiences who
might never listen to the radio broadcasts, but find the podcasts and blogs
engaging. The Exploratorium will be opening a new building in 2013 and will
include exhibits and programs that are testing grounds for this project. This is
a new model that aligns the radio content with exhibitions, social media, and in
person events at the Exploratorium, providing a unique holistic approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to inspire people to think and
talk about science and want to find out more. The evaluation will measure the
impacts on the targeted audiences reached by each of the key delivery methods.
Data will be collected using focus groups; intercept interviews with people in
public places, and longitudinal panels. The focus will be on 5 targeted
audiences (young adults, families with children, non-NPR listeners,
underrepresented minorities, and adults without college experience). This
comprehensive evaluation will likely contribute important knowledge to the field
based on this multiple-platform collaborative model.