* 1224305
* Assessing the Vitality of Arctic Indigenous Languages - Research Development Workshops
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Jim Stotts, Inuit Circumpolar Conference
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 03/31/2013
* USD 174,990.00

The Arctic is a locus of change. Researchers, governments and indigenous
communities are coming together to seek evidence-based responses to ongoing
environmental, cultural, social, political and economic changes. Language
vitality is integrally intertwined with all aspects of changing Arctic
societies. The Assessing the Vitality of Arctic Indigenous Languages research
development workshops establish a platform for an indigenous-led, Arctic state-
supported, and academically anchored circumpolar collaboration seeking to
understand and respond to communities? goals for the future of their languages.

The workshops provide an opportunity for indigenous peoples, academics, policy
makers and practitioners to share what they are already doing in Arctic language
assessment and promotion. Stakeholders will discuss needs, opportunities and
parameters for working together.

The specific workshop objectives are to: 1. Establish a research network for the
assessment of the vitality of Arctic indigenous languages, including
representatives of Arctic states, indigenous peoples? organizations, academic
researchers, language policy-makers, programmers and activists. 2. Develop a
shared, indigenous-driven and academically grounded method (or methods) for
research into the vitality of Arctic indigenous languages, with mechanisms and
protocols for inter-agency and international collaboration. 3. Plan for the
dissemination of reliable and comparable data about the status of all Arctic
languages in a centralized, accessible format; facilitate local, regional, and
international sharing of best practices in addressing Arctic indigenous language
vitality.

The workshops will bridge academic and indigenous discourses and methodologies,
establishing an acceptable research methodology for assessing indigenous
language vitality. Development of shared frameworks and methodologies will lay
the foundation for collection and dissemination of comparable pan-Arctic data,
needed for further comparisons, analysis, and ultimately better understandings
of how communities? goals (e.g. for balanced bilingualism) may best be achieved.
Establishing indigenously driven research collaborations between Arctic
indigenous groups and academic researchers will build the capacity of both to
develop and implement research projects which address the needs of indigenous
communities. Circumpolar collaboration under the auspices of the Arctic Council
and led by the Inuit Circumpolar Council provides insight into how such
international bodies may contribute to language planning for indigenous
languages.