* 1224638
* Developing a Community Information Model and Supporting Software to Extend Interoperability of Sensor and Sample Based Earth Observations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ilya Zaslavsky, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 551,176.00

1224638&lt;br/&gt;Horsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAR Geoinformatics Program
grant supports a two year project to develop a community information model and
related software to enable web based interoperability of earth observations
derived from sensors and samples that span now discrete data and informatics
initiatives for multiple communities. The system would target specific existing
web service data repositories in order to demonstrate how the information model
can support federation of earth observations data across multiple data
publication systems. Specific repositories include the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) Hydrologic
Information System (HIS), EarthChem, the Critical Zone Observatory (CZO)
Integrated Data Management System (CZOData), the Integrated Ocean Observing
System (IOOS) and the Data Observations Network for Earth (DataONE). The plan
calls for collaboration with the related Pis of these projects (through subward
support) to improve capture, sharing, and archival these data and associated
metadata by building ontologies for describing, encoding and publishing data in
common formats to allow interoperability. The plan involves community workshops
to engage stakeholders and students in the design of the model. The model would
incorporate international standards for data description and publishing
utilizing Open Geospataial Consortium standards and domain specific markup
languages. It is hoped that the results will feed directly into the larger
EarthCube cyberinfrastructure initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***