* 1224020
* Collaborative Research: Project STEAM: Integrating Art with Science to Build Science Identities Among Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Laura Conner, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,222,382.00

Abstract: Conner #1224020 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alaska
Fairbanks is partnering with the National Optical and Astronomy Observatory, the
University of Alaska Museum of the North, and the University of Washington-
Bothell to bring optics and biology content to art-interested girls through art-
infused science experiences. This full scale development project, Project STEAM,
is exploring the intersections between biology, physics, and art from the nano
to macro scales. Middle school girls (including Alaska Native, Tohono O'odham,
Pascua Yaqui and Hispanic individuals), their families, teachers, and Girl Scout
Troop Leaders in two site locations (Fairbanks, Alaska and Tucson, Arizona) are
participating in the project. Centered on the theme, "Colors of Nature," project
STEAM will engage girls in science activities designed to enhance STEM learning
and visual-spatial skills. Over the course of the project, 240 girls will
participate in 2-week long summer academies. Another 1,500 girls will be reached
through their Girl Scout Troop Leaders (n=15) who will be trained to deliver a
modified version of the program using specialized curriculum kits. These kits
and associated training will also be offered to K-12 teachers in both locations.
In addition, over 6,000 girls and their families are expected to attend Project
STEAM Science Caf√© events held at local informal science education settings at
each site during the academic year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction with
the programmatic activities, a research investigation is being conducted to
study the impact of the program on girls' science identities. Participant
discourse, pre- and post-assessments, and observed engagement with the
scientific and artistic ideas and tools presented will be examined and analyzed.
A mixed-methods approach will also be employed for the formative and summative
evaluations, which will be conducted by The Goldstream Group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project endeavors to increase STEM learning and
interest through art, build capacity through professional development, advance
the research base on girls' science identities, and inspire and interest girls
in STEM careers.