* 1224220
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Policing the favela: New Brazilian security practices in transnational and local context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Catherine Lutz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 13,432.00

Brown University doctoral candidate Stephanie Savell, supervised by Dr.
Catherine Lutz, will undertake research on the transnational circulation of
security expertise, state authority, and citizenship. International and domestic
security operations are often treated as distinct but frequently military
institutions and overseas deployments may affect domestic policing. The
researcher's goal is to discover if and why it matters for policing and for the
urban poor that security knowledge and practices circulate internationally, and
that the distinct boundaries between police and military are fading.

The research will focus on a Brazilian policing model that employs techniques
refined while leading the United Nations' peacekeeping force in Haiti. Data
collection will be carried out in a Rio de Janeiro shanty town or favela where
police forces are active. She will employ a mix of social science research
methods including interviews, life histories, and participant observation, to
understand how residents, police and military forces, and policymakers operate,
experience, and assess this policing model.

This research is important because it takes a novel ethnographic approach to
studying security, which is more often studied with other social science
methods. Ethnography can shed light on what security means in everyday lives,
highlighting the surprises and contradictions of lived experiences of policing
policy. This is an urgent task in an era when many governments are eager to
implement policies to diminish crime-related urban violence. Moreover, this
study will further our theoretical understandings of state sovereignty, the
interlinking of security and human rights, militarized policing, and the
consequences of this increasingly common type of state authority for
marginalized city residents. Funding this research also supports the education
of a graduate student.