* 1224035
* TWC: Small: Critter@home: Content-Rich Traffic Trace Repository from Real-Time, Anonymous, User Contributions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

There are very few publicly available network traces that contain application-
level data, because of the enormous privacy risk that sharing such data creates.
Application-level data is rich with personal and private information, such as
human names, social security numbers, etc. that criminals can monetize. Yet such
data is necessary for realistic testing of research products, and for
understanding trends in the domain of networking and network
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a publicly accessible,
diverse and fresh archive of content-rich network data, contributed by volunteer
users, called Critter-at-home. Users join the Critter overlay whenever online,
offering their data to interested researchers. Privacy of data contributors is
protected by several means. First, contributors may opt to host their own data
on their machines, thus retaining full control over it. Second, we process
contributed data to modify all personal and private information (PPI) and we
encrypt it. Third, no human apart from the contributor ever accesses the raw,
PPI-sanitized, data. Instead, researchers query the data via our Critter-at-home
framework, and they receive aggregate statistics (counts, distributions, etc.)
of the traffic features they query for. Four, all contact with a contributor is
at her discretion and is done through an anonymous network, where contributor
identities are hidden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archive this project creates
will greatly advance security research by providing necessary data for its
validation and for data mining. This archive will further be valuable to a
broader networking e.g., for realistic traffic generation, as ground truth in
traffic classification, and for many other purposes.