* 1224195
* Mathematical Modeling of Ocular Mechanics, Circulation and Oxygenation and their Relation to Glaucoma
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Julia Arciero, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 275,270.00

Glaucoma is a disease in which the optic nerve is damaged, leading to
progressive, irreversible loss of vision. Glaucoma is the second leading cause
of blindness worldwide and yet its pathogenesis and treatment are not fully
understood. Glaucoma is primarily associated with elevated intraocular pressure
and is treated with interventions that lower this pressure. Paradoxically, it
has been observed that many people develop glaucoma despite relatively low
intraocular pressure and that many people never develop glaucoma despite
elevated intraocular pressure. A link between impaired ocular circulation and
glaucoma has been identified and helps to explain this paradox. It is unclear,
however, if alterations in blood flow are a cause or effect of the retinal cell
death associated with glaucoma. Therefore, the objective of this study is to use
a mathematical model of ocular blood flow regulation and tissue perfusion and
oxygenation to determine whether hemodynamic alterations are primary or
secondary to glaucomatous damage. Specifically, the effects of impaired vascular
regulation mechanisms and elevated intraocular pressure on blood flow will be
compared using model simulations. These effects will be related to model
predictions of tissue oxygenation in order to understand whether impaired ocular
circulation causes cell death or if cell death is the cause of impaired
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will aid the
interpretation of clinical measurements of eye structure and blood flow and
provide insight for new treatment strategies for glaucoma. The non-standard
techniques required to obtain model solutions are active areas of research in
mathematics, and thus this project will provide significant contributions to
both medical and mathematical fields. Moreover, conducting studies in the eye is
of particular importance because it is the only environment in the human body
where blood flow and systemic vascular features can be observed and measured
easily and non-invasively down to a very small level (capillary vessels). These
measurements identify risk indicators not only of glaucoma but also of many
systemic diseases currently diminishing the quality of human life, including
diabetes, hypertension and atherosclerosis. By combining theoretical
interpretations and descriptions of underlying principles of human physiology
with experimental and clinical measurements, this study has a unique potential
to impact the knowledge and treatment of multiple diseases.&lt;br/&gt;