* 1224131
* ISE Pathways: Repurposing Obsolescence: Teaching DIY Science, Technology and Engineering Practices to Adolescents in Underserved Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Garnet Hertz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Neufeld
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

This pathways project will design, develop and test Do-It-Yourself, (DIY),
hands-on workshops to introduce and teach middle school females in underserved
Latino communities computing and design by customizing and repurposing e-waste
media technology, such as old cell phones or appliances -- items found in the
students homes or neighborhoods. The major outcome of the project will be the
creation of a workshop kit that covers the processes of DIY electronics learning
taking place in the workshops for distribution of the curriculum to after school
programs and other informal science venues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have
implemented three pilot projects over the last three years that demonstrate the
ability of hands-on DIY electronics curricula to motivate and encourage students
and to enable them to acquire a deeper understanding of core engineering,
mathematics and science concepts. This project would extend the approach to
underserved Latino youth, particular girls of middle school age. This audience
was identified because of the historically low rate of participation in STEM
fields by people in this group and the particular challenges that females have
in acquiring knowledge in technical STEM areas. The proposal suggests that the
approach of using hands-on workshops that rely on low technical requirements --
essentially obsolete or discarded electronic equipment, primarily from homes of
participants -- will encourage the target audience to experiment with items they
are familiar with and that are culturally relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis of the project is that this approach will lower barriers to
experimenting with "circuit bending" - the hand-modifying of battery-powered
children's toys to build custom electronic instruments and lead to greater
participation and success of females in the target group. The project will
provide free workshops in two neighborhood locations and be supported by
undergraduate student mentors and volunteers and staff of two community groups
that are part of the project, Machine Project and Girls, Inc. Participants will
demonstrate the finished projects to the workshop group, mentors and parents.
Each participant will receive a copy of the workshop handbook in both English
and Spanish to take home so that parents, members of the community and
caregivers can supervise and participate in future projects.