* 1224079
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Regulation of Genetically Modified Seeds in Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Peter Haas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 08/31/2013
* USD 17,640.00

The purpose of this study is to understand how policies regarding the regulation
of genetically modified seeds are made in developing countries. The research is
being conducted to understand the policy options available to developing
countries in managing the opportunities and risks arising from developments in
agricultural biotechnology.

Genetically modified (GM) agricultural seed varieties, which are in use since
1996, promise welfare increases through agricultural productivity enhancement.
Their widespread adaption is advocated as the single best solution to meet the
food demand of a growing world population with finite arable land, and GM
varieties have already completely colonized the seed variety portfolio for
certain important crops in some countries. On the other hand, there are other
countries that went as far as making the release of GM seeds to the environment
a criminal offense, moved by sanitary, environmental, socioeconomic concerns.
While normative arguments dominate the debates, we do not have satisfactory
comparative studies of such dramatically divergent policies, analyzing why they
exist and how they structure the market for seeds, the most essential input for
agriculture.

The intellectual merit of this project is connected with its efforts to fill the
gap in our understanding of these policies. The research will be confined to the
commodity chains of three commercially significant crops - cotton, maize, soy -
and is designed in two levels. First is a structured comparison of five
countries' trajectories from 1996 to the present: Argentina, Brazil, India,
Mexico, and Turkey. The second is the more detailed study of the Argentinean and
Brazilian cases, where these seeds have been used extensively, but with
different approaches to intellectual property rights protection and other policy
challenges involved.

The project should improve our understanding of why developing countries facing
broadly similar international regime and market constraints end up with
different policies for administering the challenge of GM seeds, and whether
these policies have been consequential for the seed market in ways intended by
the policy stakeholders. The research will demonstrate the latitude for policy
variation available to developing countries in the context of a common
international regime (agreements regulating various aspects of GM seeds and food
products) constraining the behavior of countries. It will also venture to
explore the micro-foundations that create the macro behavior observed at the
country level. In Argentina and Brazil, by interviewing various stakeholders
(politicians and bureaucrats, scientists, influential private sector and civil
society representatives) the co-PI will gather data on the considerations and
interests that have played decisive roles in shaping national policy. By
evaluating this information together with public policy documents, industry
reports, studies by agronomic and economic specialists and other secondary
literature the project should improve our understanding of how said
considerations and interests have been served by policy.

The broader impacts are connected with the study of an important policy area
that has not been subjected to scrutiny. The study will enable us to better
understand policy-formation under conditions of complexity and uncertainty, and
contribute to debates in political economy; international environmental
politics; science, technology and society (STS) studies. It will also inform
commercial groups, policy-makers, and monitoring civil society groups interested
in the regulation of agricultural biotechnology.