* 1224624
* Tracking the Process of Data-Driven Decision Making: Exploring the Use of the Instructional Systems of Practice (ISOP) Framework to Transform Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Richard Halverson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 593,844.00

This project is addressing the measurement of instructional practices and
administrative decision-making concerning undergraduate STEM courses. In seeking
to enhance the efficacy of pedagogical reforms, researchers and policymakers
recommend that educators should utilize data-driven decision making (DDDM)
systems. For this to work, the data must be robust, salient to local practice,
and supported by adequate technical and administrative systems. Currently little
is known about the nature of decision-making processes within STEM departments
and pedagogical reform initiatives and this lack of high-quality data about
instructional practice on individual campuses has retarded the use of DDDM at
the postsecondary level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this study are to
collect high quality data on instructional practice, to prepare reports based on
these data for decision makers in higher education, and to subsequently examine
the use of these data in decision making about pedagogical reforms. The core
tool being used is the Instructional Systems of Practice (ISOP) framework. ISOP
was developed as an approach to studying faculty teaching. It is designed to
improve on existing data sources on teaching such as self-report surveys,
unstructured observations, or student ratings. ISOP defines teaching to be a
multi-dimensional practice comprised of course planning, classroom practice, and
student interpretations of teaching efficacy. Classroom practice is studied
using the Teaching Dimensions Observation Protocol (TDOP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM education leaders at three universities are committed
to using the ISOP framework to help guide their decision-making. The
participation of three universities is expected to define in greater detail the
extent to which the ISOP framework can be used to enhance DDDM and efforts to
transform undergraduate STEM education. The study will use of a longitudinal
mixed methods case study design to study decision making and instructional
practice over the course of three years at three research universities with
active STEM education projects. Additionally this project is planning to provide
professional development opportunities to administrators and STEM education
leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ISOP framework is an
innovative multidisciplinary approach that draws on established methodologies
from cognitive science, naturalistic decision-making, and educational research.
It does so in ways that promise to contribute new knowledge about the dynamics
that underlie administrative decision-making and faculty practice, and provide
better methods and measures for use in STEM education research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will determine to what
extent the ISOP framework can be utilized in unique contexts engaged in
undergraduate STEM education initiatives. It has the potential to be of
significant value to researchers, educators and policymakers in the US.