* 1224088
* Pathways:   Large Alternate Reality Games for Education -- Assessing Performance and Play
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jihie Kim, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The University of Southern California (USC) will build on prior work to test a
robust model for assessing player content engagement and social interactions
within an augmented reality game (ARG). In partnership with No Mimes Media, USC
will use machine learning algorithms to make automated player inferences to
customize game play. The content focus of the game will span a range of STEM
disciplines, with a special emphasis on earth science content and scientific
investigation &amp; experimentation reasoning. High school youth from
underserved communities in Los Angeles will be recruited to participate in the
endeavor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pathways project will use various "rabbit
hole" techniques to attract freshmen and sophomore students from partner charter
schools to the online game. The rabbit hole strategies may include cryptic
posters, inquisitive signs, &amp; SQR codes strategically placed in plain and
open view of the target group. The game will be fully accessible to the target
group online. During the ARG experience, youth players will encounter STEM
concepts and scientific problems. Antagonistic characters will promulgate
scientific misconceptions and nonscientific reasoning and challenge players to
employ their scientific knowledge and skills to level-up, gain badges, and move
through the game. As game play persists, machine learning algorithms will gather
data on the players learning competencies and social interactions within the
game. These data will be aggregated and analyzed to assess learning and
interactions within the ARG environment. Additional analyses will be conducted
by the mixed methods approach the external evaluation group, CRESST, will employ
for the project formative and summative
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 300 youth, within the target
grade levels, are expected to participate in the gaming experience. However,
given that access to the game and assessment tools will expand beyond the target
group, the potential reach of the project could be much greater. Further, the
stated aim of the project is not only to produce a scalable model for broad
implementation but it also endeavors to provide puppetmasters with research and
assessment tools to create more individualized experiences and improved learning
outcomes for players within ARG environments.