* 1224637
* Collaborative Research: Talking About Leaving Revisited: Exploring the Contribution of Teaching in Undergraduate Persistence in the Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Elaine Seymour, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,615,849.00

This is a mixed-methods research project to explore what has and has not changed
in the learning experiences of undergraduates in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors since the original study by Elaine
Seymour and Nancy Hewitt, "Talking about Leaving: Why Undergraduates Leave the
Sciences (TAL-1)," published in 1997. The study is focusing on the impact on
student persistence of a variety of factors. This is also the first large scale
investigation of STEM field-switching since TAL-1 across multiple institutions
that are changing teaching practices and forms of student support in
foundational STEM courses. This study is exploring whether and how problems with
the learning experience found to be major contributors to switching decisions
have been addressed at the original sample of seven institutions, and whether
such changes enable more students to graduate in these disciplines. The seven
institutions provide a useful baseline to gauge the extent of changes in the
teaching and learning environment. These seven also represent the full range of
types of higher education institutions providing most STEM undergraduate
education (except for community colleges). Many factors affecting student
decisions are being examined and independent measures of faculty teaching
practices are being made using classroom visits.

The project has three inter-related component studies: (1) a study of STEM
fields-switching patterns based on national and institutional data, (2) a
switcher and non-switcher interview study that replicates and extends the
original research, and (3) a three-part study of instructors teaching
foundational STEM courses using course observation, instructor interviews, and
online surveys of all students in those courses. Ethnographic data will be
gathered from three sources: student interviews, instructor interviews, and
students' write-in responses to the online survey. Instructor interviews will
explore the processes that both enable and constrain uptake of available
evidence-based teaching methods and materials. Structured classroom observation
and recording will be undertaken using the Teaching Dimensions Observational
Protocol (TDOP), and a custom version of the Student Assessment of their
Learning Gains (SALG) online instrument will be administered to all students in
the foundational courses.

Intellectual Merit: Among a number of analytical focal points, the study will
produce multi-level regression analyses to assess how student demographic and
academic characteristics, SALG responses, and course characteristics such as
instructional methods predict the probability of students switching from their
major later in the study. It will identify variables that predict switching, and
the relative weight of individual predictors. These analyses will shed light on
links between particular teaching methods used in foundational STEM courses and
their persistence outcomes in students.

Broader Impacts: The dissemination plan for the last year of the project
includes preparation of research briefs, peer-reviewed and popular articles, and
a book. These will examine issues of persistence in the context of educational
change. Findings will be presented at the seven research sites to audiences that
include deans, directors, and chairs of STEM departments, colleges, and graduate
schools; to funding agencies interested in STEM reform; to current and
prospective STEM doctoral students; to faculty advisors; and to scholars of STEM
education.