* 1224091
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Finding Blight: Code Enforcement in Post-Katrina New Orleans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Sean Mallin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 25,200.00

University of California-Irvine doctoral student Sean Mallin, supervised by Dr.
William M. Maurer, will undertake research on building code enforcement as a
lens through which to observe debates over the meaning of property, recovery,
and community in post-disaster contexts. In particular, Mallin will investigate
the proposition that legal processes tied to code enforcement coalesce with
rebuilding imperatives to enact discourses and understandings of the meaning of
property and ownership. In previous research, it has been observed that some
residents see code enforcement as a welcome mechanism to transfer vacant
properties from less responsible owners who have not rebuilt to those who will
commit to neighborhood recovery. On the other hand, residents still struggling
to return may be more critical of the process in that it appears to turn their
misfortune into a crime. This scenario plays out in post-disaster contexts
throughout the world, which makes the research both timely and
significant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the purposes of this study, Mallin will
conduct 12 months of ethnographic research in post-Katrina New Orleans. New
Orleans is an appropriate site because a local anti-blight campaign has targeted
vacant properties through comprehensive code enforcement and thus the
reconceptualization of property and ownership may be underway. Mallin will
collect data and conduct semi-structured interviews at four sites: the
Department of Code Enforcement, city-run property auctions, an organization
assisting property owners, and in neighborhoods with residents and local
organizations. Mallin will employ a mix of social science methods including
direct observation, participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and
analysis of archival documents and newspaper articles (to provide social and
historical context for contemporary redevelopment activities). These data will
be analyzed to address four overarching research questions: (1) How are
designations of blight made, supported, interpreted, or contested, especially in
relation to Hurricane Katrina? (2) What kind of social, moral, and material
relationships between residents and property are framed through the concepts of
blight and responsible ownership? (3) Do municipal laws and real estate markets
create economic and non-economic values through new categories of property
(blighted or non-blighted)? and (d) Are criteria for social inclusion and
exclusion mediated through categories of property and
ownership?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it
contributes to knowledge about new urban dynamics. Results should also
generalize to other post-disaster contexts such as communities affected by the
current foreclosure crisis and coastal cities anticipating property-related
issues because of climate change, and thus will be of use to planners and policy
makers. Funding this research also supports the education of a graduate student.