* 1224697
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Space in Language, Cognition, and Sociality among Central Quechua Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Joshua Shapero, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 13,293.00

University of Michigan doctoral student Joshua Shapero, supervised by Dr. Bruce
Mannheim, will investigate the connections among language, thought, and space.
Shapero will study how spatial concepts at linguistic and cognitive levels shape
-- and are shaped by -- the social actions of talking about, walking through,
and working within the landscape of a Quechua-speaking community in the central
Peruvian Andes. The goal of the research is to discover the degree to which
spatial concepts can be separated from the individual, environmental, and
stereotypical factors of particular social contexts as opposed to remaining
constant across all contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation uses three
methodological approaches: 1) ethnographic study of the spatial organization of
agricultural, pastoral and ritual activities; 2) recording and analysis of
interactions among speakers engaged in these activities; and 3) controlled
experimental studies of spatial language and behavior. The combination of these
three approaches will yield rich data, because by enlivening current
experimental methods through the insights of ethnographic investigation, the
project points toward ways of testing spatial conceptualization in complex
social settings. The formal description this research will provide, and its
focus on space at a conceptual level, is crucial to understanding the role of
language in the intimate relationship between people and the space they inhabit.
The focus on variation gives analytic purchase to social, linguistic, and
cognitive differences manifest at an interactional rather than cross-linguistic
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the documentation
of Ancash Quechua, which is an endangered language. Shapero will conduct
workshops in linguistic and ethnographic methods at the Regional Academy of
Ancash Quechua and at the program in intercultural education at the National
University Santiago Antunez de Mayolo, and will help to develop pedagogical
materials in Ancash Quechua. He will also disseminate his findings and offer his
expertise to local community members. The project will also contribute to the
training of a graduate student.