* 1224111
* Integrating Informal STEM and Arts-Based Learning to Foster Innovation
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Jessica Luke, Balboa Park Cultural Partnership
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,852,211.00

The Balboa Park Cultural Partnership, in collaboration with several informal
science education and other cultural and business organizations in San Diego,
Chicago, and Worcester, MA are implementing a research and development project
that investigates a range of possible approaches for stimulating the development
of 21st Century creativity skills and innovative processes at the interface
between informal STEM learning and methods for creative thinking. The goal of
the research is to advance understanding of the potential impacts of creative
thinking methods on the public's understanding of and engagement with STEM, with
a focus on 21st Century workforce skills of teens and adults. The goal of the
project's development activities is to experiment with a variety of "innovation
incubator" models in cities around the country. Modeled on business "incubators"
or "accelerators" that are designed to foster and accelerate innovation and
creativity, these STEM incubators generate collaborations of different
professionals and the public around STEM education and other STEM-related topics
of local interest that can be explored with the help of creative learning
methodologies such as innovative methods to generate creative ideas, ideas for
transforming one STEM idea to others, drawing on visual and graphical ideas,
improvisation, narrative writing, and the process of using innovative visual
displays of information for creating visual roadmaps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hosting the project's incubators are the Balboa Park
Cultural Partnership (San Diego), the Museum of Science and Industry (Chicago)
and the EcoTarium (Worcester, MA). National partners are the Association of
Science-Technology Centers, the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, and the Americans for the Arts. Activities will include: the formation
and collaborative processes of three incubator sites, a research study, the
development of a creative thinking curriculum infused into science education,
professional development based on the curriculum, public engagement events and
exhibits, a project website and tools for social networking, and project
evaluation. A national advisory council includes professionals in education,
science, creativity, and business.