* 1224488
* Science Education for New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Catherine Middlecamp, HARRISBURG UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/2016
* USD 3,499,813.00

In this project the National Center for Science and Civic Engagement (NCSCE) is
continuing to catalyze and sustain pedagogical and curricular transformation on
a large scale through its Science Education for New Civic Engagements and
Responsibilities (SENCER) Program. It is building on prior results and
accomplishments in empowering educators to help students in American colleges
employ focused and connected learning in the science, mathematics, engineering,
and technology (STEM) disciplines to engage with important issues facing our
democracy. A key goal of this project is to expand SENCER's community of
practice to achieve a transformative "tipping point" in undergraduate STEM
instruction and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SENCER models apply an "outside
- in" approach from the science of learning to the learning of science, framing
STEM learning within compelling civic challenges. The intellectual merit of this
effort consists in empowering educators to help students in American colleges
employ focused learning in the STEM disciplines to engage with great issues
facing our democracy. The broader impacts of this project include strengthening
our democracy by enhancing the scientific and technological literacy of the
American people supporting civic engagement, and sustaining a program that helps
achieve these important goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five goals define the reach
of this 4-year project: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Expand participation in the
SENCER Program to reach transformative scale by involving faculty teams from
more than 20% of US colleges and universities in national and regional programs
in new course and program design, active learning pedagogies, and civic
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;2. Increase the intensity and scope of follow-up
activities to institutionalize reforms by organizing intensive implementation
webinars, linked-in discussion groups, and deploying leadership fellow "co-
mentors" to strengthen implementation outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;3. Disseminate
scholarship, materials, and other resources to strengthen connections with the
wider education community by mounting a "models to materials" initiative to
populate the SENCER digital library collection with easy-to-adapt and use
collections of course materials, labs, assessments, civic engagement projects,
and related resources.&lt;br/&gt;4. Broaden assessment to measure and promote
enduring understandings by collaborating with the College Board to enable
targeted assessment (connected to the disciplines in which SENCER courses are
taught) that measures learning of unifying scientific concepts, science
practices, and issues involving science, technology and society. &lt;br/&gt;5.
Engage in formal planning to assure sustainability, leadership succession, and
growth by designing and implementing a multi-phased sustainability plan. The
plan includes strategies and mechanisms for program development, finance,
governance, leadership succession, and acquisition of intramural and extramural
support to grow a robust community of reformers well after NSF funding has
ceased.