* 1224933
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  The Political Economy of Decline
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Erik Wibbels, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2014
* USD 16,602.00

The process of deindustrialization has swept large swaths of America's
manufacturing heartland and many other advanced economies. Historically,
industrial production clustered by location, creating one-industry cities and
regions. In many of these places, manufacturing employment has dropped
significantly as industrial production has moved elsewhere and economies have
shifted toward the service sector. This has had a major impact on many cities
around the world, which face high unemployment and poverty rates. Declining
firms and local politicians in such places clamor for government support. Yet
that support is easier to find in some settings than others. While the current
literature on subsidies focuses almost exclusively on national-level price
distortions, this research looks at the causes and effects of subsidies and
other forms of government aid at the city level, where failing industries can
have their biggest political and economic impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will bridge the gap between research on the provision and effects of
government protection -- both why some firms receive support while others do not
and the impact of such protection on the incentives of firms to innovate. By
doing a comparative study on the provision and effects of government support,
the research will show how governmental involvement works as a brake or an
accelerator for economic decline in regions that house concentrated industries.
These findings have important implications in a world where deindustrialization
is rife and old industrial areas face the constant challenge of reinventing
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three parts. First, the
researchers will examine the relationship between subsidies and geographically
concentrated industries using a quantitative analysis of firm-level data across
countries. The researchers will supplement this quantitative empirical work with
more nuanced cross-national case studies. The first will be a comparative study
of the auto industry in three different electoral systems: the US, the UK and
Germany. The auto industry's relatively concentrated production in these three
countries allows the researchers to hold economic concentration constant while
varying politicians' responsiveness to the industry. The second case study will
utilize the change in New Zealand's electoral system. By switching from an
electoral system where politicians care about geographic interests to a system
where politicians care about national constituencies, the researcher can examine
how different electoral systems affect firm and politician behavior in a
national context where the geography of industrial production has not changed.
Finally, the last part of my research links the provision of subsidies to their
effects on industries and local economies. The researchers expect firms that
receive subsidies to decrease innovation at the expense of rent-seeking. They
will combine an examination of the link between subsidies and levels of
innovation using firm-level data from around the world with a more detailed use
of micro-data within the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
expect this research to have important implication for our understanding of why
government support is allocated to some firms and not others. Equally important,
the researchers expect it to provide important insight into why some post-
industrial cities and regions are able to make the transition to new, knowledge-
based economies fairly easily, while others remain stuck in protracted economic
decline.