* 1224151
* Full-Scale Development: Ciencia Publica: Co-Creating Public Outdoor Learning Spaces with Latino Communities
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Veronica Garcia-Luis, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 09/30/2015
* USD 525,000.00

The Exploratorium, in collaboration with the Boys and Girls Club Columbia Park
(BGC) in the Mission District of San Francisco, is implementing a two-year
exploratory project designed to support informal education in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) within underserved Latino
communities. Building off of and expanding on non-STEM-related efforts in a few
major U.S. cities and Europe, the Exploratorium, BGC, and residents of the
District will engage in a STEM exhibit and program co-development process that
will physically convert metered parking spaces in front of the Club into
transformative public places called "parklets." The BGC parklet will feature
interactive, bilingual science and technology exhibits, programs and events
targeting audiences including youth ages 8 - 17 and intergenerational families
and groups primarily in the Mission District and users of the BGC. Parklet
exhibits and programs will focus on STEM content related to "Observing the Urban
Environment," with a focus on community sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project explores one approach to working with and engaging the public in their
everyday environment with relevant STEM learning experiences. The development
and evaluation processes are being positioned as a model for possible expansion
throughout the city and to other cities.