* 1224102
* Green Accessibility: Measuring the Environmental Costs of Space-Time Prisms in Sustainable Transportation Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Harvey Miller, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2014
* USD 474,801.00

This project focuses on estimating the environmental cost of transportation-
based accessibility. Accessibility is a central concept in transportation
science, planning, and engineering. Accessibility refers to an individual's
potential mobility and interactivity within a given geographic setting using
transportation and communications technologies. Transportation scientists,
planners, and engineers have a well-developed theory and methodology for
measuring transportation-based accessibility: the space-time prism (STP), which
is the envelope of an individual's possible travel paths between two geographic
locations given limits on available time and travel speeds. The STP measures how
well a transportation system provides mobility options that connect people to
places they might want to go. Scholars have not considered the environmental
costs of this potential mobility, however. Estimating the resource cost of
actual mobility involves monitoring the resource consumption and/or emissions of
a vehicle as it moves through geographic space. Calculating the environmental
costs of a STP is difficult, however, because there are many potential paths,
but only one will actually occur. This research project will extend the STP to
include the environmental costs of accessibility. The investigators will improve
theoretical understanding of the STP by developing methods for estimating the
distribution of potential paths within the prism interior. They will develop
practical measures of expected mobility costs for prisms in both continuous
space and transportation networks, and they will evaluate the expected cost
measures using empirical mobility data. They will develop geographic information
system (GIS) software for applying prism benefit/cost measures in transportation
planning and project evaluation, including a usability evaluation involving
practicing transportation planners. Finally, they will create a framework for
deploying STP cost/benefit measures in federally mandated transportation
planning documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will substantially advance
scientific knowledge about human accessibility, a fundamental concept in
transportation science, planning, and engineering as well as in other social and
behavioral sciences. This interdisciplinary project will link fundamental
concepts in the human sciences (accessibility) and physical science and
engineering (resource consumption and waste emissions) with modern
transportation planning practice, creating new transdisciplinary opportunities.
Graduate and undergraduate students from geography, urban planning, and
transportation engineering will be engaged in research that is relevant to basic
scientific understanding as well as to a critical, real-world problem. The
project will have potentially transformative effects on transportation as well
as urban and sustainability science and planning. The extension of accessibility
theory to environmental science will challenge the assumption in transportation
science and planning that greater accessibility is a generally unmitigated
benefit to individuals and society, thereby helping generate more nuanced and
sophisticated approaches to the analysis, planning, and management of complex
human-physical systems like transportation and cities.