* 1224051
* OUTSIDE: Over Under and Through: Students Informally Discover the Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Aimee Thomas, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,001.00

This PATHWAYS project, OUTSIDE: Over Under and Through, Students Informally
Discover the Environment, is a descriptive study focusing on an informal
environmental education program for underrepresented middle school students in
Mississippi. The project is a collaboration between the University of Southern
Mississippi's Biological Sciences Learning Center, the Lake Thoreau
Environmental Center, the Mississippi Museum of Natural Science, and the
Hattiesburg Public School District. The partners will develop a training program
for volunteer naturalists and, using an ethnographic approach, capture patterns
in learning and interactions among the students and naturalists. They will
answer the following research questions: 1) In what ways do students interact
with naturalists, nature, and technology supplements while participating in
OUTSIDE informal environmental programs? and 2) What are students' ideas about
the environment and environmental awareness? Deliverables will include rich
descriptions of participant experiences during the program; identification of
environmental factors that may influence learning; a Beta version of the etrek
app to supplement learning; a curriculum plan for post-secondary students and
teachers; publications and presentations focused on research findings within
broader review of literature and programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OUTSIDE will
help advance the informal science education (ISE) field by providing empirical
support for pedagogical decision making among environmental educators who work
with underrepresented and underserved STEM learners in high needs communities;
offering insight into how ISE professionals can leverage local resources and
embed sustainability in project designs; and developing technology that can
serve a broader community.