* 1224100
* TWC: Small: Understanding and Defending Against Crowdsourced Online Identities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Ben Zhao, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 510,743.00

Remarkable things can be achieved by harnessing power of the masses. By breaking
down tasks and distributing to users, "crowdsourcing" systems can accomplish
complex tasks such as translating books or creating 3D photo tours.
Unfortunately, the opposite also holds: misuse of these systems creates powerful
tools that can compromise the security of online communities, since today's
security mechanisms focus on defending against automated scripts and fake
accounts, but not real users.

In a malicious crowdsourcing system, customers initiate campaigns, and workers
are paid for tasks such as creating Facebook accounts, posting fake Yelp
reviews, or starting rumors on Twitter, with results indistinguishable from
those of normal users. This type of malicious activity is called crowdturfing,
because of its similarity to both crowd-sourcing systems and "astroturfing." The
PIs have already found example sites today, and early measurements show some
that generate over $1Million in annual revenue, while growing exponentially in
users and revenue.

This project studies crowdturfing systems in detail via measurements and
experiments, and use those results to develop robust defenses against them.
Measurements and interviews will be used to study their support structure and
incentives; develop endhost-based techniques to mark their results and economic
solutions that reduce incentives for customers and workers; and build effective
detection systems that identify crowdturfing in different domains using per-user
behavioral models.

This work can change the way we view security in online communities, and its
results can guide the deployment of new protection mechanisms that target
crowdsourced fake user accounts and activities.