* 1224553
* The Role of Interpersonal Processes in the Interpretation of Uncertainty Terms
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Thomas Holtgraves, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 165,000.00

Language is an imperfect medium for communication, and although this quality can
be exploited for positive effect (e.g., poetry), it can also result in
communicative misunderstandings. What the current project seeks to provide is an
in-depth analysis of words that are likely to be a prime source of
misunderstanding: uncertainty terms. Uncertainty terms are words that are not
fixed and include probability words (possible, likely), quantifiers (some, all),
frequency terms (often, frequently), preference terms (like, love), and terms of
evaluation (good, excellent). Because they are not fixed, these types of words
can admit a range of interpretations. Hence understanding what people intend to
convey when they use an uncertainty term, and how people interpret another's use
of an uncertainty term, is critical for understanding human communication and
miscommunication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of the proposed
research is to develop and test a comprehensive account of the role played by
interpersonal processes in the production and interpretation of a group of
uncertainty terms. A series of experiments is planned that will: (1) examine how
people interpret and process uncertainty terms in an attempt to uncover basic
interpretive principles involved in their use, (2) explore the production of
uncertainty terms and the possibility that speakers and recipients may sometimes
fail to coordinate in their use of uncertainty terms, (3) extend the analysis to
interpersonal variables such as power and examine the impact of these variables
on the interpretation of uncertainty terms, and (4) apply the analysis to the
manner in which people interpret uncertainty terms in self-report measures. The
results of this project will help advance social psychological theories of
social communication as well as cognitive theories of language comprehension and
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact, the proposed
research will contribute to the training of several graduate and undergraduate
students and improve the research climate at the PI's home institution. Students
who participate in this project will be extensively trained and participate in
all facets of the research process. In addition, the results will have practical
implication by bringing to light interpersonal processes that influence how
people interpret, and misinterpret, uncertainty terms. Uncertainty terms appear
frequently in communications with important and far-reaching consequences such
as the description of subjective experience (e.g., pain assessment in a medical
setting), conveying estimates of risk (e.g., financial, environmental), and
self-report instruments in general. Hence, the potential impact of the results
of the proposed research is extensive.