* 1224362
* Understanding stochasticity in cancer recurrence timing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jasmine Foo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 278,000.00

Mutation-induced drug resistance represents a major obstacle in cancer treatment
and often causes the failure of therapies and tumor recurrence. The time at
which cancer recurrence occurs (i.e., survival benefit of therapy) is governed
by a complex balance between many factors such as initial tumor size, mutation
rates, the type/number of resistance mechanisms, and drug efficacy and schedule.
This research aims to develop a comprehensive mathematical understanding of how
these factors conspire to control the temporal dynamics of the evolutionary
processes driving cancer recurrence, using branching process models of tumor
growth. The first part of the work will focus on developing a detailed
understanding of the temporal dynamics of cancer recurrence, under the basic
assumptions that tumor cell populations are ?well-mixed? in a constant selective
environment. The analysis will characterize both mean dynamics and fluctuations
in the system due to both demographic stochasticity and random mutational
fitness changes. In the second part of the work, the investigators will relax
these basic assumptions to quantify and compare the effects of additional
factors that may significantly impact recurrence dynamics. These additional
factors include temporally varying selective environments, spatial structure and
inhomogeneity, and hierarchical population structure. All of these
investigations will be performed using stochastic process models of escape from
extinction, and both analytical and computational tools will be utilized to
study recurrence dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to a
better understanding of the mechanisms driving variability in patterns of cancer
progression following acquired resistance to treatment. The results can
eventually aid in the development of better statistical tools for prognosis,
evaluating drug efficacy, and improving treatment strategies. For example, an
understanding of how the timing of cancer recurrence reveals information about
the composition or prior genetic history of the tumor can aid in determining
optimal treatment strategies post-recurrence. In addition, this project will
contribute to a general mathematical understanding of the dynamics of escape
from population extinction. Thus, the theory developed will be broadly
applicable, with minimal extension, to understanding similar issues in
evolution, health (e.g. bacterial and viral drug resistance), and ecology. This
project will support for trainees at the undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels in research at the interface of mathematics, biology, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;