* 1224939
* Intracellular metal pumping in microbial excavation by microbes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ferran Garcia-Pichel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,861.00

Cyanobacteria are among the most common, widespread and environmentally
significant agents of bio-erosion, boring microscopic galleries as they grow
within carbonate substrates. The mechanisms by which they achieve this against
chemical equilibrium are poorly known. Our work showed that boring is likely
driven by the action of membrane-bound Ca2+ transporting ATPases, powered
directly by photosynthetically derived ATP, acting to maintain the levels of
free Ca2+ in the interstitial space of the distal borehole very low, a situation
that promotes local calcite dissolution, with Ca2+ then travelling intra-
cellularly down a concentration gradient in the filament to be released into the
outside medium. We intend here to advance our understanding of the boring
mechanism at the molecular, genetic and cellular level and to test its
universality, by probing its variability in essence or detail with respect to
microbial agents other than the models previously used, and for mineral
substrates other than CaCO3. We will achieve this through genetic and cellular
characterization of the Ca2+ transport systems, molecular biology techniques and
micro-imaging techniques based on confocal microscopy of model microbes. We will
also interrogate natural complex communities of boring microorganims from a
variety of geographic and mineralogical settings (limestones, dolostones and
biogenic carbonates) for their compliance with the Ca2+-transport mechanism.
Finally, renewed efforts of cultivation will be used to address the mysterious
excavation of phosphates, dolomite, and magnesite, a capacity that model
microbes lacks, but is assumed to take place in nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moving from descriptive to mechanistic models of
understanding, as this work will attempt, remains one of the frontiers of
geobiology. The research will attempt to ascertain the exact mechanisms by which
microbes can use the energy from the sun to power dissolving minerals like
limestone, when geochemistry would predict they should not dissolve at all. This
knowledge would offer the potential to explain several biological and geological
phenomena of widespread importance. For example, it will involve the study of
physiology of calcium transport, the same phenomenon that drives muscle movement
in humans, in a very different setting. It may also contribute to our ability to
predict the consequences of global acidification of the oceans with respect to
coastal limestone dissolution. It will contribute basic knowledge with potential
applications in biomaterial science, potentially even providing a means for
combating calcification in engineered systems, or for deterring the bio-
deterioration of buildings and monuments. The research will be intricately
embedded with activities in education, training, dissemination and outreach.