* 1224098
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Defining and Evaluating States' Obligations to Eliminate Racial Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Joshua Clark, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2013
* USD 24,891.00

This project will analyze how accountability procedures of the United Nations
human rights treaty system are carried out in practice. Even those states that
cooperate with accountability requirements never fully meet their treaty
obligations. By studying three groups of Costa Rican government officials and a
UN expert committee as each formally evaluates progress towards implementing the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the researcher will be able to compare responsible parties?
interpretations of obligations within the Convention?s broad
norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By engaging in direct observation, semi-structured
interviews, and participant observation, the researcher will investigate how
officials within a country use census data, other government records, and public
consultations to construct a report on discrimination against indigenous, Afro-
Costa Rican, and immigrant populations. The researcher will also observe the UN
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination as it evaluates such state
reports. The study will analyze these Costa Rican and UN officials?
deliberations over questions of evidence and treaty interpretation, focusing in
particular on how they understand the scope of the term ?discrimination,? and
the bounds of states? responsibilities to combat
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this project will contribute to practical
knowledge of treaty implementation processes. Existing macro-level analyses of
human rights treaties attribute unfulfilled obligations to weak enforcement and
uncooperative states. By analyzing the process at a different level, this
project will open the way toward explanations based in norm ambiguity and
interpretation. Its novel approach will generate findings that are valuable to
ongoing efforts to improve the human rights treaty accountability system. This
project will also support the training of a social scientist.