* 1224063
* Virtual Faculty Workshops on TUES Project Development and Implementation
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 03/31/2017
* USD 552,455.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION

This Central Resource Project seeks to develop a virtual web-based framework to
better prepare current and future TUES principal investigators in the
development, implementation, evaluation and dissemination of their projects. The
project builds upon the Interactive Web-Based Workshop (IWBW) model developed
and used extensively by engineering and computer science NSF Program Directors
(PDs) to provide professional development for engineering and computer sciences
faculty. Five workshops that have already been tested are being refined for use
across other STEM disciplines (these include: Introduction to the TUES Program;
Proposal Writing Strategies; Project Evaluation; Making an Impact: Building
Transportable Projects; and Broader Impacts and Project Evaluation). Three other
topics are also are being considered for future development, including: faculty
development for dissemination, project transportability and dissemination, and
increasing participation of underrepresented groups.

Each of the Interactive Web-Based Workshops (IWBWs) is 90 minutes long and is
being offered multiple times over the course of the two-year project. The
workshop sessions are evenly distributed throughout the combined Spring 2013,
Fall 2013, and Spring 2014 timeframe. Each workshop involves pre- and post-
assignments, discussion communities as well as Q&A opportunities with current
NSF PDs during the on-line sessions. The materials for the workshops are being
developed by the project team, in collaboration with former and current NSF PDs
and leaders in STEM undergraduate education and evaluation.

The project is specifically helping TUES grantees and other science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty at colleges and universities
(including community colleges) to better understand how they can: 1) improve
existing NSF TUES undergraduate STEM education projects, 2) work with an
evaluator to plan and implement effective evaluations that document the impacts
of TUES projects, 3) design educational research and development projects with
broad impact; including faculty change, dissemination and broadening
participation, and 4) develop, create and implement TUES-specific or other
undergraduate STEM education projects.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE

This project is engaging the more than 750 current NSF TUES-funded projects,
which represent about 379 institutions, as well as additional faculty members
who intend to submit TUES proposals. Special efforts are being conducted to
engage STEM faculty from community colleges and from minority-serving
institutions (MSIs). Colleges and universities (as well as individual faculty)
can participate in one or more workshops - but are being strongly encouraged to
participate in all 8 workshops.

The specific resources and products being developed by this project include:
eight virtual workshops focused on TUES project development, implementation, and
evaluation; a project website, hosting IWBW descriptions and presenters,
resources, evaluation instruments, registration, and other project related
information; ten on-going virtual focus groups (PI Forums) organized during the
TUES PI Conference and facilitated by the project to discuss specific STEM
education topics; and an online monthly electronic TUES newsletter, including
announcements from projects that are recruiting collaborators, field test sites,
or faculty workshop participants.