* 1225647
* The Role of Decaying Inhibition in Forced Networks of Neurons
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Nancy Kopell, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 525,001.00

Forced networks of oscillating neurons are ubiquitous in the nervous system.
Although forced unitary oscillators have been heavily studied, there are very
few studies of the effects of periodic forcing on networks of oscillators with
multiple internal degrees of freedom. Understanding such systems is an essential
step in understanding how the brain makes use of its rhythmic dynamics to
communicate signals among regions. The networks in this project have an almost
universal property of networks of neurons: there is exponentially decaying
inhibition that feeds back to the excitatory cells of the network. In these
projects, the decaying nature of the inhibition is important for the emergence
of lower-dimensional dynamics and the ability to produce and analyze simplified
models of network phenomena. The initial three subprojects concern noise,
multiple periodic inputs, and intrinsic currents providing extra timescales that
interact with periodic forcing. The work will relate the properties of network
interaction, such as the decaying inhibition, to geometric ideas of invariant
manifold theory. The aim is to produce a level of mathematical clarity that is
not generally a part of initial modeling work, and to expand the set of tools
and concepts available for further study of forced networks. The project focuses
on networks producing gamma (30-80 Hz) oscillations and beta (12-30 Hz)
oscillations, with physiological descriptions of the neurons appropriate to
those rhythms.

The dynamics of the nervous system are central to cognitive function, but how
the brain makes use of its dynamics is barely beginning to be understood.
Rhythms of the nervous system have long been known to be highly associated with
cognitive processes including sensory coding, attention, learning, memory, and
motor planning. The study of such rhythms, and their use in brain communication,
is an excellent bridge between physiology and function. This project deals with
the response of networks of neurons to periodic and other input, as would be
seen from signals arriving from other parts of the brain. The purpose of the
project is to understand how brain networks process their temporally and
spatially coded inputs. This work is being done in the context of a broad
initiative to study the origin and significance of brain rhythms. Kopell is the
founder and current head of the Cognitive Rhythms Collaborative, a group of over
two dozen Boston-based senior investigators interested in the physiological and
dynamical mechanisms of neural activity, their importance in cognition, and
their pathology in neurological diseases including schizophrenia, Parkinson's
disease and epilepsy, as well as their changes in anesthesia; it includes
experimentalists working in vivo and in vitro, mathematicians, statisticians and
medical personnel, who are already incorporating ideas from the mathematical
research into clinical practice.