* 1225601
* Stochastic Models of HIV Escape from CTL Attack
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sivan Leviyang, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 124,998.00

During HIV infection, cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), a type of immune system
cell, exert selective pressure on the HIV population through attack at multiple
epitopes. Several recent datasets demonstrate that CTL attack can occur
simultaneously at multiple epitopes, and that HIV escapes such attack through
multiple mutation pathways that lead to rapid selective sweeps of mutant
variants. However, HIV escape dynamics from CTL attack and the effect of such
attack on HIV genetic diversity are not well understood. Current models of HIV
escape from CTL attack typically involve deterministic dynamical systems that
model CTL selection but not HIV mutation. In a different context, HIV genetic
diversity is often explored through phylogeny construction using evolutionary
models that include mutation but not CTL mediated selection. This project
bridges these two approaches by developing stochastic birth-death models that
include both CTL attack and HIV mutation. Using such models as a basis, this
project involves construction of mathematical and computational tools through
which the effect of CTL attack on HIV genetic diversity can be explored.
Further, novel statistical methods and algorithms will be developed to infer HIV
escape dynamics under multi-epitope CTL attack by exploiting both population
dynamics and genetic sequence data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs) are immune system cells thought to play a central role in controlling HIV
infection. CTLs kill cells infected by HIV, but HIV escapes this attack through
mutation. HIV escape from CTL attack is complex as CTLs mount many simultaneous
attacks while the HIV population escapes through many different mutations.
Currently we do not have a quantitative understanding of HIV escape from CTL
attack, especially in the context of multiple, simultaneous CTL attacks. One
reason for this is that current mathematical and statistical techniques
typically fully model either CTL attack or HIV mutation, not both. This project
will develop mathematical, statistical, and computational tools for
understanding HIV escape by bridging existing approaches that consider CTL
attack with those that consider HIV mutation. Using these newly developed tools,
HIV escape will be quantitatively explored through data-based inference and
theoretical analysis. A quantitative description of HIV escape from CTL attack
is useful in understanding the role of the immune system in controlling HIV
infection and, potentially, in designing vaccines. Further, lessons learned from
HIV may be transferred to the numerous other viruses exposed to CTL
attack.&lt;br/&gt;