* 1225654
* Type 2 Collaborative Project: Integrating Testing into Advanced CS/IT Courses Supported by a Cyberlearning Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Yujian Fu, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2016
* USD 78,425.00

Ensuring the quality of software systems in the 21st Century requires an
improved pedagogical approach to teaching software testing that exploits the
cyberinfrastructure currently accessible to academic institutions and the social
networking inclinations of our students. Two main factors highlight the need to
provide students in the computing disciplines with greater access to learning
materials on software testing: the high cost associated with the production of
software systems that contain errors and the need to adequately train future
software engineers and computer programmers since these occupations are
projected to increase by 21% from 2008 to 2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is creating new cyberlearning materials on software testing and
improving faculty expertise in the knowledge and use of software testing
techniques and tools by: (1) creating a cyberlearning environment (WReSTT ? Web-
based Repository of Software Testing Tutorials) that provides students and
instructors with access to tutorials on software testing concepts and tools; (2)
conducting workshops to develop faculty expertise in software testing and using
the features in WReSTT to support pedagogy; (3) fostering students? acquisition
of software testing concepts and skills in undergraduate programming courses;
and (4) promoting WReSTT and disseminating the research findings to the academic
community. The project team consists of experienced instructors and evaluators
from a cross-section of institutions, including institutions with students from
underrepresented groups. Three industry partners support the project by serving
on the project?s advisory board, presenting testing tool tutorials at faculty
workshops, and making testing tools available to students at academic
institutions.