* 1225596
* Enhancing Social Science Data Infrastructure: Upgrade of Metadata Documenting Cross-National Microdata
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Janet Gornick, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 750,000.00

SES -1225596

Janet Gornick CUNY Graduate Center

ABSTRACT

Enhancing Social Science Data Infrastructure: Upgrade of Metadata Documenting
Cross-National Microdata

LIS serves as a unique data archive and research center. It provides researchers
from multiple fields access to household- and person-level data ("microdata")
from high- and middle-income countries around the world. To that end, the LIS
staff gathers nationally-representative datasets from many countries and
harmonizes them into two distinct databases: the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)
Database, which is focused on income microdata, and the Luxembourg Wealth Study
(LWS) Database, which contains wealth microdata. These databases facilitate and
promote high-quality cross-national comparative research. Most researchers use
the LIS databases to analyze variation across countries in socio-economic
outcomes, primarily poverty and income inequality, wealth and debt holdings, and
employment and earnings patterns. Many LIS-based studies focus on the impact of
public policies and other national institutions on these outcomes.

LIS also maintains a massive collection of explanatory documentation
("metadata"), which describes the original data sources and data collection
practices, as well as the decisions made by the LIS staff during the process of
preparing and harmonizing the data. These metadata document the quality of the
LIS data, and are critical for making the data harmonization process transparent
to the many data users. The work carried out by the LIS staff -- acquiring,
harmonizing, and making the microdata available, and preparing and providing the
metadata -- saves many months of data acquisition and preparation time for the
researchers who use the data. NSF support for this project permits LIS staff to
design and create a metadata repository. It will replace the current metadata
storage system, which lacks a search function, with a sophisticated searchable
database that will enable users to search the LIS and LWS metadata more easily.
The repository will have a back-end populating feature (to be used by the LIS
data staff) and a front-end search function (to be used by LIS data users).

Broader impacts For nearly 30 years, LIS has provided access to cross-national
microdata that are otherwise difficult to obtain. This has spurred the
development of a vast body of comparative research on socio-economic outcomes,
carried out by economists, sociologists, and other social scientists around the
world. This infrastructure project will produce a searchable metadata system,
which will assist the LIS data team as it continues to harmonize and document
microdata from a rapidly growing and increasingly diverse set of countries. For
the thousands of researchers who already work with the LIS and LWS data, this
project will enable them to use both the microdata and the metadata more quickly
and more accurately. The new infrastructure will also facilitate the use of the
LIS and LWS microdata by new research communities, thereby promoting innovative
social science research.