* 1225878
* Collaborative Research: Microbial Flocculation Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* David Bortz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 323,415.00

The investigator and his colleagues study the population dynamics of aqueous,
multi-cellular, microbial communities. These communities are ubiquitous from the
laboratory to the ocean, and the objective of this research is to advance
understanding of microbial flocculation, the process whereby proliferating
clusters of organisms in suspension fragment and aggregate. Specifically, the
researchers use semigroup, fractal, partial differential equation, and
computational analysis to advance the theory and applications for a novel class
of structured population models. The close coupling between the model
development, analysis, and experimental validation allows insight into the
biomechanical and metabolic adaptations of this globally pervasive and
fundamental state of microbial existence. The investigator and his colleagues
are guided by three motivating questions: 1) what are the dominant mechanisms
driving floc fragmentation? 2) How does floc structure variability impact
population proliferation? and 3) Why do some floc population distributions
converge to self-similarity and others decay to mono-dispersion? Insight into
the dominant microscale mechanisms could dramatically change both modeling and
consequently control of microbial populations.

Micro-organisms suspended in a fluid often do not live as single cells - by
collision and separation they combine and recombine in a process called
flocculation. These microbial communities exist everywhere from the laboratory
to the ocean and the tendency to flocculate has a surprising impact on human
life. For example, industrial biotechnologies based on cell cultures (e.g., in
the manufacturer of proteins as drugs) rely heavily on predictions of the
physical properties of microbial communities. Bacterial clusters are used in
municipal sewage treatment plants across the country as an environmentally
sustainable part of cleaning human and industrial wastewater. Moreover,
bacterial and algal communities in a fluid are an essential part of the
bioplastic, biofuel, and biogas industries. In natural settings, the
flocculation properties of algae play an important role in algal blooms (and
thus in the resultant negative economic and health impacts). The investigator
and his colleagues develop and study mathematical models of flocculation and
perform experiments to validate predictions of the distribution of cluster sizes
and growth rates. This project aims to transform scientific understanding of
microbial flocculation from one based upon simplified, idealized models of
clusters to one based on microscale mechanistic and metabolic first principles.
Advances in our understanding of the population behavior of these microbial
aggregates could lead to dramatic improvements in such diverse societal
challenges as biofuel production efficiency, sustainable means of handling
wastewater, and management of oceanic algal blooms.