* 1225894
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Marital States: Kinship and Citizenship in Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Eda Pepi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 26,040.00

Stanford University doctoral candidate Eda Pepi, supervised by Dr. Sylvia
Yanagisako, will undertake research on the reproduction of statelessness through
nationality laws in Jordan that prohibit Jordanian women married to noncitizen
Palestinian men from passing their Jordanian citizenship to their children or
spouses, thereby rendering these children stateless. Pepi will conduct twelve
months of field research in the city of Amman, Jordan, focusing on the effects
of such laws on mixed families and on attempts by the Jordanian state to
regulate family life for Palestinians and Jordanians alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a research design involving social science methods
such as participant observation, semi-structured interviews, inter-generational
family discussions, life histories, and archival research, as well as through
dispute processing and content analysis, Pepi will gather data about the
practices of two kinds of mixed families: "stateless families" (Jordanian women
married to non-citizen Palestinian men -- couples whose children are stateless)
and "citizen families" (Jordanian men married to Palestinian women -- couples
whose children are citizens). This research will shed light on the effects of
state regulation on family life and on the ways that families cope with the
differential effects of state regulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will make a contribution to the anthropology of statelessness, the extant
scholarship of which is limited to a few policy studies that do not adequately
treat questions of kinship and gender as integral to inquiries into citizenship,
sovereignty, and statelessness. The project frames family life as an important
site of sovereignty in action where the state is constituted. This research is
also important because it will inform policymakers about the everyday lives of
stateless individuals, of whom there are over 15 million in the world. Funding
for this research also supports the training of a social scientist.