* 1225981
* SBP 2012 Outreach Efforts to Increase Diversity and Participation of Minorities
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Donald Adjeroh, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2014
* USD 16,640.00

This is funding to increase diversity of participation in the Social Computing,
Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, and Prediction (SBP) 2012 conference, to be held
at the University of Maryland, College Park, from April 2-5, 2012. The SBP
conference provides an international platform for collaborative and exploratory
research that advances the emerging interdisciplinary field of social computing.
It attracts leading researchers in behavioral modeling and social computing from
academia, industry and government, who address issues of behavior modeling,
analysis, pattern mining, and prediction in domains such as healthcare, privacy,
and organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of attendance at previous SBP
conferences has found substantial gender and racial inequalities in
participation in the conference, and less disciplinary diversity than desired
for this new interdisciplinary field. Project activities include (a) targeted
outreach to female, Hispanic, African-American, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, and schools in EPSCoR (Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research) states; (b) targeted outreach to underrepresented academic
disciplines relevant to SPB;(c) special invitations to participate for authors
in the same categories of schools and disciplines who have had a paper declined;
(d) solicitations for student volunteers from the same categories of schools and
disciplines; and (e) encouraging diversity in the selection of speakers for the
panels held during the conference. Small travel grants and/or conference fee
waivers will be used to encourage participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: By broadening participation in the SBP conference, this project will
provide new opportunities for interaction across disciplinary boundaries,
fostering creative new ways of thinking about problems in social computing and
behavior modeling. In addition, the project will encourage members of
disadvantaged groups to become involved in STEM research through training,
professional development, and community building.