* 1225915
* Discovering the Art of Mathematics: Inquiry Based Learning in Mathematics for Liberal Arts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Julian Fleron, Westfield State College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 09/30/2017
* USD 550,611.00

This project helps complete Discovering the Art of Mathematics, a library of 10
full-length, stand-alone learning guides for Mathematics for Liberal Arts (MLA)
and other cognate courses. Each volume provides curriculum materials sufficient
for a semester-long course. The pedagogy is a form of inquiry-based learning
that is a descendent of the Socratic dialogue. The mathematical content is both
sophisticated and accessible, with deep and natural connections to the arts,
history, culture, philosophy, humanism, and literature throughout.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During Phase 1 of the project, these unique curriculum
materials sparked considerable learning gains and affective benefits in the
cohort of over 1,000 students who used the materials. In addition to the
completion of the materials, the Type 2 award will support the development of
teacher resource guides, assessment materials, and resources for the expanded
use of inquiry in general education mathematics courses. It will also support
nine traveling professional development workshops that will help develop
communities of inquiry-based learning practitioners from the generally under-
supported cohort of teachers that most often teach MLA. It will also support the
creation and implementation of assessment tools that further evaluate the
student learning gains and affective benefits of using our materials. Finally,
it supports the high-profile, nationwide dissemination of the Discovering the
Art of Mathematics library and the scholarly work it generates, helping to
transform the way MLA is taught and learned.