* 1225221
* Collaborative Research:  Design for Impact - Creating Effective Student Activities that Faculty Will Use
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Milo Koretsky, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,998.00

Developing students' understanding of fundamental concepts is a primary goal of
undergraduate engineering education. Innovations such as concept questions,
model-eliciting activities, and inquiry-based instruction have consistently been
found to be more effective for promoting conceptual change. However, these
innovative approaches were designed with educational effectiveness as the
foremost (or only) concern. Considerably less research has been devoted to
understanding how to design these activities to increase their adoption by
engineering faculty. The primary challenge facing engineering reform today is
not primarily to develop more effective instructional strategies but to find
ways to get faculty to adopt instructional techniques that we already know to be
more effective than the traditional methods still found in the majority of
undergraduate engineering classrooms. This project addresses that challenge by
identifying methods of developing instructional modules that are simultaneously
effective for student learning gains and faculty adoptability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing instructional materials for
heat transfer, an important foundational course for chemical, mechanical and
other engineering majors. It is combining the research on student learning of
fundamental concepts with research on adoption and change to develop materials
that professors are more likely to actually use in their classes. The materials
are being evaluated for "usability" by a panel of professors at different types
of institutions who work with a diverse range of engineering student
populations. Ongoing evaluation of the project is monitoring the most frequently
downloaded activities and relating this information to factors that promote
faculty adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The literature on diffusion of
innovation into the college classroom identifies several factors that inhibit
adoption of new approaches. These include faculty concerns about (1) preparation
time, (2) class time, (3) effectiveness, (4) student resistance, (5) inflexible
teaching environments and (6) inability to adapt innovations to suit their
needs. There is therefore a need to develop approaches that minimize these
identified barriers so that effective practices are more widely adopted and
consequently provide broad impact. The findings of this project will inform
future efforts to promote faculty adoption of new instructional practices in
other STEM areas.