* 1225612
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the Role of Writing in Promoting Learning and Engagement for Diverse Undergraduate Thesis Writers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Lisa Brown, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 63,922.00

Previous research demonstrated that students who participate in structured
thesis writing courses developed stronger writing and critical thinking skills
than students who simply worked one-on-one with faculty mentors. It is also well
established that writing can be one of the most effective strategies for
promoting critical thinking and scientific reasoning, but how writing affects
learning is largely unproven. Since higher-order thinking involves restructuring
knowledge, the writing activities that evoke this process of knowledge
transformation - as well as the mechanisms of effect - still need to be
determined. There is substantial evidence that motivation (level of engagement
with the task), and self-efficacy (beliefs regarding one's ability to learn)
increase learning. Additional processes that are likely to influence learning
are epistemology beliefs (beliefs about the nature of knowledge and its
justification) and metacognition skills (the ability of students to monitor
their thinking and learning strategies). This project is based on the hypothesis
that writing affects learning through these four processes. If this is correct,
then teaching practices that address all of these mechanisms directly are most
likely to optimize learning.

The goal of this research project is to understand whether writing an
undergraduate thesis improves critical thinking and writing skills through
impacting metacognition, motivation, and beliefs, and whether these effects
differ as a function of student characteristics and departmental context. This
study will address these effects in two dimensions: (1) across four disciplines
(biology, chemistry, economics, and neuroscience) within one university and (2)
across four universities within biology departments and colleges. All
collaborators teach thesis writing courses, represent a range of institutional
contexts, pedagogical approaches, and have diverse student populations. A
Faculty Learning Community will be used to facilitate sharing of educational
practices, assessment methods, and findings. Nationally recognized teaching
experts will guide participants in using assessment results to create effective
teaching interventions.

This research will employ pre-/post-intervention experiments and will be
conducted concurrently at four universities using a common protocol and study
design. The experiments involve different structures and practices at each
institution and department around the common task of a capstone thesis and
employ a baseline (year 1) and two modification years (Years 2 and 3). Year 1 is
baseline with no intervention. In years 2 and 3, instructional practices will be
shaped by assessment results and by sharing approaches through the faculty
learning community.

Intellectual Merit: Even though these mechanisms interact and operate
concurrently, most prior research has examined each mechanism singly. Including
all four processes in this model will enable a better understanding of their
independent and combined contributions to improvements in critical thinking and
scientific reasoning brought about through writing an undergraduate thesis.

Broader impacts: This project will promote teaching and learning practices and
the integration of teaching and research in several ways. The work intentionally
and explicitly addresses the diversity of students and institutions by studying
thesis writers across disciplines and universities representing diverse student
populations. Furthermore, it will provide proof of concepts essential to the
wider adoption of evidenced-based teaching practices: that students' beliefs,
thinking and learning strategies, and motivation are processes that affect
learning and can be effectively transformed through writing practices targeted
to improve critical thinking and scientific reasoning.