* 1225603
* New Faculty Experience for Two-Year College Physics Instructors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Robert Hilborn, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 560,000.00

Two-year colleges (TYCs) play a significant role in the United States' higher
education system, serving 36% of the students in higher education. Retraining in
growth areas such as the medical field or alternative energy often requires
content knowledge in physics. But the needs go beyond just content knowledge.
Future employees are in need of skill sets such as scientific problem solving,
synthesizing information and product design. While traditional instruction
provides discipline-based content, it does not always allow students to develop
these skills. Substantial efforts have been made to develop research-based
instructional strategies in physics that enhance both content learning and
development of scientific skill sets. However, the American Institute of Physics
survey of TYC physics faculty members has shown that traditional lectures
occurred in over 60% of the classes most of the time and 43% of the respondents
at TYCs were not using a single innovative strategy listed on the survey.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this project is to have a significant
impact on STEM education at TYCs by providing sixty new TYC physics instructors
with an eighteen-month intensive professional development experience that
includes: (1) on-line interactions among project staff and participants, focused
on seminal papers in physics education; (2) a 4-day immersion experience, in
workshop format, where participants receive direct experience with several
research-based instructional strategies; (3) post-conference online mentoring
and on-site meetings with select mentees; and (4) a follow-up conference
conducted in tandem with a national American Association of Physics Teachers
meeting where participants present capstone projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second project goal is to further the development of the next generation of
leaders in the TYC physics community by recognizing as "alumni-in-residence"
past program graduates who exhibited early leadership traits while in the
program. These program alumni are sharing their recent transformations with
current participants and providing insight into the philosophical approach the
leadership team strategically employs in each aspect of the experience. They are
also being mentored in physics community leadership and provided opportunities
to lead sessions.