* 1225663
* OCE-PRF: Symbiosis unbound?  Investigating the physiology, genome, and proteome of Thiotaurens thiomutagens, a novel marine sulfide-oxidizing bacterium
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Beverly Flood, Flood                   Beverly        E
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 11/30/2014
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, the investigator will examine the physiology of an elusive
group of basal chemoautotrophic Gammaproteobacteria and the thiotrophic pathway
found exclusively in bacterial-animal host associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
large number of basal sub-clades within the Gammaproteobacteria are marine
biogeochemically-important sulfide-oxidizing autotrophs; but few have been
cultivated and knowledge of their ecophysiologies remains limited. Some of these
bacteria engage in symbiotic lifestyles with marine invertebrates in sulfidic
habitats, where they detoxify sulfide for the host, and in some cases serve as
the host's sole food source. Most of these endosymbionts have a free-living
stage prior to infecting, or being taken up by the host animal. But to date,
there is not a single strain of thiotrophic bacterial symbiont in cultivation
and little is known about their ecophysiologies and biochemical interactions
with their hosts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator recently isolated a
sulfide-oxidizing Gammaproteobacteria within the same sub-clade that includes
many endosymbiotic strains with a free-living stage, dubbed Thiotaurens
thiomutagens. Like many endosymbionts adapted to hypoxic regimes, this strain
fixes carbon into biomass under low atmospheric oxygen or via denitrification
using the oxygen-sensitive enzyme RuBisCO Form II. This strain exhibits unusual
growth patterns on organic acids, one of which is that it appears to
preferentially use an organic acid such as succinate, as an energy source to fix
carbon dioxide. T. thiomutagens may be the first obligate autotrophic bacterium
which fixes carbon solely with RuBisCO Form II in culture. Preliminary tests
suggest that the ecophysiology of T. thiomutagens may be very similar to that of
thiotrophic endosymbionts. This project will enable the investigator to further
elucidate the physiology of T. thiomutagens through a combination of cultivation
experiments, genomics, and proteomics. The cultivation approach will result in
the formal recognition and description of T. thiomutagens. The sequenced genome
will be compared with published genomes of endosymbiont thiotrophs to aid in the
determination of whether T. thiomutagens may serve as a proxy for endosymbionts
in future studies and determine whether it may also be an ecotype representative
of the early radiation of the Gammaproteobacteria. Two proteomics studies are
proposed using a recently developed mass spectrometry technique. The first study
will elucidate the pathway for thiotaurine utilization and the second study will
elucidate the pathways invoked during growth on succinate during and after the
uptake of exogenous carbon dioxide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broadening
participation goals involve mentoring five to six other military veterans at a
time through the course of their academic careers at the University of
Minnesota. The investigator is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute research mentor
to transfer students in biology and will continue to mentor undergraduates in
research during this project. In addition, the investigator will organize a
session on symbioses at the Society for Chicanos and Native Americans in Science
National Conference, attended primarily by undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to support novel
research by early career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean
sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support, this project
will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an
independent research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation
of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.