* 1225833
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Pedagogical Innovation for a Generation of Transformation via Inquiry-Based Learning in Mathematics (SPIGOT)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Stan Yoshinobu, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2016
* USD 364,925.00

SPIGOT, Supporting Pedagogical Innovation for a Generation Of Transformation, is
providing intensive four-day workshops in Inquiry-Based Learning (IBL) in
college mathematics. Led by experienced faculty developers and IBL
practitioners, the SPIGOT workshops engage about 120 mathematics instructors
from diverse institutions, especially early-career faculty, in one of three
summer workshops. Workshops prepare instructors to implement research-based,
student-centered approaches to teaching and learning. Conference-based mini-
workshops serve as an on-ramp to the intensive
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPIGOT's design is informed by faculty-
development literature and experience to address major obstacles to change. It
draws upon existing infrastructure of the Academy of Inquiry-Based Learning to
support participants' long-term engagement with an active community of practice.
As instructors adopt IBL in one or more courses, thousands of students
experience potentially transformative mathematics
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation-with-research study is gathering
data on faculty response to the workshops and aspects of their local context
that help or hinder implementation of an IBL course. Such data offer formative
feedback to the workshop leaders and add to knowledge about how best to
encourage faculty uptake of these proven methods. Dissemination of the study
findings will target both mathematics educators and the broader STEM education
community.