* 1225851
* An Integrated Simulation Framework to Explore Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Slum Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Andrew Crooks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 01/31/2014
* USD 99,999.00

This project is about developing a model of slum (also known as informal or
squatter settlements) formation in rapidly growing cities around the world. More
than 900 million people, or a third of the world's urban population, live in
slums today, the majority of them in the developing world. This phenomenon has
implications for health, security, trafficking, environmental, and other issues
of global concern. Slums have been the target of many policy actions, but
despite these, conditions within slums have not improved much. Many of the
policies aimed at improving housing conditions are often not based on an
empirical understanding of slums. It is thus important to investigate these
empirical questions. (1) How do slums form and expand? (2) Where and when are
they formed? and (3) What types of structural changes and/or policy
interventions could improve housing conditions for urban poor? This project will
develop a modeling framework that is an integration of Discrete-Event Simulation
(DES), Agent-based Modeling (ABM) and Geographic Information System (GIS). This
novel simulation framework will help explain and predict the spatio-temporal
patterns of slum formation in cities. The model will allow policymakers and
planners to analyze the impacts of their policy actions on the slums before
implementing the actual policies. A successful model could lead to effective
policy interventions that could contribute not only to improving housing
conditions for the urban poor, but also to the general welfare of the slum
population including health, education and environmental sustainability. While
the framework will be calibrated and validated for a city in India, Ahmedabad,
the technological development of integrating DES, GIS, and ABM into a single
framework could be used to study other urban systems both in the developing and
developed world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the urban policy
applications of this research, this project will contribute to the development
of future scientists and researchers by involving them in the project. In the
US, a post-doctoral researcher will be supported and there will be active
involvement of and collaboration with graduate students and faculty at India's
Center for Environmental Planning and Technology University. The project also
contains a community development component through the engagement of a non-
governmental organization working with slum communities in India. This group
will help empower people in slum communities by contributing various aspects of
the modeling efforts, for example, their assistance in the mapping of slums.
With the help of these organizations we expect to introduce the framework and
disseminate the findings to various stakeholders in India, seek ways to
generalize the framework to apply it in other cities, and generate further
research interest in the geography and spatial sciences community about this
topic. Once completed, the model and associated data will be made publicly
available via a website to be used by others interested in it.