* 1225865
* Collaborative research: Laboratory and numerical experiments on the response of wave ripples to changes in oscillatory flow
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* J. Taylor Perron, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2016
* USD 255,146.00

Symmetric sand ripples are among the most common bedforms in modern wave-
dominated environments and in the rock record. Whether ancient or modern,
visually striking wave ripple patterns are an easily observable signature of the
complex interaction of bed topography, turbulent flow, and sediment transport.
Ripple spacing is often used as an indicator of ancient wave conditions and
water depth, and modern ripples influence bed roughness. However, ripples are
often out of equilibrium with respect to rapidly changing wave conditions, and
both ancient and modern ripples often contain complicated defects - deviations
from straight, parallel crests - that appear to be disequilibrium features but
are poorly understood. Our ability to interpret two-dimensional ripple patterns,
or to model how those patterns respond to changing wave conditions, is therefore
deficient. This project will investigate the mechanisms by which wave ripples
respond to changes in wave conditions through a combination of laboratory wave
tank experiments, numerical simulations of bedform evolution, and field studies
of both ancient ripples exposed in rock outcrops and modern ripples exposed on
shorelines. First, in a series of laboratory wave tank experiments, we will use
time-lapse photography and image analysis to track the response of rippled beds
to step changes in wave forcing, and ultimately produce a phase diagram for
different types of wave ripple defects. Second, we will develop a new numerical
method for modeling the co-evolution of bed topography and oscillatory flow, and
we will use this model to better understand the transient ripple evolution
observed in the wave tank. Third, we will compare the results of the laboratory
and numerical experiments with ancient ripples in rock outcrops and modern
ripples on shorelines. The main outcomes will be a new interpretation of
widespread wave ripple patterns, and a new framework for modeling transient
bedform evolution.

Patterns generated by flows that move sand, such as the ripples that are a
common sight along shorelines around the world, are a rich source of information
about ancient and modern flow conditions. These bedform patterns can also
influence other geologic flows: modern ripples roughen the sandy bed, slowing
coastal flows, and ripples in sedimentary rocks can influence permeability,
which controls the flow of water, oil and gas beneath the land surface. This
research will improve our ability to interpret common irregularities in ancient
and modern wave ripple patterns, and will also produce a new computational
framework for modeling their formation. In addition to providing an improved
explanation for the striking variety of ripple patterns in coastal settings, our
results will provide geologists, sedimentologists, and coastal engineers with
new tools for predicting the formation and evolution of bedforms, and will aid
geophysicists and hydrologists in understanding the controls on reservoir
characteristics.