* 1225884
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Contexts of Treatment and Care: Patients and their Families in a Tuberculosis Epidemic
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Linda Garro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,050.00

University of California, Los Angeles doctoral candidate Hannah Reiss,
supervised by Dr. Linda Garro, will explore the social contexts of illness in
the day-to-day lives patients accepted into a treatment program designed to meet
prevailing standards of biomedical care. Why does an illness with effective
treatment continue to persist with such high incidence rates? What are the
social contexts of illness and care that promote or impede successful treatment?

To address these questions, Reiss will work in Tajikistan, which has one of the
highest incidence rates of tuberculosis in the world and high frequencies of
treatment failure, default and death. Her research will explore the social
forces, practices, and understandings that promote or impede treatment as
patients and their families navigate tuberculosis illness and therapy. Her study
combines: 1) a longitudinal design to follow patients throughout treatment; 2) a
dual focus on clinical and social interaction; and 3) attention to the
organization of social support from families and the community. Reiss will
collect data through participant observation with families, interviews with
patients, their relatives and clinicians, illness narratives, and observations
of clinical encounters.

This project will explore the illness experience as a complex social phenomenon,
contributing to anthropological theory by 1) incorporating experiential,
longitudinal and relational approaches in the examination of infectious disease
to expand current conceptual frameworks; 2) adding to the growing body of
literature that positions health as a family, network and community concern; and
3) addressing the social structures of care for tuberculosis patients and the
role of social support in successful completion of treatment. This project has
wider applicability for health care delivery. It is critical to ground health
initiatives in a better understanding of local realities of illness. Tajikistan
is a vivid example of the tuberculosis epidemic's broad threat to global health.