* 1225796
* Collaborative Research: CS in Parallel: Scaling an Incremental Modular Approach to Injecting Parallel Computing Throughout CS Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Elizabeth Shoop, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 235,923.00

The shift to parallel computing, including multi-core processors, cloud
computing, and heterogeneous systems, has induced a workforce development crisis
for computer science (CS) education. This project addresses how crowded CS
curricula, traditionally structured around sequential (non-parallel) computing,
can be changed to effectively incorporate the rapidly-evolving body of
parallelism knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Saint Olaf College, Calvin College
and Macalester College are demonstrating how colleges and universities can
insert short (one- to three-day) teaching modules on parallel computing into
their courses through self-contained units that present conceptual principles
and reinforce them by hands-on experience and follow-up exercises. New modules
that incorporate emerging curricular recommendations, relevant applications to
other fields, and parallel design patterns are under development. Parallelism is
infused incrementally throughout the CS curriculum. Having developed this
modular strategy in a predecessor CCLI Type I grant, this project demonstrates
the scalability of this approach to other universities and colleges by targeting
two geographical regions with workshops and follow-up adopter support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other project activities reward participants for creating
new modules, promote the national dissemination of this modular approach through
conference workshops and presentations, and expand existing synergistic
partnerships between CSinParallel.org and related efforts in industry, academia,
and professional organizations.