* 1225496
* Software for 3D Inversion of EM Geophysical Data
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Gary Egbert, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 221,875.00

The focus of this project is on supporting and extending capabilities of
"ModEM", a modular system for inversion of electromagnetic (EM) geophysical data
which has been developed over the past few years at Oregon State University. The
code has been applied to inversion of a range of EM geophysical datasets,
including 2D and 3D magnetotellurics (MT), geomagnetic observatory data for
global deep mantle conductivity studies, and simple controlled source EM, and
preliminary versions were made available to expert academic users during the
initial development phase. Through this project we are extending and "hardening"
ModEM, and maintaining and supporting its use for a broader community of users.
Our primary initial focus is on support of 3D MT capabilities (which are most
developed in ModEM, and of the greatest academic interest), but we are also
building on the more general capabilities of ModEM to support inversion of CSEM
data, and joint inversion of multiple EM (and ultimately other) data types. In
addition to development and maintenance of software, we provide training in its
use, offering short courses on 3D MT inversion and interpretation, and
maintaining a web presence where the community of ModEM users can discuss with
us, and each other, problems and solutions as they arise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making ModEM widely available to the broadest community
possible, supporting further development, and providing resources for education
and community interaction, all contribute substantially to the ongoing 3D
revolution in EM geophysics, which will ultimately enable new discoveries in
basic and applied Earth science. Wide and free availability of advanced
inversion codes facilitates expansion of the community of experienced 3-D
inversion users, and will accelerate development within this community of
understanding of the appropriate uses (and limitations) of these now novel 3-D
interpretation methods. EM methods have important applications in industry and
in the applied environmental sciences. This project is helping to develop
capacity for these applications, supporting development of practical and robust
software and knowledgeable and trained users.