* 1225183
* The Ninth U.S.-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology: Exploring New Direction for Convergence of Nano Science to Technology and Application (June 4-5 2012 in Seoul, Korea)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Myung Jhon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 03/31/2013
* USD 49,344.00

PI: Jhon, Myung &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1225183&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Carnegie-Mellon University &lt;br/&gt;Title: The Ninth U.S.-Korea Forum on
Nanotechnology: Exploring New Directions for Convergence of Nanoscience to
Technology and Applications &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will organize the ninth
forum on nanotechnology between the United States and Korea, to be held on June
4th and 5th 2012 in Seoul, Korea. This Forum is not only a continuation of the
previous eight Forums on nanotechnology but also an opportunity to forecast
advances in nanoscience and technology during the coming decade. The Forums
organized in the past decade focused in establishing the budding role of
transformative nanotechnology in the convergence of a broad range of scientific
and engineering areas (NANO1) including active nano-devices and systems,
sustainable nanomanufacturing, education, nano-energy, nano-biotechnology, and
nano-electronics. The eighth Forum held in 2011 focused on nanotechnology
convergence in sustainability with an emphasis on environmentally friendly
technologies for the future; the Forum highlighted new horizons in
nanotechnology for the next decade (NAN02) by addressing complex problems faced
by an ever increasing global population. The proposed Forum will further
establish a common platform for scientists and engineers from both countries by
focusing on new R&amp;D directions in the next decade (NAN02), where
nanotechnology will have dramatic impacts. The Forum will provide
recommendations for new priorities and establish milestones for NAN02 regarding
topics such as nano-fundamentals for convergence technologies, sustainability,
nano-electronics, and biomedical processes. The PI will be the organizer for the
U.S. participation, which will include one keynote speaker, 10 senior presenters
and six early-career participants. Roughly equal numbers of Korean presenters
selected by Korean organizers will also participate. The Forum proceedings and
findings will be published on Carnegie Mellon's website and will be available to
a scientific community via a special issue in technical journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel
contribution of this Forum, in contrast to previous Forums, is integrating the
achievements in NANO 1 into future applications and identifying critical topics
and benefits in NAN02 for the next decade. This Forum will also promote the
exchange of research, education, and policy issues between the two countries in
the emerging area of NAN02. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along with the exchange of ideas among the leading
scientists and engineers in nanotechnology area, this Forum will recommend new
paradigms in this field for the next decade and promote collaborative
initiatives between the two countries. The Forum will make a significant
contribution to society and the global environment in a broader sense by
bringing NAN02 to the public. To achieve these goals, the PI will publish the
content of the Forum in a special issue of a technical journal for extensive
outreach to scientific community.