* 1225630
* Collaborative Research: Establishing Process Links Between Streamflow, Sediment Transport/Storage, and Biogeochemical Processing of Mercury
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Joel Blum, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2015
* USD 154,966.00

The proposed work is an investigation of mercury (Hg) in river systems that have
experienced large anthropogenic inputs of this toxic substance (e.g., by
upstream mining). This interdisciplinary project will identify critical
locations in river systems where the risk of Hg input to food webs increases and
elucidate the processes by which this occurs. The study will focus on the
longitudinal (downstream) transport and biogeochemical processing of sediment-
adsorbed Hg derived from hydraulic gold mining in the Sierra Nevada and mercury
mining in the Coast Ranges within and through the Yuba-Feather-Sacramento River
system of Northern California, USA. It will document the primary sources (Coast
Range v. Sierra Nevada) of Hg contamination to lowland ecosystems in the
Sacramento Valley and Bay-Delta and the relative contribution and risks of each.
We will: 1) mathematically model flood inundation in river corridors to identify
areas of high potential of oxidation/reduction; 2) identify preferential zones
of sedimentation through numerical modeling of event-based washload transport;
3) identify distinct contamination sources to lowlands by conducting Hg stable
isotopic analysis of sediment; and 4) investigate Hg speciation in conjunction
with changes in Hg species isotopic signatures, associated with redox conditions
and sediment source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In river basins beset by Hg
contamination from atmospheric deposition or anthropogenic inputs from mining,
there is great uncertainty about the interplay among sediment transport,
deposition, and remobilization and the evolution of Hg reactivity in response to
inundation regimes and ambient chemistry. These factors have important
implications for bioavailability of sediment-adsorbed Hg to food webs, as it
travels to sensitive downstream ecosystems where methylation potential is high.
This research will address this problem and provide new understanding into the
physical and biogeochemical processes that threaten sensitive lowland
ecosystems. The importance of sediment deposits originating from legacy mines,
especially in the Bay-Delta watershed, has recently increased due to
realizations that they may contain high levels of Hg that may be available to
food webs. These factors are being investigated by various government agencies
and nonprofit groups responsible for river basin management. The research team
has developed close contacts and relations with personnel from interested
parties in the US with whom findings will be shared.