* 1225817
* OCE-PRF: ZOOPREDICT - A study of ZOOPlankton Responses to Environmental Determinants with Interns, Classes, and Teachers
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* David Elliott, Elliott                 David          T
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 01/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, the investigator will study the response of estuarine
zooplankton to predicted consequences of climate change, focusing on the direct
effects of changes in water temperature, and indirect effects through changes in
food environment and mortality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing environmental
conditions can have disparate effects on the phenologies of different trophic
groups within the plankton community, resulting in an uncoupling of population
growth peaks of zooplankton, their predators and prey, changes in the relative
roles of bottom-up and top-down factors in regulating zooplankton populations,
and a restructuring of the dynamics of the entire plankton community. For
example, zooplankton growth often responds more strongly than phytoplankton to
temperature changes. Therefore, warmer temperatures may ultimately increase
resource limitation of zooplankton. Potential ecosystem level effects include
changes in fish recruitment and degree of benthic-pelagic coupling due to the
roles of zooplankton as prey for fish and facilitators of vertical flux of
organic matter. The investigator will study zooplankton dynamics along the James
River, using combined experimental, observational, and quantitative modeling
approaches to evaluate the relative importance of temperature, food quantity and
quality, and mortality in limiting zooplankton growth under present conditions
and predicted scenarios of climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
results will be useful to zooplankton ecologists and ecosystem scientists
studying the Chesapeake Bay and other coastal ecosystems. The research
activities will address the extent of change in temporal dynamics of the
region's zooplankton community since 1985, contribute directly to advance
understanding of zooplankton ecology, and improve quantitative modeling of
Chesapeake Bay zooplankton population dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts include broadening participation in ocean sciences through
recruitment of undergraduate students to participate directly in research during
eight-week summer internships. The students will be selected with the goal of
broadening participation of under-represented groups in ocean sciences, in
collaboration with VCU's Environmental Studies program and Hampton University.
In addition, the investigator will work in coordination with summer interns,
local schools, and VCU's University Special Programs staff to develop semi-
annual and summer educational activities that introduce K-12 students to aquatic
sciences and plankton ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
under the NSF Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OCE PRF) program,
with goals to support novel research by early career scientists and increase the
diversity of the U.S. ocean sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-
PRF support, this project will enable a promising early career researcher to
establish themselves in an independent research career related to ocean sciences
and broaden participation of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.