* 1225779
* Infinitely Repeated Games with Private Monitoring:  An Experimental Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Guillaume Frechette, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 301,216.00

This award funds research that will employ laboratory experiments to test game
theory models of strategic interaction. Many economic situations involve
repeated interactions where decision makers cannot directly observe the
decisions made by other participants. In many of these situations, decision
makers each have partial information about others' decisions. Any game where
agents observe what the others do with error (and what is observed is only known
to them) is a game with private monitoring. There are many real world examples,
and economic theory has recently made substantial progress in developing new
methods for analyzing these games. However, these theories have not yet been
subjected to empirical testing. There are many real-world examples of these
games, but gathering data from these examples to test the theory is difficult.
Data about what agents privately observe is rare. Furthermore, other critical
parameters from the point of view of the theory are often not observable or
difficult to measure. Given this, the laboratory offers a valuable alternative
to explore behavior in such environments.

The economic theory of imperfect private monitoring has mainly considered two
extremes: almost perfect and almost public monitoring. As the names imply,
almost perfect is imperfect but very close to perfect monitoring (where the
players' signals are uncorrelated conditional on their actions) and almost
public is has a private component but is very close to public (where signals are
correlated). The new research funded with this award studies both almost perfect
and almost public monitoring, in a series of three projects. The first question
to be addressed is simple: can subjects support cooperation when monitoring is
imperfect and private? If indeed subjects can support some cooperation, then the
next question is how is their behavior different when monitoring is private as
opposed to public or perfect? A more demanding version of this question to be
explored is what strategies are most often used, and how do these vary with the
particulars of the information structure? These are addressed by three projects
implementing randomly terminated prisoner's dilemma games in the laboratory.

These projects will have a substantial impact on what we know about infinitely
repeated games with private monitoring. They will also further our understanding
of behavior with imperfect monitoring more generally.

Infinitely repeated games are characteristic of many types of human
interactions: political, psychological, sociological, et cetera; making this
project intrinsically interdisciplinary. Hence, these results will be relevant
to many applications. Understanding factors that facilitate or hinder
cooperation is a key question in the social sciences, and this research will
provide partial answers. The PI will also be contributing to both graduate and
undergraduate education; a wide variety of students will participate in this
research.