* 1225617
* The Effects of Survey Presentation on Nonignorable Nonresponse and Measurement Error
* SBE,SES
* 12/30/2011,05/31/2013
* Roger Tourangeau, Westat Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2013
* USD 71,269.00

Every request to take part in a survey is framed in some way. This project
consists of a set of experiments that investigate how the presentation of the
survey request affects nonresponse and measurement error. The experiments are
guided by a theory of survey participation (the salience-leverage theory) that
claims that people decide whether to take part in a survey based on whatever
aspects of the survey are made salient in the presentation of the survey request
and on how they evaluate those features. Two initial experiments randomly vary
the description of the topic and sponsor of the survey, with hypothesized
effects both on nonresponse propensities and on reporting. In the third
experiment, survey design features that can mediate or reduce the error-
producing influences of the survey topic and sponsor will be examined. Thus, the
project experimentally tests mechanisms producing nonresponse bias and
measurement errors and, once these effects have been documented, provides
guidance to the survey practitioner about how to reduce their impact.

While the research is theoretically motivated and features experimental control,
there are important practical implications of the work for the federal
statistical agencies and the larger survey community. Sometimes estimates of key
social indicators (e.g., the prevalence of rape or the frequency of defensive
use of handguns) vary widely across surveys. The effects explored in this
project may help explain these discrepancies. In addition, this work will a)
help agencies conducting surveys anticipate when different sponsors may obtain
different results, b) provide evidence about potentially harmful effects on
nonresponse error and measurement error of emphasizing a single purpose of a
survey, and c) produce evidence regarding design features that can reduce the
effects of the presentation of the survey on nonresponse and measurement error.