* 1225571
* Collaborative Research:  Sustainable Diffusion of Research-Based Instructional Strategies:   A Rich Case Study of SCALE-UP
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert Beichner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2016
* USD 159,397.00

This project is designed to improve knowledge of the diffusion of research-based
instructional strategies. It involves a rich case study of the spread of one
particular research-based instructional strategy, Student-Centered Active
Learning Environment for Undergraduate Programs (SCALE-UP). SCALE-UP was chosen
because it has been shown to be effective in a variety of contexts, has been
disseminated in multiple ways by the developer (workshops, presentations,
publications, individual consultations), has spread informally from one adopter
to another, and has crossed into multiple STEM departments at a variety of
institutions.

This project is: 1. Developing a national census of where SCALE-UP is used in
the US and abroad and the connections that led to that use, resulting in a
network map that allows visualization of the structure and paths of the spread
of a research-based innovation. 2. Identifying and surveying three department
types: i) departments with sustained implementations, ii) departments that
adopted, but subsequently abandoned, SCALE-UP and iii) departments that, after
consideration, chose not to adopt SCALE-UP. 3. Conducting an intensive study of
a subset of departments through interviews and a small number of site visits. 4.
Producing a research informed guide for secondary implementers to be
disseminated through the PER Users guide (www.perusersguide.org).

The survey and intensive study include an analysis of the implementation
process: the departmental context, who the leaders were, what circumstances led
to adoption, classroom characteristics, and outcomes. Common modifications made
during secondary implementations are also being identified along with reasons
motivating those modifications. The results of this project are intended to test
and improve current thinking about how innovative instructional strategies
spread.

Main Research Questions 1. How do secondary implementations come to be
initiated? 2. What characteristics are common in secondary implementations? 3.
How sustainable are secondary implementations? 4. What might education
researchers, policy makers, funding agencies, etc. do to better support
successful secondary implementations?

Intellectual Merit: Much time, money and effort have been put into documenting
the effectiveness of innovative teaching methods and curriculum and in
disseminating these results. Available evidence indicates that while these
efforts have had some impact on mainstream teaching, the majority of teaching is
still inconsistent with what research has shown to be best practices. This
project is increasing the value of the substantial R&D efforts in science
education by contributing to a better understanding of how and why research-
based innovations come to be integrated in mainstream teaching, and developing
recommendations for increasing the impact of research-based reforms.
Additionally, when large-scale diffusion of ideas occurs, the majority of
implementations will necessarily be secondary implementations (those not
directly part of the work of the developers). However, despite their obvious
importance, very little work has been done to understand the nature of secondary
implementations, a hole this project aims to fill. This project is part of a
larger research program toward the development of more effective, research-based
models of change.

Broader Impacts: The results of this project can help researchers, curriculum
developers, designers of professional development, and funding agencies to
better support reform toward research-based pedagogies that is sustained and
effective. Additionally project results are being disseminated to faculty
interested in implementing research-based pedagogies through the PER User's
Guide. There is currently no effective model for sustained reform, leading to a
reduction of the impact of the large body of research and curriculum development
in science education. It should also be noted that many of the research-based
pedagogies, while improving outcomes and reducing attrition for all students,
have been shown to have a disproportionately positive effect on traditionally
underrepresented groups such as women and ethnic minorities.