* 1225352
* Stable homotopy methods in p-local group theory
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Kari Ragnarsson, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2013
* USD 43,102.00

In this project, the Principal Investigator will employ methods from
&lt;br/&gt;stable homotopy theory to provide insight into the surprising
relationship &lt;br/&gt;between p-local group theory, modular representation
theory and stable &lt;br/&gt;homotopy theory. Specifically, the PI will first
give a much simplified &lt;br/&gt;description of the p-local finite group model
for the homotopy theory of &lt;br/&gt;fusion systems. This shows that a p-local
finite group on a finite &lt;br/&gt;p-group is equivalent to map from the
classifying space into a p-complete, &lt;br/&gt;nilpotent space with a stable
retract satisfying Frobenius reciprocity up &lt;br/&gt;to homotopy. In recent
work, joint with Radu Stancu, the PI has shown &lt;br/&gt;that saturated fusion
systems on a finite p-group are in bijective &lt;br/&gt;correspondence with
stable idempotents of the classifying space that &lt;br/&gt;satisfy Frobenius
reciprocity. The PI will extend this result to a &lt;br/&gt;bijection between
p-local finite groups and idempotents that satisfy &lt;br/&gt;Frobenius
reciprocity up to structured homotopies. The crucial question &lt;br/&gt;in the
field is on the existence and uniqueness of classifying spaces for
&lt;br/&gt;saturated fusion systems (in the form of p-local finite groups).
Using &lt;br/&gt;results from this project, the question can be approached by
refining the &lt;br/&gt;current construction of classifying spectra from being a
construction up &lt;br/&gt;to homotopy to producing structured classifying
spectra, and steps will be &lt;br/&gt;taken in this
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups are fundamental objects in mathematics
used to keep track of the &lt;br/&gt;symmetries of an object (e.g. a set or a
space). A group is said to act &lt;br/&gt;on an object if that object exhibits
the symmetries encoded by the group. &lt;br/&gt;Among such objects the
classifying space of a group is of special &lt;br/&gt;importance, as its
homotopical properties contain information about all &lt;br/&gt;possible actions
of the group on topological spaces. A finite group can &lt;br/&gt;be
characterized as the fundamental group of its classifying space --the
&lt;br/&gt;set of paths in the space beginning and ending in a fixed point where
two &lt;br/&gt;paths are identified if one can be continuously deformed into the
other. &lt;br/&gt;For a given prime p, the p-local structure of a group can be
thought of as &lt;br/&gt;the system of symmetries of the group that can be
detected by actions on &lt;br/&gt;sets whose cardinality is a power of p. This
notion is made precise by &lt;br/&gt;fusion systems as introduced by Puig and
developed by Broto-Levi-Oliver. &lt;br/&gt;As conjectured by Martino-Priddy, and
proved by Oliver, p-localizing the &lt;br/&gt;classifying space mirrors this
construction in topology. More generally &lt;br/&gt;one can consider abstract
fusion systems that do not necessarily come from &lt;br/&gt;groups and p-local
finite groups are a model for the corresponding &lt;br/&gt;classifying space
suggested by Broto-Levi-Oliver. In this project the PI &lt;br/&gt;will elucidate
this correspondence by providing a simpler model for &lt;br/&gt;classifying
spaces of abstract fusion systems and take important steps &lt;br/&gt;toward
proving the existence of classifying spaces for arbitrary fusion
&lt;br/&gt;systems which is a fundamental question in the field.