* 1225997
* Experimental and empirical approaches to grammatical expressions of speaker attitude
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Kiel Christianson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2014
* USD 23,583.00

This award will assist in support of a conference that will bring together
experts in the fields of Linguistics, Social and Experimental Psychology,
Cognitive Science, and Foreign Languages to discuss the latest developments in
research on social and emotive factors affecting language production and
comprehension and new empirical methodologies to study them. Six leading
scholars in linguistic pragmatics and im/politeness research, three from North
America and three from overseas, will deliver plenary lectures over the 2-½ day
conference. In addition, approximately 70 papers and posters will be presented
in three parallel sessions. The conference 'Experimental and Empirical
Approaches to Politeness and Impoliteness' is an international and
interdisciplinary conference that will take place at the University of Illinois
Urbana campus from August 29-31, 2012 and will focus on experimental and data-
intensive analyses of the effect of speaker attitude on grammatical expression.
A central goal of the conference is to identify new areas of empirical
engagement with the topic including online and offline experimental measures,
and to help forge new international collaborations in these areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broader aim is to help reinvigorate the links forged in
the 1970s between linguistic theory and research on expressions of attitude and
social relations that lie at the intellectual roots of the discipline.
Additionally, the conference will help align theoretical advances in the field
of linguistic im/politeness with applications in industry, education, and
policy-making. The conference will provide an important venue for students and
junior researchers to learn about on-going work in Linguistics and related
fields that impacts the study of civility and to develop professional
relationships. A selection of papers identified through peer review will be
published in a volume edited by members of the organizing committee. This volume
will extend awareness of the latest research in this interdisciplinary area to a
broader scholarly community, and will contribute to our understanding of cross-
cultural differences in the grammatical expression of speaker attitude and
affinity.