* 1225880
* The evolution of hummocky moraine landscapes: a modeling study
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kristie Franz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2015
* USD 97,414.00

Hummocky moraine topography covers large areas near former ice margins in the
once-glaciated continents. A leading hypothesis for the origin of hummocky
moraine belts is that they formed from material that accumulated at the surface
of a melting, stagnant ice mass. Uneven distribution of englacial and
supraglacial sediment and water is expected to cause buried ice to melt at
different rates, generating relief on the stagnant, debris-covered surface and
promoting lateral and vertical re-sedimentation. While these re-sedimentation
processes and the thermal and mechanical factors that control them have been
well-described in modern glaciers with relatively thin debris-cover, the way in
which they scale spatially and temporally to thicker debris blankets on
Pleistocene ice sheets and the landscapes inherited from them is not presently
clear. We plan to develop a physical and mathematical framework for modeling
long-term ice melt under a thick (>0.5m) debris cover and to apply it to testing
hypotheses for the origin of hummocky moraine and dominant variables in their
formation.

This project aims to advance our understanding of and ability to predict melting
of ice beneath a thick, insulating layer of rock debris. This problem not only
underlies the long-term development of glacier-marginal landscapes (e.g., the
hummocky moraine belts of the upper midwestern USA), but is fundamental in the
discussion of water resource issues and geological hazards in many parts of the
world. Retreating glaciers in places like the Himalayas are increasingly
blanketed with rock debris as thinning exposes unstable rock in valley walls.
This debris cover modulates glacier melt in a complex way, creating uncertainty
among downstream communities in the volume and longevity of a key freshwater
resource. Furthermore, debris accumulations atop melting ice have a tendency to
be very unstable, creating flooding and debris-flow hazards to nearby people and
infrastructure. Our research will combine several modeling tactics and tools,
along with geospatial analysis and field observations, to better constrain the
key processes and variables controlling melting and debris redistribution in
these environments.