* 1225669
* Copper Processing and its Implications in NW Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Edward Schortman, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2014
* USD 27,012.00

What is known about prehistoric Mesoamerican metallurgy is seemingly
straightforward. Workshops where items of copper and copper alloys were made
date to as early as the 7th century and are limited to western Mexico. These
objects are found in small numbers throughout Mesoamerica in contexts that
suggest their use in conveying the high ranks of those who could acquire them.
Consequently, the creation and expression of hierarchical distinctions in
numerous prehispanic societies partly depended on elite access to goods flowing
through trade networks originating in west Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;Excavations
conducted during 2002 and 2004 at the Terminal Classic (AD 800-1000) political
center of El Coyote in northwestern Honduras challenge these assumptions.
Investigations here revealed unexpected but clear evidence of copper processing
including areas where: copper-bearing rocks were broken up before smelting; the
smelting occurred; the melted material was further processed to yield small
beads of pure copper; and, debris generated by these steps was jettisoned. If
the workshop's prehispanic date is confirmed, this discovery questions
archaeological assumptions about copper's role in ancient Mesoamerican systems
of production, trade, and power. &lt;br/&gt;Ascertaining El Coyote's
significance to the understanding of metallurgy's place in Mesoamerican
political and economic processes requires determining: when copper working
occurred at the center; what techniques were employed in this process; and how
the manufacture of copper artifacts figured in the social relations through
which power was exercised locally and over wider territorial extents. Of these
objectives, the first is the most fundamental. Initial attempts to date El
Coyote's copper workshop yielded contradictory results; the material culture
found in the production area points to its use in the Terminal Classic period
while C-14 assays suggest an 18th century date. Complicating the matter is
evidence that copper was worked at El Coyote over at least three distinct
chronological phases and may span the prehistoric and historic eras. Metallurgy
may, thus, have figured in local and regional political economies that pre-
and/or post-dated the Spanish conquest.&lt;br/&gt;Work supported by the National
Science Foundation will address these crucial issues through a combined program
of excavation and data analysis. Systematic excavation will determine the
production area's full extent, identify features related to copper working,
especially where artifacts were cast, and collect material samples from
different strata and locations throughout the workshop. These items will be
subject to varied analyses, including: 1.) studies of artifact styles and
functions to infer periods of occupation, behaviors pursued in the workshop, the
cultural affiliations of the artisans, and changes in these variables over time;
2.) chemical and mineralogical assessments of soils, artifacts, and debris to
reconstruct changing technologies of manufacture and trade connections; 3.) C-14
assays to date the different intervals of copper processing.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the research include the opportunities it will provide: for
Honduran and U.S. students to learn the practice of archaeology; for local
teachers and their charges to incorporate emerging understandings of the area's
prehistory in their studies; and, to enhance understanding of metallurgy's place
in past political economies.