* 1225917
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Spatial Spread of Stage-structured Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* William Fagan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Two significant challenges in ecology are to understand and accurately describe
the spatial spread of species. Such spatial spread is important in a variety of
ecological contexts, such as when non-native species invade new habitat and when
species shift their spatial distributions in response to global change
processes. Meeting these challenges requires population models that capture
essential aspects of the dynamics of spatially spreading species, including
demography and dispersal. Integro-difference equations will be used to describe
the spread of populations with separate growth and dispersal stages wherein
vital rates and dispersal abilities are determined by age, size, or
developmental stage. Semi-discrete models (hybrid dynamical systems) involving
reaction-diffusion equations and integro-differential equations will be employed
to study the spread of populations in which different processes or different
rates occur inside versus outside a species' reproductive period. Models with
Allee effects will be developed for plant populations with pollination
limitation, and for two-sex populations with reproductive asynchrony and
imperfect mate-finding. Data from two well-studied field systems matching the
structure of specific models will be used to parametrize key model components.
The investigators will examine the existence of spreading speeds and traveling
waves for the models, provide formulas for spreading speeds and traveling wave
speeds, and calculate the sensitivity and elasticity of the speeds to changes in
demographic and dispersal parameters. Methods from differential equations,
integral equations, and dynamical systems will be used to investigate the
spatial dynamics for the models. The outcomes of this research will also have
broader impacts in other scientific disciplines where wave propagation is
addressed. New rigorous mathematics will be integrated with extensive field and
laboratory data to bridge the gulf between abstract mathematical results and
ecological observations. To further broaden the impacts of this research, the
investigators will also develop a MathBench module (.umd.edu) relating to
ecological invasion dynamics. This module will feed into the larger, NSF-funded
MathBench Initiative, which is designed to improve the quantitative literacy of
undergraduate biology students and give them a deeper appreciation of the role
of mathematics in understanding biological problems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through new research at the interface of mathematics and biology,
this project will contribute to the growing body of information on the spatial
spread of species. Research on the dynamics of species spatial spread is
essential to understanding when and where resource managers can act to limit the
spread and impacts of non-native, invasive species. Likewise, better
understanding of the dynamics of spatial spread is essential for forecasting
species responses to global change processes. In this project the investigators
will develop and analyze mathematical models incorporating species birth,
growth, death, and movement to identify points in species? life-cycles that are
critical to the rates of population spatial spread. Models for plant species
limited by pollen supply and for populations featuring imperfect mate finding
will be explored, with a focus on understanding the effects that particular
population processes have on the rate and nature of species spatial spread. By
focusing on two ecological case-studies in addition to novel mathematics, this
project will help to point out specific targets and opportunities for natural
resources management.