* 1225583
* OCE-RIG:  Causes and consequences of consumer pressure across latitude
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Amy Freestone, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

In this project, the principal investigator will conduct field experiments in
sea grass ecosystems ranging from North to Central America testing hypotheses
that explore the fundamental mechanisms that drive the latitudinal diversity
gradient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies using a simplified model habitat
demonstrate that variation in interaction strength, particularly consumer
pressure, can be an important determinant of contemporary species diversity
patterns across latitude. This project will translate these advances from a
simplified model habitat to a complex natural ecosystem of conservation
importance, seagrass beds. Seagrasses are critical foundation species that
provide complex habitat for a rich biota, including commercially important
species and a diversity of macroalgae that, along with the seagrasses,
significantly contribute to coastal primary productivity and nutrient cycling.
This ecosystem is among the most threatened in the world, yet how fundamental
ecological interactions, such as consumer pressure, shape patterns of
biodiversity in this system remains a central question. This project will
explore the effects of consumer pressure on species diversity in a complex
natural ecosystem across the primary global gradient, latitude.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project links field sites in North and Central
America, and builds infrastructure for continued exploration of large scale
ecological patterns and processes. Understanding how ecosystems operate across
biogeographic scales is emerging as an exciting and transformative research
avenue. To overcome methodological and logistical challenges of conducting
standardized experiments across large scales, this project employs multiple
experimental approaches to directly compare community dynamics of seagrass
ecosystems in three regions spanning 30 degrees of latitude from the temperate
zone to the tropics. Standardized consumer exclusion and exposure experiments
will be conducted in New Jersey, Florida, and Panama using both artificial and
natural seagrasses. Seagrasses, and the diverse communities of epiphytic sessile
invertebrates and macroalgae that they support, will be studied to reveal the
ecological importance of consumer pressure on ecosystem structure and diversity.
Latitudinal gradients in consumer diversity, consumer activity, prey
recruitment, and abiotic conditions will be explored as mechanistic
underpinnings of this continental-scale phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will broaden participation of under-represented groups in the ocean
sciences by using an established international research program as a platform
for engaging, inspiring, and educating students at the middle school, high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels through direct intensive research
training, mentoring, and hands-on field activities. Promoting diversity in
science is a long-standing commitment of the PI, and she continues to mentor
students of under-represented groups through programs at Temple University, her
professional society, and local universities. By collaborating with programs at
Temple University that inspire and train women and under-represented minorities
to pursue careers in STEM fields, the PI will lead annual field trips for middle
and high school students to Barnegat Bay, New Jersey (a study site for this
project). Through hands-on activities, these students will help develop a long-
term publicly-available data set for use as an educational tool and as a
resource for research. The PI will continue to support outreach activities in
the Philadelphia public schools through an established NSF GK-12 program, which
serves a diverse population of local students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences Research Initiation Grant (OCE-RIG)
program, with goals to support novel research by early career scientists and
increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean sciences workforce and research
community. With OCE-RIG support, this project will enable a promising early
career researcher to establish themselves in an independent research career
related to ocean sciences and broaden participation of under-represented groups
in the ocean sciences.