* 1225597
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Impact of Mechanization and Market Integration on Industry Location in Germany and the Pennsylvania-Ohio-Virginia Region 1840-1910
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Price Fishback, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2014
* USD 10,832.00

Which factors determine industrialization is still one of the great questions of
economic development. Most empirical research on industrialization has focused
on cross-country comparisons of productivity and economic growth. One limitation
of these national comparisons is that they tend to overlook the diversity of
economic conditions inside most countries. This dissertation research project
will exploit regional differences in industrial development within Germany and
the Pennsylvania- Ohio-Virginia region to analyze the role of natural resource
endowments, agglomeration economies, and political barriers to migration and
firm location for industrialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first question
being analyzed is how mechanization contributed to the geographic concentration
of manufacturing industries in Germany and the Pennsylvania-Ohio-Virginia
region. The introduction of powered machinery created the potential for
technology spillovers and benefits to shared local labor markets for skilled
technicians. Furthermore, the adoption of water and steam power introduced
dependence on natural resources like rivers and coal. In fact, the adoption of
water power might have hindered the formation of industry clusters, because the
use of water power required location on a river with sufficient flow and space
for a dam. In contrast, the adoption of steam engines might have encouraged the
concentration of industries around coal mines, because coal deposits were scarce
and coal was expensive to transport. Comparing the effects of mechanization on
the geographic concentration of industry in Germany and the Pennsylvania-Ohio-
Virginia region will help to identify which of these mechanisms shaped the
industrial landscape under the different conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second research question pursued here is how the political unification of the
German Empire affected industry location. It is possible that political barriers
prior to 1871 served as protection for manufacturing in less developed states,
in which case unification could have led to de-industrialization in these areas.
But unification also added hinterland for establishments in already dense
manufacturing centers and could have encouraged firms to spread out
more.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, unification might have improved local conditions in
less developed states and made them more attractive for manufacturing. The
foundation of the German Empire coincided with the railway boom and
mechanization in manufacturing, which makes it difficult to separate the impacts
that these events had on the location of manufacturing. By using U.S. counties
as a control group and districts in Germany as a treated group, one can examine
more effectively the impact of political and economic unification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new data set has been collected from the manufacturing
censuses of the German Zollverein and the German Empire, which documents power
use and regional employment for 124 industries between 1846 and 1907. Similar
data will be collected from the U.S. state manufacturing censuses between 1840
and 1910. By making these new data sets available, this project will contribute
to our knowledge about industrialization in Europe and the United States. The
proposed analysis is also expected to improve our understanding of the long run
consequences of political and market integration. Most economists and policy
makers agree that market expansion generally increases overall welfare, but what
happens to local industries when independent states with different regulatory
frameworks join a single union with common regulation is less clear.