* 1225782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  An Experimental Approach to Understanding Elections and Citizen Information Processing
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Jennifer Wolak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 12/31/2014
* USD 8,858.00

Electoral campaigns are thought to serve two major purposes: 1) to provide
citizens opportunities to hold government accountable and 2) to educate citizens
about candidates and issues. The first goal, promoting representation, is
intimately tied to the second of informing people. But if campaigns fail to
educate citizens, or if people are biased consumers of information about
candidates, the extent to which citizens can ensure they are being well-
represented is weakened. If predispositions and party labels interfere with
objective attention to candidates' issue positions, then this poses serious
concerns about citizens' competence in a representative democracy.

Imagine a citizen trying to decide between two candidates. Often, the choice is
simplified by party cues that provide an easy indication that a candidate and a
voter hold similar beliefs. In contemporary politics, however, the party cue
often fails to serve its informative role. Frequently, candidates hold issue
positions that contrast with those of their co-partisans. When party cues and
issue preferences diverge, are citizens able to competently attend to candidate
positions? Or do partisan identities interfere with people's ability to learn
about their choices? The mixed evidence on how party cues and policy information
affect citizen competence requires further exploration in the context of a
dynamic campaign.

The intellectual merit of the project emanates from its attention to the
critical question of: to what extent, and how precisely, do party cues limit
information seeking and objectivity? If people are unable to attend to
candidates' policy positions because of party labels, the expectations of
representative democracy require a better understanding of how such biases may
be mitigated. Previous experiments have failed to simultaneously 1) leverage the
dynamic nature of campaigns to shed light on citizens' willingness to
objectively learn policy information, 2) explore the consequences of party and
policy manipulations beyond candidate evaluations, and 3) evaluate the
mechanisms underlying partisans' biases. This project varies both the extent of
issue-based agreement between candidates and voters as well as candidates' party
labels. These manipulations, and the ability to track voters' information
searches over the course of a dynamic, simulated campaign, will shed light on
the conditions under which citizens objectively learn about their choices. As
the main component of a larger dissertation on campaign learning, this
experimental design speaks to a central aspect of citizen competence - the
ability to overcome partisan biases during elections. Normatively, this will
provide insight into how campaigns and elections may better encourage voters to
look past simple party labels and objectively evaluate candidates.

The broader impacts of this work are connected to its extension of our knowledge
of why people learn during campaigns, how their predispositions shape their
openness to information, and the consequences of new information for their
attitudes. Furthermore, this project contributes to multidisciplinary interests
in stereotypes, learning, and the normative consequences of using simple cues in
evaluating choices. By understanding the conditions under which people will
learn cognitively uncomfortable information about candidates, this project helps
develop a better picture of why some people are more open to alternative
perspectives than others. Furthermore, understanding the conditions under which
partisan biases are attenuated can inform strategies that may encourage voters
to objectively attend to policy-specific, rather than just partisan-filtered,
information. Beyond political science, these findings will be of interest to
psychologists who study motivated learning, social scientists interested in
representation, and policymakers seeking to better understand the role of
campaigns in promoting civic competence and citizen engagement.