* 1225688
* Collaborative Research: OpenFE - Developing Faculty Expertise and Creating Learning Materials for Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Darci Burdge, Nassau Community College
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2017
* USD 212,562.00

Free and open source software (FOSS) is created by individuals and organizations
that make the resulting software freely available for anyone to use, study,
modify, or re-distribute. FOSS has become a major part of the software industry
and is producing many world-class products. Among these products are
Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software products (HFOSS) that create social
benefit in areas such as disaster relief, economic development, and health care.

Experience with undergraduate participation in HFOSS demonstrates a potential to
motivate students, create excellent learning opportunities, and attract and
retain female students in computing disciplines. However, many instructors need
professional development and a supporting community to bring HFOSS into their
classes. The Open Source Faculty Expertise (OpenFE) project is expanding the
community of faculty with expertise in HFOSS and is also creating, organizing,
and evaluating learning materials needed to integrate HFOSS into computing
curricula in diverse settings including community colleges.

OpenFE is building on prior NSF-funded work to reach a larger and more diverse
student population. Group informatics is being tested as an approach for
creating and supporting instructor learning groups. OpenFE is also incorporating
FOSS community learning strategies such as Legitimate Peripheral Participation
to create an innovative application of professional learning strategies to
undergraduate computing education.

OpenFE is a collaborative project involving Drexel University, Western New
England University and Nassau Community College.