* 1225799
* The Effects of Zoning and Local Regulatory Environment on Housing Prices and Foreclosure Risk
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Arnab Chakraborty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 99,356.00

This project focuses on whether and how characteristics of local zoning and
regulatory environment are related to foreclosure risks. Despite the strong
interest of local governments in reducing the impact of the recent surge in
foreclosures, little is known about how the policy tools available to local
jurisdictions can be used to minimize the risk of foreclosure. Research on
determinants of foreclosures has concerned primarily on tracing the risk-taking
behavior of borrowers and lenders, lending-related policies, and poorly
regulated financial markets. A small but growing body of literature presents a
clear link between housing price, housing supply, and foreclosure. This project
will explore the implied connections between foreclosure risk and land-use
regulation. The investigator posits that when zoning restricts the supply and
diversity of housing types and affordability, homebuyers may be forced into a
higher price category and consequently may have a higher vulnerability to
foreclose. This can be especially true under additional adverse conditions
(trigger events), such as when there is a decline in homeowner income or housing
value. This phenomenon may have been exacerbated by increased access to subprime
lending instruments during the recent housing bubble and subsequent burst. The
investigator will examine these connections through the following research
questions: (1) How are the zoned housing capacities and diversity of zoned
housing types in an area related to higher rates of housing price escalation?
(2) Controlling for other factors, are areas with high rates of sub-prime
mortgage activity associated with local regulatory characteristics and changes
in housing prices? (3) To what degree did regulations and housing price
escalation contribute to the vulnerability of homeowners to foreclose? As
municipalities are most often the government entities responsible for zoning
decisions, he will examine these relationships primarily at the municipal level
using multiple metropolitan areas in the United States. He also will look at the
ZIP-code and individual parcel-level associations within these municipalities to
test the theoretical associations suggested by the literature on zoning and
housing price at these scales. Because foreclosure risk may be affected by
factors beyond a spatial unit, he will apply spatial autoregressive models
(spatial lag models) and multi-level regression models to analyze interactions
across geographical boundaries and hierarchical scales.

This project will address the gap in current research related to local
conditions by systematically including zoning policies affecting housing
production and supply into the foreclosure risk analysis. Project findings will
provide important evidence to facilitate consideration of more robust policy
interventions and to help foster communities more resilient to future shocks.
The framework and findings of this project will be disseminated widely through
academic and policy venues and will add to the tools that can help identify
affordable housing shortages and areas of concentrated risk.