* 1225792
* IONiC: Transforming Education Through Collaborative Development of Materials at the Frontiers of Inorganic Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lori Watson, Earlham College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 437,962.00

The goal of this project is to improve student learning in inorganic chemistry
on a national scale through design, implementation, evaluation and dissemination
of classroom and laboratory activities that incorporate topics in cutting-edge
research. Four professional development workshops deepen faculty content
knowledge in emerging research topics in materials, bioinorganic chemistry,
catalysis, and organometallic chemistry. Workshops are led by pedagogy and
discipline experts from a variety of institution types, including leading
researchers in these areas. Teaching materials based on the research are
produced by workshop participants and reviewed by the expert workshop leaders.
Workshop participants join an online community of inorganic chemists and
disseminate their work on the Virtual Inorganic Pedagogical Electronic Resources
(VIPEr) web site. VIPEr, a platform for collaboration, conversation, and
dissemination, is home to more than 550 registered faculty users and serves as a
dynamic community for the evaluation and improvement of these materials.
Workshop participants and others in the VIPEr community test the learning
materials and report student learning outcomes on VIPEr. Virtual versions of the
four workshops are also made available on VIPEr.