* 1225753
* Theories of Sentence Processing and the Neuroscience of Language:   Special Session at the 2013 CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Fernanda Ferreira, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2014
* USD 32,511.00

The cognitively based theories that influence current psycholinguistic research
are based largely on non-neural data and theoretical constructs. The foundations
of these theories are formal linguistic models of grammar as well as cognitive
models of memory, attention, and learning. However, given that language
processing must take place in a physical structure, it is critical to develop
theories that are biologically plausible and compatible with other theories in
the cognitive neurosciences. The 26th Annual CUNY Human Sentence Processing
Conference, to be held in March 2013 at the University of South Carolina, will
include a Special Session to address this question: Can the basic architecture
of language developed in the 1950s and 1960s that was based primarily on
linguistic evidence, or in the 1980s and 1990s based on statistical constraint-
based models, survive in the era of brain imaging, brain stimulation, and
sophisticated cognitive neuropsychology? If not, what new architectures for the
language system are compatible with what has been learned from the entire range
of relevant evidence--including linguistic, behavioral, and biological data?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Special Session will bring together six prominent
researchers to consider this fundamental issue. This particular group was chosen
because a range of major cognitive neuroscience methodologies besides
traditional neuropsychology is represented, and because the speakers take
diverse theoretical perspectives on linguistic architectures and processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Special Session will make contact with the widest
possible spectrum of conference attendees, but particularly with younger
scientists with interests in neurobiological approaches to cognition and
language. The Special Session will also help to ensure that the resource-
intensive research undertaken by neuroscientists studying language will have as
broad an impact as possible and will begin to seriously inform fundamental
theorizing in all areas of psycholinguistics.