* 1225926
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Bone Marrow Transplant Practices for Children with Sickle Cell Disease in the United States and France
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Lesley Sharp, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 23,344.00

Columbia University doctoral candidate Gina A. Jae, supervised by Dr. Lesley A.
Sharp, will conduct research on how healthcare systems in the United States and
France are making a risky, expensive, but potentially curative procedure
available to children affected by sickle cell disease, a disabling genetic
disorder common to minority and immigrant populations. Although this procedure,
hematopoietic cell transplantation (also known as bone marrow, umbilical cord
blood, and stem cell transplantation), has been available to patients with
sickle cell disease in both countries for over two decades, only a few hundred
cases have been documented in the medical literature. Over half of these
procedures have taken place in Europe, with the majority of them performed in
France. Given that U.S. private and state-funded insurers universally cover the
high cost of this procedure for sickle cell disease, other factors need to be
considered in addition to the availability of healthcare access to patients.
Because French and U.S. healthcare environments share leadership in
international sickle cell disease research and clinical care, but are
nonetheless producing divergent practices, these two sites provide a rich
opportunity for comparative investigation.

The project will involve social science research methods such as participant
observation, interviews, oral history, and archival research. The researchers
plan to conduct an ethnographic examination of interactions among scientists,
healthcare providers, patients and their caregivers, and advocates and
policymakers in the U.S. and France in order to produce a deeper understanding
of the social, scientific, political, clinical, and ethical processes that are
making complex medical practices routine in these national and local contexts.

The research is important because it incorporates the participation of
underrepresented minority and immigrant children and adults affected with sickle
cell disease. The researchers will disseminate the findings of the project to
patients and their families, to local advocacy groups, and to scholars in both
countries. Oral histories will be archived and made available to the public
through the Columbia University Center for Oral History. The project will
strengthen research collaborations between the U.S. and France, contribute to
the training of a social scientist, and help healthcare professionals in both
countries provide the best standard of care to individuals with sickle cell
disease.