* 1225644
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Entitlement Claims and NGO Professionalization in the Making of the Chinese AIDS Epidemic
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Miriam Ticktin, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 8,420.00

New School doctoral candidate Carol Wang, supervised by Dr. Miriam Ticktin, will
investigate China's transition to a liberal market economy, a subject of much
scholarly and popular discussion, given its wide-reaching impact on individuals,
the environment, and global exchange. This research considers the effects of
China's economic transition through AIDS activism, a phenomenon that links the
rise of consumer entitlements, the spread of contagious disease, and the
influence of international public health and human rights in post-reform China.
The research will focus on the emergence of politically engaged HIV-positive
individuals and the ways in which they are drawing from international discourses
to reframe an epidemiological concern as a problem of human and legal rights.

The project will utilize social science methods, including twelve months of
participant observation in Beijing and other China locations; structured and
semi-structured interviews with Chinese HIV/AIDS activists, Euro-American human
rights trainers, and others; and textual analysis of written materials. These
methods will allow the researcher to address the multi-directional
interconnections between HIV/AIDS and human rights, two global forces that have
crossed China's borders as indirect results of state economic policy.

This research will bring law and medicine into the same field of inquiry, and
will examine how these two overlapping and yet often contradictory regimes of
expertise come together as civil society groups engage in processes of
professionalization. This research will also illustrate the evolution of China's
health care and legal systems during economic liberalization. By examining the
situation through the eyes of those who must navigate these bureaucracies, this
study may be helpful to national policymakers as well as international agencies
invested in the development of these systems. This research is co-funded by the
Cultural Anthropology program and the Law and Social Sciences program and will
contribute to the training of a graduate student.