* 1225980
* Directly quantifying the isotopic fractionation associated with the key enzymes in microbial sulfate reduction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* David Johnston, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2015
* USD 239,154.00

The microbial lifestyle of sulfate reduction is central to the oxidation of
organic matter both in the Modern and throughout Earth?s history. This linkage
to the carbon cycle, and in turn climate, is commonly inferred through sulfur
isotope studies, which are themselves informed by experiments with extant
bacteria that perform this process. At its core, however, bacteria are driven by
a suite of enzymes, or catalysts, that conduct much of the critical chemistry.
In this proposal, investigators look to place the first direct isotopic
constraints on the two key enzymatic steps within this metabolism: dissimilatory
sulfite reductase [DsrAB/C] and APS oxido-reductase [APSr]. This data will allow
for a more mechanistic understanding of cellular fractionation processes, which
will then sharpen our capacity to read environmental records. This research
project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Ines Pereira of the
Instituto De Technologia Quimica E Biologica, ITQB, Portugal, who will provide
the biochemistry expertise necessary for the project. A Harvard graduate student
will travel between the Pereira and Johnston's labs, acquiring valuable
interdisciplinary training in isotope geochemistry and biochemistry. Travel
costs for the international component of this research have been provided by the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.