* 1225825
* OCE-RIG: Emission of greenhouse gases by coastal marine invertebrates in response to nitrogen loading and ocean warming
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Serena Moseman-Valtierra, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 07/31/2015
* USD 99,993.00

In this project, the principal investigator will study greenhouse gas (GHGs)
emissions from coastal invertebrates in relation to nitrogen availability and
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal ecosystems may be significant sources
of greenhouse gases, including nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane (CH4) that have
300 and 25 times the global warming potential per molecule of carbon dioxide
(CO2). Marine invertebrates, in particular, may produce GHGs in coastal
ecosystems either directly or indirectly, through biogenic alteration of
sediments, which expands the oxicanoxic interfaces in which microbes thrive.
Anthropogenic nitrogen (N) loading and warming of coastal oceans may both
enhance GHG production significantly. To test the hypothesis that numerically
dominant coastal invertebrates, including a tube-building amphipod (Ampelisca
abdita) and bivalves (Mytilus edulis, Mercenaria mercenaria, Geukensia demissa),
can emit significant quantities of CO2, N2O , CH4, manipulative experiments will
be performed. Potential emissions from each species, and subpopulations (along
an existing nitrogen gradient in Narragansett Bay, RI), will be assayed under
standardized conditions. To test how emissions from coastal invertebrates vary
in response to anthropogenic fertilization and warming of the ocean, nitrogen
and temperature will then be manipulated in mesocosm experiments. Fluxes and
dissolved GHG concentrations will be compared across treatments. The abundance
of two key potential mediators of GHG fluxes, ammonia-oxidizing and methane-
oxidizing microbes, will also be characterized. These examinations will reveal
functional consequences of ocean warming and fertilization, including the
potential of coastal organisms to enhance global climatic
feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve broadening
participation of under-represented groups in STEM. The principal investigator is
committed to advancing science among all members of our diverse society. A
graduate student will be recruited from a national diversity outreach program.
Undergraduate researchers, via Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships, will
be mentored, and their contributions will be featured in new workshops that will
be developed for high school students and teachers, and the National Society for
the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences
Research Initiation Grant (OCE-RIG) program, with goals to support novel
research by early career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean
sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-RIG support, this project
will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an
independent research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation
of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.