* 1225163
* OCE-PRF: The Use of Biological, Ecological and Genetic Observations as an Integrative Approach to Understand Coral Decline
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Jorge Pinzon, Pinzon                  Jorge          H
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

For this project, the investigator has developed an integrative study including
ecological, morphological, biochemical and genetic observations to understand
individual responses of corals to temperature stress.

Increased coral mortality and subsequent modifications of coral reef ecosystems
are responses to the changing environmental conditions that include direct and
indirect effects of increased atmospheric CO2, increases in water temperatures,
disease outbreaks, bleaching, and opportunistic pathogens. In the Caribbean,
combinations of these natural effects have affected several coral species, among
them the Montastraea annularis species complex. Considered one of the most
important genera of corals in the Caribbean, these species have been affected by
diseases and bleaching episodes. Infections and environmental effectors have
significantly reduced abundances of M. annularis. Given that these species show
local-specific responses to thermal stress and differential survival rates, it
is likely that individual genetic composition may offer different levels of
resistance/susceptibility to environmental stressors and infectious diseases.
Therefore, a combination of observations that includes these different variables
is needed to resolve key questions in the response of corals to environmental
changes.

The broader impacts of the research include mentoring for graduate and
undergraduate students in two minority serving programs at the University of
Texas Arlington. Mentoring activities involve participation of students in all
aspects of the scientific method, including manuscript preparation. Furthermore,
the investigator will join outreach efforts of the sponsoring scientist who is
engaged in local and statewide activities. The investigator will also work with
local junior high schools as well as participate in the Hispanic Engineering
Science and Technology conference, where students are taught about coral reefs
and exposed to interactive workshops on the role corals play in healthy reef
ecosystems.

This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to support novel research by early
career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean sciences
workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support, this project will enable
a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation of under-
represented groups in the ocean sciences.