* 1225160
* Integrated Dynamics of Temporal and Spatial Controls in the Cell Division of Caulobacter crescentus
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Yang Cao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 275,192.00

The purpose of this project is to gain deeper insight into the molecular
mechanisms controlling the growth, division and differentiation of bacteria by
building mathematical models of gene expression and protein localization within
a bacterial cell. The free-living aquatic bacterium, Caulobacter crescentus, is
a suitable organism for addressing such questions because it divides
asymmetrically into two different types of cells (a stalked cell and a swarmer
cell) and because the molecular basis of its asymmetric division process is
easily studied in the laboratory by modern genetic, biochemical and microscopic
methods. In light of the wealth of experimental results now available on the
genes and proteins controlling this process, the funded project will address the
pressing need for accurate and predictive mathematical models that connect
detailed molecular mechanisms with the observed properties of Caulobacter
reproduction and differentiation. Two types of mathematical models will be
considered. Deterministic models--based on systems of nonlinear partial
differential equations--will be used to describe the average behavior of a
population of Caulobacter cells, which is the type of data collected in many
experimental protocols. Stochastic models--based on the reaction and diffusion
of individual molecules within a single cell--will be used to describe the
precise spatial distribution and temporal dynamics of specific proteins within
cells, as measured by microscopic studies of fluorescently labeled proteins.
This project will provide new ideas, methods, algorithms and software for
spatiotemporal modeling of gene expression and protein dynamics in living cells.
It will also provide training for two graduate students, a life scientist and a
computer scientist, in modern methods of computational cell biology,
mathematical modeling and spatial stochastic
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes by which bacteria grow, divide
and differentiate are of great importance to human welfare because we live in
intimate relationships with many types of bacteria. Beneficial bacteria colonize
our digestive tract, fix nitrogen for our crops, and produce valuable products
in our bioreactors. Pathogenic bacteria cause diseases in us and in our crops
and domestic animals. To gain control over both beneficial and pathogenic
bacteria, we need to understand the molecular mechanisms governing bacterial
reproduction and differentiation. Mathematical models are useful tools for
exploring hypotheses about these mechanisms because they integrate a wealth of
experimental evidence into a realistic and accurate computer representation of
molecular interactions. Computer simulations then serve to test the hypotheses
against known experimental facts in a comprehensive fashion and to predict the
outcome of novel experimental studies. The cell division cycle of Caulobacter is
a favorable case for testing the utility of mathematical modeling in molecular
cell biology. In addition, because Caulobacter is closely related to both
nitrogen-fixing and disease-causing bacteria and because its asymmetric mode of
division is analogous to the reproduction and differentiation of human stem
cells, the mathematical methods and biological results expected from this
project may ultimately lead to practical developments in agriculture and
medicine.