* 1225204
* Scalable Bayesian Inference in Large Medical Databases
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Finale Doshi-Velez, Doshi                   Finale         P
* Fellowship Award
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

This project will develop new efficient algorithms for large-scale nonparametric
Bayesian inference in the context of medical prediction problems. The
computational techniques will be applied to discover intermediary pathways,
known as pathophenotypes, that can be used to predict cardiovascular disease
expression and events based on electronic health record and genomic data. While
many articles have discussed the promise of electronic health records to improve
drug surveillance and efficacy, the advanced statistical methodologies needed to
realize this promise requires innovation in efficient computational techniques
specially designed for large datasets and modern computer architectures
including distributed computing and dealing with streaming data. The
contributions of the proposed work will result both in contributions to computer
science and statistics as well as in direct impacts for safer, higher-quality
healthcare. The work on scalable Bayesian inference will be of general interest
to wide breadth of statistics, operations research, economics, and machine
learning communities working on efficient inference techniques.

Each of the technical research objectives is inspired by problems in analyzing
large medical data, and thus the proposed work will have direct implications for
improved healthcare through more timely predictions of adverse drug events and
patient outcomes (well-aligned with NSF?s mission to improve national health,
prosperity and welfare). The fellowship will allow the researcher to build on
her established teaching record through co-instructing a machine learning course
at Harvard, supervising 1-2 masters? students on projects related to the
proposed research, and high school outreach through the MIT Educational Studies
Program.