* 1225734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Transmitting Diagnostic Skills in Tibetan Medicine: Embodied Practices for Indigenous Categories of Cancer
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Carol Worthman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 14,989.00

Emory University doctoral candidate Tawni L. Tidwell, supervised by Dr. Carol M.
Worthman, will investigate biocultural understandings of how humans create and
teach complex knowledge systems. The focus of the research will be on how
medical knowledge and epistemologies are conceptualized, transmitted, and then
enacted in practical skill. Using Tibetan medicine as a case study, she will
examine how diagnosis is formally transmitted, cultivated, and clinically
deployed, in this 2,000 year-old text-based, orally-instructed, and practically-
implemented non-Western system. What are the learning processes and related
sociocultural structure that support such a system in its enactment of
diagnostic skill? What do these processes tell us about the transmission of
complex knowledge systems more generally?

As the first western student in Men-Tsee-Khang, the premier Tibetan medical
school, Tidwell will undertake her investigation with Tibetan medical student
peers, faculty, and a group of expert physicians. She will document how
diagnostic skills are transmitted, cultivated and applied, with particular
regard to a Tibetan medical illness category called dres-nad. The focus on dres-
nad is strategic because dres-nads and biomedical cancers are the illness
categories in which the Tibetan medical and western biomedical systems most
closely overlap. As such, this overlap opens a space in which to elucidate the
distinctive features of the two systems of diagnosis and care. Through class
participant-observation, student and faculty interviews, and expert physician
clinical observations, Tidwell will look at these processes, influences and
methods of how situated knowledge of the body interacts with knowledge practice
systems to develop skill development and further such skills toward expertise
with specific regard to dres-nad.

This research will provide insight into the transmission of complex systems of
knowledge by illuminating medical education in a sophisticated, rigorous and
systematic non-Western medical system. The study will facilitate international
research collaborations and partnerships. Funding this research also supports
the education of a graduate student.