* 1225920
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutionalized Eldercare in Contemporary China
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Marcia Inhorn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 11,088.00

Yale University doctoral student Rose Keimig, under the guidance of Dr. Marcia
Inhorn, will investigate how elders, families, and caregivers are negotiating
new forms of institutionalized eldercare in contemporary China. Decades of
reforms during the twentieth century, and especially the one-child policy of the
late 1970s, have given rise to stark demographic imbalances in China today.
These imbalances have, in turn, stimulated an increase in demand for residential
care facilities against a backdrop of filial piety norms and the privatization
of health care services. The proposed project is one of the first to use
ethnographic research methods to study how experiences with elderly
institutionalization in China are mediated by pluralistic medical systems,
changing moral worlds, shifting demographics, and new market-driven caregiving
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be conducted in
Kunming, the capital of Yunnan province in southwestern China. Using a
combination of social science methods, including participant observation and
interviews with staff, residents, and families of institutionalized and non-
institutionalized elders, this study aims to show how people are grappling with
the everyday challenges of new forms of eldercare. The wide range of research
methods and informants will provide a rich account of how the broader themes of
biomedicalization, kinship, and urbanization map onto the aging experience in
contemporary China. Furthermore, by going beyond the existing demographics and
statistics, this research seeks to uncover how, by moving aging relatives out of
private homes and into institutions, families are facilitating the emergence of
new forms of institutional caregiving and new ways of being an elderly person, a
filial child, and a caregiver in contemporary China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has broad social relevance, not just in China but across the globe. By
showing how aging is experienced, how caregiving decisions are made, and how
family responsibilities are reworked in institutional settings, this project
will illuminate areas for policy interventions that will make demographic
transitions easier for future caregivers, elders, and families in China, the
U.S., and around the world.