* 1225036
* Collaboratively Developing Research-Based Curricular Materials to Improve Conceptual Understanding in Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2013
* David Pollock, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 10/31/2013
* USD 599,798.00

The findings of educational research are not always put into practice by
teachers. This project is addressing this problem through collaboration of 20
educational researchers and engineering instructors at different colleges and
universities in the Pacific Northwest, who are creating and implementing new
approaches to teaching the engineering course Mechanics of Materials.
Specifically, this project is focusing on deeper understanding of fundamental
engineering concepts such as stress, strain, and equilibrium. The collaborators
are working to discover and change students' preconceptions, which may be
incorrect assumptions of how materials behave, based on their prior coursework
and life experience. This project is addressing a real problem that engineering
instructors are currently experiencing in their classrooms. Since the
engineering educators have been involved in the project from the beginning, they
are more likely to continue to use the curriculum materials they develop, and to
encourage others to use them. This collaboration is also ensuring that the
findings are being implemented in classrooms soon after they are discovered.
More interactive, conceptually oriented classrooms, such as those being
implemented in this project, will improve student learning and increase student
interest and retention in engineering.