* 1225974
* OCE-RIG: Variability in Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) strength and hydrological conditions in the central Sahara/Sahel during the Pliocene-Pleistocene
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Isla Castaneda, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,939.00

In this project, the principal investigator will examine past AMOC variability
and hydrology in the Sahel using a multi-proxy geochemical
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in the strength of the Atlantic
meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) are known to have a major influence on
global climate with the areas around the North Atlantic, including Europe, North
America, and northwest Africa. It is predicted that the AMOC may slow down
during the 21st century, based on current model simulations from the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Therefore, it is important to develop
a better understanding of past AMOC variability and its impacts on ocean and
continental climates as well as to further develop and refine methods for
fingerprinting past AMOC variability. A distinctive feature of AMOC slowdown in
the tropical North Atlantic is surface cooling accompanied by shallow subsurface
(&gt;30 m) warming. A recent study of the tropical N Atlantic demonstrated that
organic geochemical temperature proxies can be used to simultaneously
reconstruct surface and subsurface water temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this research effort, the AMOC variability and
hydrological conditions in the Sahel will be reconstructed by using a multi-
proxy geochemical approach to examine sediments from ODP Hole 660A. This project
is designed to test the hypothesis that the characteristic AMOC signature of
anti-correlated variation between surface and subsurface water temperatures in
the tropical N Atlantic also existed on longer multi-millennial to million-year
timescales. This research will provide new records of sea surface temperature
(SST), subsurface temperature, and continental vegetation and hydrology during
the Pliocene-Pleistocene, which will be used to examine relationships between
AMOC and continental hydrology. A particular focus is on the mid-Pliocene warm
period, an analog for future warming on Earth, and during the onset and
intensification of Northern Hemisphere glaciations in the late Pliocene, when
major steps in mammalian and hominin evolution occurred. A new Plio-Pleistocene
SST record generated by this work will be used to examine the evolution of zonal
and latitudinal SST gradients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is an important
part of the broader impacts of this project. The educational aspects of this
proposal consist of training a graduate student, two undergraduates, and six
high school science teachers. The proposed activities will introduce high school
students to the exciting subject of ocean sciences and provide them with
information on career opportunities in this field. In an effort to increase
awareness of the ocean sciences to under-represented groups, as well as overall
participation in the ocean sciences, science teachers will be recruited from
high schools lacking Earth Sciences curriculum. The high school teachers will
visit the University of Massachusetts-Amherst during the summer and work with
the PI and graduate student to produce classroom activities that can be
incorporated into high school chemistry, biology and physics courses.
Subsequently, the PI, undergraduates and graduate student will visit the home
high school of each teacher during the academic year to inform students about
career opportunities in the ocean sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences Research Initiation Grant (OCE-RIG)
program, with goals to support novel research by early career scientists and
increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean sciences workforce and research
community. With OCE-RIG support, this project will enable a promising early
career researcher to establish themselves in an independent research career
related to ocean sciences and broaden participation of under-represented groups
in the ocean sciences.