* 1225857
* ComGen Authentic Research Experiences (C-ARE):   Dissemination, Enrichment and Expansion Project
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Cheryl Vermilyea, Bellevue College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 598,233.00

Intellectual Merit: The core of this project is a one quarter long, six quarter
credits undergraduate laboratory course centered on sequencing the genome of an
agriculturally significant bacterium, Pseudomonas fluorescens. In addition to
lectures covering traditional curriculum, students will perform original
research (sequence the segments of DNA, trouble shoot, assure the validity of
their data, analyze and infer the significance of their results and communicate
their data to peers and faculty). The synergistic activity of critiquing current
original research articles in the topics covered in lecture connects the
research experience to the students' theoretical learning and informs student
analysis of their own data. Community college partners include Olympic, Clark,
Tacoma and Everett Community Colleges. Other partners include the USDA ARS Root
Disease Biological Control Research Unit and Washington State University.

Broader Impact: The aim of this project is to enable community colleges
throughout the broad Seattle Tacoma region of Washington state to incorporate an
authentic research experience within their traditional laboratory curricula. It
is based on a highly successful model designed and implemented by the PI at
Bellevue Community College and involves a considerable amount of professional
development for the faculty involved. The results will be a set of faculty with
new disciplinary related skills in genomics, students who have been part of a
scholarly project, community colleges with an enhanced curriculum, and important
information gathered about an agriculturally important Pseudomonas species.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education