* 1225886
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Recycling and waste management in Chinese cities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 2,419.00

Yale University doctoral candidate Amy Zhang, under the guidance of Dr. Michael
R. Dove, will undertake research on the transformation of social and physical
contemporary urban landscapes through the lens of waste management. Waste
management has become a focus of official efforts to construct modern cities, a
prominent means of livelihood for rural migrants, and a frequent rallying point
for urban environmental activists. Building on the emerging literature in
anthropology on the material dimensions of social life and urban infrastructure,
this study aims to examine the meanings and values that inform different ways of
discarding and reclaiming objects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through eighteen months
of ethnographic research with waste experts, activists and informal collectors
in Guangzhou and Beijing, China, the researcher will identify the social
practices, technologies and infrastructures of waste management, and the
accompanying aspirations and values that are reconfiguring China's urban
environment. She also seeks to understand the public reception of science and
technology in China; various ways of knowing waste, risk, and pollution; and the
relationship between state efforts to build modern cities and the lived
experiences of inhabitants. The researcher will use a variety of social science
research methods including semi-structured interviews, oral histories,
participant observation (of waste management schemes), ethnographic life-cycle
analysis (of waste objects), photographic documentation, and photovoice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public policy debates on waste management in China
foreground the need for technological solutions. This project broadens the
debate over municipal waste management to include recognition of the public
reception of science and technology and informal systems of recycling. These
dimensions are important to both policy makers and urban and regional planners
who seek to design livable cities in China and the global south. Finally, this
project adds an ethnographic perspective, focused on the significance of human
aspirations and the unforeseen outcomes of social practice, to a growing
interdisciplinary field aimed at enhancing understandings of the human
dimensions of urban environmental change. Supporting this research also supports
the education of a graduate student.