* 1225750
* 2012 CCES
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Stephen Ansolabehere, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,229.00

The Cooperative Congressional Election Study (CCES) is a data infrastructure
project involving the collaboration of research teams from over 60 academic
institutions. Collectively these research teams have fielded national surveys of
35,000 adults in 2006, 37,000 in 2008, and, with partial funding from NSF,
54,000 in 2010. In addition the project has produced a 10,000-person survey
panel in 2006 and 2007, a 2,000-person panel in 2006, 2007, and 2008, and a
Hispanic sample in 2010. The core of this award is to guarantee a minimum survey
of 20,000. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each research team that wishes to be involved
in the project purchases a 1,000 person sample survey. Each individual team
determines half of the questions on its survey while the other half of the
content is created by a design committee, drawn from the participating teams
(called Common Content). With 35 teams, as in 2006, there are 35 individual team
surveys each with a sample of 1,000 and a single common survey of 35,000 cases.
Researchers have used their team modules to conduct survey research on themes
and questions for which appropriate public use data are not available. Since
2006, the CCES has produced studies that have appeared in over 60 journal
articles and dozens of books. This includes over a dozen articles that have
appeared in the top three journals in the discipline. The National Science
Foundation support will pay for the Common Content part of the survey, and will
facilitate participation from a large number of institutions that otherwise
could not afford to participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing survey data
for so many scholars at so many institutions, the survey helps to create and
sustain a network of researchers interested in a wide variety of public opinion
topics. Over 60 institutions have participated in the project so far, and each
team involves multiple faculty members and research assistants. Those who
participate in this project build research skills, especially in the area of
questionnaire design, and generate further research ideas that can be pursued
through this or other vehicles. The CCES also has a central educational mission.
The current grant will allow for further development and distribution of
instructional materials relating to the survey that may be adopted widely as
part of graduate curricula. In addition, several university teams have used this
platform to support PhD dissertation and post-doctoral research.