* 1225733
* A NEW APPROACH TO EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION OF COUPLED SILICATE DISSOLUTION - PRECIPITATION REACTION RATES AT AMBIENT CONDITIONS WITH SI ISOTOPE SPIKES
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Chen Zhu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,976.00

Many of society's urgent environmental concerns and problems, such as global
warming and strategies that mitigate it, and the stresses on the Earth's
Critical Zone - the thin veneer on the Earth's Crust from vegetation canopy to
the soil and groundwater which sustains human life and is where most terrestrial
life thrives on Earth - have something to do with the rates of feldspar
dissolution. Feldspars are the most abundant minerals in the Earth's crust,
comprising of more than 50% of the Crust volume. For the former, one global
warming mitigation strategy is geological carbon sequestration, for which CO2 is
stored in deep underground geological formations. However, the injected CO2 will
acidify the native brine and dissolve feldspars in the reservoirs, which could
affect the reservoir quality and the long-term safety of storage. For the
latter, the weathering of feldspars as an abundant mineral in the Critical Zone
is critical to rates of soil development and the buffer capacity of the Critical
Zone to stresses. However, to assess how fast feldspar dissolution or weathering
takes place (chemical kinetics), we need to wrestle with one of the fundamental
challenges in geochemistry. It has been known for a long time that the
laboratory measured dissolution rates of feldspars are two to five orders of
magnitude faster than rates estimated from field studies. Without resolving this
seemingly intractable obstacle, we cannot quantitatively evaluate a number of
environmental and geological processes, such as those mentioned above.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is designed to test the promising hypothesis
that would partly resolve the apparent discrepancy: A large part of the
discrepancy between in situ field and laboratory rates results from the coupling
of the dissolution and precipitation reaction in the field systems which is
absent in most laboratory experiments. Historically, the determination of very
slow feldspar dissolution rates in laboratory at ambient temperatures has been
problematic. Slow reaction rates mean that solutes may be below analytical
detection limits, thus affecting the accuracy of the experiments. Here, the
investigator proposes an innovative utilization of newly developed technology -
High-Resolution Multi-Collector Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry -
and uses a novel design of stable silicon isotope 'spikes' to overcome these
obstacles in order to determine feldspar reaction rates at ambient and near
equilibrium conditions, not previously possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
will involve cooperation among the investigator at Indiana University and his
colleagues at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev in Israel, and at Trent
University in Canada. Funding is requested only for the US organization. This
study will enhance international and multi-disciplinary collaboration and
contribute to the training of a post-doctoral associate and an exchange student
from Israel. Te investigator is currently conducting research on the industrial
scale CO2 storage project in Norway (the Sleipner project) and will communicate
the results from this study to the CO2 storage community and the Critical Zone
research community.