* 1225741
* Exploration-Driven Online Science Education:   Habitable Worlds 2.0
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Ariel Anbar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2019
* USD 676,945.00

Society's response to climate change and many other challenges hinges on public
understanding that science is not a body of facts and certainties in tidy
disciplines, but rather a process of reasoning which often crosses disciplines
and which narrows the uncertainties of knowledge. Unfortunately, the way science
is taught to non-science students at most large universities tends to reinforce
misconceptions. For example, many students satisfy their general science
requirement in very large introductory lecture courses based on traditional
disciplines. While some of these courses are excellent, they often emphasize
facts rather than scientific reasoning. Lectures are often supplemented by
laboratories to address this gap. However, when class sizes reach the hundreds,
laboratories often feature scripted "cookbook" activities that do not teach
students to reason scientifically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators are deploying and assessing a large-enrollment undergraduate
general education science course that places scientific reasoning and
multidisciplinary perspectives at the heart of the experience. This model is
possible because of developments in online, computer-assisted education
(cyberlearning). The project builds on Arizona State University's semester-long
"Habitable Worlds" course, which is organized around the search for intelligent
life beyond Earth. Motivated by the question "Are we alone?" students explore
key science concepts from astronomy to sustainability using online tutorials
that employ interactive simulations and immersive, media-rich "virtual field
trips" (VFTs). Video lectures are embedded in the tutorials, but as scaffolding
rather than as centerpieces. The tutorials utilize an intelligent software
platform that responds adaptively to student input--essentially, a virtual tutor
--and collects data on students' actions and inputs useful for learning research
and course development. Such platforms that can be programmed by the instructor
are now becoming commercially available. The investigators' thesis is that for
large student populations this model is superior to conventional lecture-based
online and face-to-face courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Habitable Worlds" was
piloted in Fall 2011 and will have been offered to about 800 ASU students online
by the end of Fall 2012. In this project, the investigators, in collaboration
with Maricopa Community College District (MCCD) faculty, are deploying and
assessing a new version, "Habitable Worlds 2.0," which is optimized to scale to
even larger and more diverse student populations. In this revised course,
tutorials follow a learning progression from less to more mathematically
involved, and are better aligned with K-12 education standards for pre-service
teachers enrolled in ASU's Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College (MLFTC). Data
collected by the tutoring platform is being used for research on student
problem-solving. The investigators are also comparing the effectiveness of VFTs
to physical field trips and are rigorously evaluating course effectiveness using
both formative and summative methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the size
of ASU and MCCD, this project could have far-reaching effects on undergraduate
science education nationwide. Because "Habitable Worlds 2.0" is part of the
redesigned teacher preparation program at MLFTC, which is one of the largest
teacher preparation programs in the United States, the project is also likely to
have a broad impact on K-12 education.