* 1225720
* IDBR (EAGER): An AFM-Based Instrument for Monitoring DNA Synthesis in Real-Time
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Reza Shahbazian-Yassar, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 04/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award supports development of an
instrument that is capable of sequencing human and other genomes with
unprecedented low cost, long read sections, and high speed and accuracy. To
achieve this goal, the probe of an atomic force microscope (AFM) will be
functionalized with a DNA polymerase, and the conformational perturbations of
the polymerase during DNA synthesis will be monitored by the AFM in real-time.
Because different nucleotides cause different conformational perturbations of
the enzyme, the sequence of the template DNA will be read out directly from the
order of unique conformational perturbations as it travels through the
polymerase. Using instruments currently on the market, genome sequencing is
highly expensive, which hampers many applications such as personalized medicine.
With these instruments, only short read segments can be obtained, which results
in high computational efforts in post-sequencing genome assembly. The short
reads also cause problems for sequencing genomes that have long repeats.
Existing methods require sample amplification by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). Because of inaccuracies introduced during sample amplification, the
genome sequences are not accurate enough for applications such as disease
diagnosis. During traditional sequencing, information on epigenetic DNA base
modifications, which is linked to many important biological processes, is lost.
The proposed AFM-based instrument is expected to overcome these problems.
Because the new instrument uses single-molecular sequencing, the costs for DNA
sample preparation and amplification in existing technologies will be minimized.
In many known sequencing technologies, expensive reagents are required. The new
technology may only need natural nucleotides, which will further reduce costs.
The sample DNAs used for sequencing with the proposed instrument will not need
amplification by PCR, thus the inaccuracies introduced during sample preparation
in existing sequencing methods will be avoided. Because the sequences of DNAs
are read out directly and continuously during DNA synthesis, the sequencing
speed and read length will far exceed those of technologies currently on the
market. Because original sample DNAs are used for sequencing and epigenetically
modified nucleobases are predicted to cause different conformational
fluctuations of polymerase from unmodified ones, the new instrument is expected
to sequence genomes without losing any epigenetic base modification
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will have a broad impact on
many research areas such as human health, food, energy, environment, and
national security, all of which demand sequencing the genomes of human, animals,
plants, bacteria, viruses or other organisms. Besides sequencing, the instrument
will also find application in DNA polymerase conformational dynamic studies
giving data that cannot be obtained directly using known techniques. Similar
instruments for studying other enzymes can also be readily made using the
technologies developed in this project. These instruments will help to answer
important fundamental questions on enzyme catalysis. Initially, the new
sequencing service will be provided to biological research labs through
collaborations. Later, the service and the instrument will be made commercially
available to medical, academic, and commercial labs. The project is highly
multidisciplinary. Three research groups that have expertise in biology,
chemistry, and engineering will work together to develop the instrument. During
this process, two postdoctoral researchers and at least two PhD students will
gain extensive research experiences in these fields. In addition, three or more
undergraduate students will also be trained. Some of these next generation
scientists are expected to help the commercialization of the instrument and
sequencing technology.