* 1225529
* Synchrony in Metapopulations at Multiple Time-Scales: Theory, Experiments and Field Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Robert Costantino, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to understand how and why collections of spatially distinct
populations of a species (called metapopulations) display synchronous
fluctuations in plant and animal numbers. Synchrony among populations has a
serious implication for conservation biology. Synchrony means that
metapopulations, on occasion, can be simultaneously rare which enhances the
likelihood of extinction. Synchrony results from migration among populations and
from environmental variation that affects multiple populations. The relative
importance of these two mechanisms remains unknown. The current statistical
methods of analyzing synchrony have shortcomings. The degree of synchrony
between two population time series is usually measured by a single number, such
as a correlation coefficient. However, the strength of synchrony between two
time series can vary with the time scale on which it is examined, that is,
synchrony may have frequency-specific components. To increase our understanding
of metapopulation synchrony, this project will (1) analyze data from large
spatio-temporal ecological databases, (2) develop new theory and statistical
methods, and (3) conduct new laboratory experiments. The implications for
climate change, extinction risks, and the mechanisms that drive synchrony
(migration and environmental variation) will be assessed. Long spatially-
extensive time series of environmental variables and population numbers will be
analyzed to characterize the frequency-specific nature of synchrony. Analytical
and numerical analyses of mathematical models will develop theoretical
expectations for how frequency-specific environmental synchrony affects
population synchrony and probabilities of metapopulation extinction. Experiments
with laboratory populations of flour beetles will extend earlier studies in
several ways. First, the investigators take a time-scale-specific perspective on
both environmental and population synchrony. Second, they examine both
equilibrium and chaotic populations. Previous theoretical work has show that
these two dynamics respond differently to synchronizing processes. Third, their
experiments will involve two sibling species of insects whose population
dynamics are controlled by different density-dependent mechanisms: cannibalism
of immature life stages and delay of metamorphosis. The former leads to rapid
responses to perturbations and increases the tendency for demographic cycles
whereas the latter leads to slow responses to perturbations and non-cyclic
dynamics. The use of both species will allow an evaluation of the generality of
the experimental results. This multidisciplinary approach will enhance our
understanding of ecological synchrony and its relevance to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have important practical
implications for the effects of global climate change on species extinction and
will lead to more sophisticated methods for conserving threatened or endangered
species whose populations have become fragmented. The research will capitalize
on existing ecological databases and will generate and disseminate high quality
laboratory data that can be used to further our understanding of the
interactions among environmental variation, dispersal, and population dynamics.
The mathematical and statistical tools developed will extend the traditional
methods for examining synchrony to consider different time scales and will be
applicable to data from other fields. The project will also contribute to the
interdisciplinary education of undergraduates and graduate students, including
underrepresented groups, and will create and distribute instructional materials
to facilitate the use of the flour beetle system for training in quantitative
ecology at the undergraduate and graduate levels.