* 1225666
* Memory encoding in spatially structured networks: dynamics, discrete geometry & topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Carina Curto, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 04/30/2015
* USD 164,999.00

Hippocampal networks are believed to be a major center of associative learning
due to the central role of the hippocampus in learning and memory, as well as
the relatively high levels of recurrent connectivity and synaptic plasticity.
The lack of topographic structure in hippocampus has made it a natural
inspiration for associative memory models, such as the Hopfield model, for
encoding memories in unstructured recurrent networks. At the same time, studies
in rodents have uncovered the critical role of hippocampus in spatial navigation
and, more recently, time-tracking. In contrast to associative memory encoding,
these functions have been successfully modeled using spatially structured
networks. How can these viewpoints be reconciled? The central goal of this
research is to develop a mathematical theory of memory encoding in spatially
structured networks, and to study the neural codes that arise from such
networks. Specifically, the research will develop mathematical theory to answer
the following questions: (1) How can overlapping memory patterns be encoded
precisely as attractors of an unstructured neural network, without introducing
unwanted "spurious states"? (2) How can memories be encoded in a spatially
structured network, such as a bump attractor network, while maintaining
functions that depend on the network's spatial organization? (3) Aside from
error correction, what are the advantages of redundancy in a neural code, such
as the hippocampal place field code, that is characterized by heavily
overlapping receptive fields? This last question will also be explored via the
analysis of cortical and hippocampal data sets provided by collaborating labs.

The hippocampus is often thought of as a "Swiss knife" in the brain. Decades of
experimental work have uncovered its essential role in learning and memory, as
well as in spatial navigation. From a theoretical standpoint, it is puzzling how
the same neural network can achieve such disparate functions. In particular,
mathematical models of memory encoding are fundamentally quite different from
models of spatial navigation. This work will integrate these two major types of
neural network models, with the goal of understanding how the hippocampus can
support multiple important functions. At its core, the research will advance the
mathematical theory behind our understanding of network-level computation in the
brain.