* 1225726
* Collaborative Research: Assessment of Product Archaeology as a Platform for Contextualizing Engineering Design
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Wei Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 08/31/2014
* USD 64,999.00

Many engineering programs struggle to meet the accreditation requirement that
all engineering students have "the broad education necessary to understand the
impact of engineering solutions in a global, economic, environmental, and
societal context." As a result, engineering students receive meaningful
contextual experiences in a piecemeal fashion and graduate with a lack of
concrete competencies that bridge knowledge and practice in the global world in
which they live and work. By considering products as designed artifacts with a
history rooted in their development, the product archaeology framework combines
concepts from archaeology with advances in cyber-enhanced product dissection to
implement pedagogical innovations that address the significant educational gap.
With an archaeological mindset, students approach product dissection with the
task of evaluating and understanding a product's (and its designers') global,
societal, economic and environmental context and impact. These hands-on,
inductive learning activities require students to move beyond rote knowledge to
hone their engineering judgment, extend and refine their knowledge, and apply
their knowledge in meaningful ways to realistic challenges. This pedagogical
framework thus provides students with formal activities to think more broadly
about their professional roles as engineers. This project, which is a
collaboration among 6 universities, focuses on assessing the learning outcomes
of exercises developed within the product archaeology framework. By documenting
the implementation characteristics of the exercises at each school (for example,
is the course a required or elective course, how many students are enrolled, is
it a design or analysis course, etc.) and assessing the learning outcomes both
quantitatively and qualitatively, the project is developing strong evidence of
what factors enable engineering students to develop an understanding of the
broader impacts of their decisions.