* 1225801
* OCE-PRF: Examining biological production and utilization of marine polyphosphate with integrated biogeochemical methods as an approach to broaden participation in ocean sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Julia Diaz, Diaz                    Julia          M
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, the investigator will explore the cycling of phosphorus in the
ocean by studying the biological mechanisms that shape the abundance,
production, and utilization of marine
polyphosphate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although phosphorus (P) is a key nutrient
that helps control marine biological productivity and microbial community
composition, the origin and fate of up to 75% of marine dissolved P,
collectively referred to as dissolved organic P (DOP), remains enigmatic.
Research conducted by the investigator revealed that polyphosphate (poly-P) is
an abundant component (~10%) of DOP throughout the world's ocean and is involved
in critical global processes such as geologic P sequestration and global
climate. However, as in the case for bulk DOP pools, very little is known about
the biological mechanisms shaping the abundance, production, and utilization of
marine poly-P. Given the profound ecosystem and climatic implications of poly-P
cycling and its potential role as an abundant biological P source, understanding
the microbial sources and sinks of poly-P that regulate its composition and
surprisingly consistent global abundance remains a fundamental challenge in
oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in the study of marine poly-P have
historically been limited by a lack of analytical techniques; however, tools to
fill critical knowledge gaps in marine poly-P cycling are now available through
an integrated biogeochemical approach that combines the expertise and technical
backgrounds of the investigator and sponsoring scientist. New mechanisms of
poly-P production and microbial P assimilation discovered through this research
have the potential to fundamentally advance biological models of P metabolism
and transform current understanding of marine DOP by revealing new mechanisms
that shape its composition, influence the linked cycles of other nutrients,
oxygen, and carbon, and global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational broader
impacts integrate with existing education and outreach opportunities at the host
institution. The investigator will mentor two summer undergraduate students
recruited through the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Minority Student
Fellowship Program. Mentoring approaches are designed to advance discovery and
substantially enrich the students' scientific contributions, personal
experiences, and overall likelihood of continuing in ocean science. Additional
broadening participation activities will contribute to the existing
infrastructure of ocean science education and foster participation in the
broader community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF
Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to
support novel research by early career scientists and increase the diversity of
the U.S. ocean sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support,
this project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish
themselves in an independent research career related to ocean sciences and
broaden participation of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.