* 1225760
* Learning to speak in time: Perception and production processes involved  in conversational turn-taking
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Eve Clark, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,646.00

Every conversation is made up of turns at speaking. Many people are surprised to
learn that speakers take turns with very little time between speakers (gaps
average ~200ms) with hardly any overlaps. This is true of conversation in
languages around the world. Since there's no single clue to indicate when
someone will finish speaking, listeners must track speech in real time and
attend to a variety of cues to when a speaker will end. But what information do
participants in a conversation rely on? This project investigates how children
and adults take turns 'on time' by studying natural variation in how quickly
speakers take their turns, and by measuring onlookers' eye movements as they
watch videos of two people talking. This project will investigate how much
participants' ability to anticipate the end of a turn relies on words vs.
intonation and rhythm (prosody) in everyday speech. Words give information about
content, and also about the structure of upcoming speech. Prosody is a
continuous cue to how a phrase is structured, and also relates to the words in
many cases. Because young children are good at differentiating between some
prosodic patterns, but don't yet know much about words or syntax, we hypothesize
that their use of cues will differ from adults'. This project will study turn-
taking in natural conversations in order to identify the developmental path for
this conversational skill. Conversation is the gateway for analyzing interaction
with other social beings. For children, conversation is a way to learn about
language and the world. Trivial skills for adults, such as knowing when to come
in and how to ask relevant questions, take children years to develop.
Understanding how children develop these skills should also shed light on how
they gain access to the information all around them.