* 1225317
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Work, Play, Race, and Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Alysa Handelsman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 10,508.00

University of Michigan doctoral student Alysa Handelsman, under the guidance of
Dr. Bruce Mannheim, will explore the interconnections between forms of play and
work of Afro-descendant street children in Ecuador as a means of understanding
how these children conceptualize their worlds, and how these conceptualizations
challenge traditional theories of work, play, and childhood. Over 30 percent of
Ecuador's population is under the age of 15, and, as of 2006, approximately 20
percent of the children in Ecuador live and work on the streets. This research
investigates how poverty transforms play and produces children who act
strategically in the face of uncertain survival and in the face of conflicting
and competing expectations from caretakers, teachers, police officers, and other
adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this work critically considers the
ways race is experienced, learned, discussed, and imagined by Afro-descendant
children -- a topic that is understudied by anthropologists, particularly in the
context of the Andes. One of the major contributions of this research will be to
show the links between economic circumstances, racial classifications, and
conceptions of childhood. The research will demonstrate how these links are
producing and regulating young people who must play and perform to survive by
means of strategies and contexts that are configured quite differently from
those of middle-class or wealthy children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through 18
months of fieldwork, primarily in Guayaquil and partially in Esmeraldas,
Handelsman will conduct research in NGOs, schools, streets, and street
children's neighborhoods. She will employ social science methods such as
participant observation, interviews, and focus groups. As an ethnographer, she
is committed to conducting fieldwork in multiple spaces and contexts to provide
diverse opportunities and venues for her research subjects to share their
stories and ideas, and so will be utilizing many innovative methods, including a
photovoice project. These mixed methods and settings form part of the
collaborative nature of the project, as they enable the participation of the
children in the research process. The research findings will be disseminated to
community members, and the project will contribute to the training of a graduate
student.