* 1225872
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Interaction, Tradition, and Middle Woodland Monumentality at Garden Creek, North Carolina
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Robin Beck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,191.00

Roughly 2000 to 1500 years ago, the southern Appalachian Mountains marked the
edges of two spheres of indigenous culture contact and exchange: Hopewell,
centered in the Midwest, and the Kolomoki pattern of platform mound
ceremonialism, concentrated in the Deep South. Under the direction of her
advisor, Dr. Robin Beck, dissertation student Alice Wright will examine the
relationships between these interaction spheres and the emergence of monumental
architecture at the Middle Woodland period (ca. 300 BC - AD 800) Garden Creek
site in western North Carolina. Since monuments are well-known archaeological
signposts of novel social, political, and religious institutions, Ms. Wright's
research stands to clarify how interactions among far-flung egalitarian
communities contributed to profound cultural changes in the pre-Columbian
Eastern Woodlands. Garden Creek includes significant archaeological deposits
that pre-date and coincide with the construction of earthen mounds and
enclosures, as well as large assemblages of local and non-local artifacts,
providing an ideal case study for evaluating the roles of both local traditions
and non-local influences in shaping unprecedented monument construction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, Ms. Wright's research at Garden Creek has
involved the re-analysis of large but unpublished artifact collections from the
1965 excavations of Garden Creek Mound No. 2 and five months of fieldwork
(2011-2012) targeting areas around the mound. Preliminary analyses of these
datasets have focused on evidence for continuity and change in the spatial
organization of activities, food production and consumption, and craft
production. In this award, several monumental and non-monumental contexts will
be radiocarbon dated to link such changes to the history of monument
construction at the site. Several stratified features will be examined
micromorphologically to clarify the nature and timing of the activities that
generated them. Ms. Wright will also coordinate macrobotanical and
geoarchaeological (Fourier transform infrared microscopic) analyses by
specialists to further refine observations regarding foodways and possible
feasting associated with monumentality. Finally, several non-invasive
geophysical survey techniques (magnetometry, magnetic susceptibility, ground
penetrating radar) will be employed to map the extent of the site and to
generate an incomparable view of its monuments and surrounding built
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will form the
basis of Wright's dissertation and subsequent publications, and will elucidate
the relationships among cross-cultural interactions, monuments, and historical
change in ancient Eastern North America (and in comparative case studies
worldwide). The project will have broader impacts on the local community that
presently inhabits the site and its surroundings, as well as on the non-
renewable archaeological resources of western North Carolina. Ms. Wright has
worked closely with local residents, the Canton Area Historical Museum,
archaeologists at the National Forests of North Carolina, and several regional
universities to foster archaeological engagement and stewardship. By developing
a museum exhibit on Garden Creek, maintaining a regularly updated blog to report
recent findings, hosting a public archaeology day at the site, and presenting
talks to local schools and historical societies, the project actively encourages
local interest and enthusiasm for archaeological research, essential for
insuring the preservation of archaeological resources in the rapidly developing
portions of western North Carolina.