* 1225876
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Pronominal Clitics in Tajik Wakhi
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Brent Henderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,910.00

Wakhi is an Iranian language spoken in the Hindu Kush region of Central Asia,
including Pakistan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and China. Spoken by 30,000 people,
Wakhi is classified as endangered by UNESCO. Wakhi indicates agreement with the
subject differently depending on causal tense. In the present tense, agreement
seems to operate much as in Romance languages, with person and number morphemes
suffixed to the verb. Agreement morphemes in the past tense are less
straightforward. They are clitics which rarely, if ever, attach to the verbs,
and may attach to various constituents in the sentence, including subject and
object. Past analyses of these elements have labeled them simply as "mobile
pronominal clitics," leaving their nature ambiguous from a theoretical
perspective.

Under the direction of Dr. Brent Henderson, Mr. Todd Hughes will conduct primary
fieldwork in Wakhi communities of eastern Tajikistan. He will investigate the
function of these clitics from the perspective of syntax and discourse. Mr.
Hughes will elicit narratives as well as collect translations and grammatical
judgements on constructed examples. These will be used to develop an expanded
analysis of the clitics under study as they relate to the system as a whole,
making their nature more clear. This project builds upon a large body of
research focusing on clitics, mostly in Romance and other European languages,
adding data and insights from a geographically and genetically different
language. These outcomes, combined with ongoing research on the Wakhi in
Afghanistan, will allow for studies on dialectical variation.

All data will be digitally recorded, transcribed and annotated by Mr. Hughes.
With participant permission, the data will be submitted to the online Endangered
Languages Archive, establishing the first permanent audio-visual record of Wakhi
available to researchers and the Wakhi community. Wakhi community members will
be able to expand nascent revitalization efforts. Funding this project also
contributes to the training of a graduate student.