* 1226113
* Social interaction and social learning: A cross-cultural comparative study
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amanda Woodward, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* david moore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 349,924.00

Children depend on others to learn language, to learn how to act in culturally
appropriate ways, and to learn to engage with the physical environment
effectively. A great deal of current research has focused on identifying the
aspects of social interaction that foster these kinds of learning. Some
theorists have proposed that child-directed interactions are critical. In these
interactions, the adult and child engage together in visual attention while the
adult directly addresses the child to communicate relevant information (e.g.,
the name of an object, or the proper use of an artifact). These interactions
have been argued to be the critical foundation from which human social learning
and culture emerge. Support for this conclusion comes from findings
demonstrating that children show enhanced attention and learning when they are
directly engaged by adults as compared to when they simply observe an adult's
actions. However, these findings come exclusively from cultural populations
where children are regularly engaged in directed interactions by caregivers.
Thus, it is unknown 1) whether directed communication is a universal feature of
early learning environments or is particular to certain communities and, 2)
whether children's heightened proclivity to learn from directed interaction is a
universal constant, or simply corresponds to the typical day-to-day experiences
that children growing up in some communities have. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed studies will address these issues by exploring the presence of child
directed communication, and its role in informing early learning for 18-month-
old children from two cultural communities: A Yucatec Mayan community, where
children may have many opportunities to observe others, and a U.S. community,
where children may regularly experience directed interactions with caregivers.
If directed interactions are critical for early social learning, then children
in each culture should show heightened learning from directed versus observed
experiences regardless of the prevalence of directed interactions in their own
experience. Alternatively, if children's social learning is shaped by their
regular social experience, Mayan children may show heightened learning in
response to observed models, and even U.S. children's ability to learn from
observed models may vary as a function of variation in their opportunities to
observe others' actions. These studies will provide a strong test of whether
child directed interactions are, in fact, the cradle of human social learning,
or whether, instead, early social learning is a more flexible process, driven by
the broader ability to understand others' intentional actions, and shaped by
regularities in the child's social experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program will be the first to test the relation between cultural
experience and early learning from directed interaction and from observation. As
such, it is uniquely positioned to answer questions about the relative
importance that direct engagement has for early learning. This understanding is
critical for informing theoretical accounts of early development, as well as for
shaping policy decisions regarding the most effective means to teach children
who come from diverse environmental backgrounds. Further, the proposed studies
will develop a set of experimental paradigms that can be used across different
cultural communities, setting the stage for future comparative work on early
development in populations that have not been heavily studied before.