* 1226045
* Collaborative Research: Smart Power Distribution System Curriculum - Multi-Institution Demonstration and Deployment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anthony Deese, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 44,023.00

The steady modernization of electric power distribution systems has included the
installation of smart grid enabling technology such as intelligent electronic
devices (IED) equipped with their own internal sensors, mini-RTU's (remote
terminal units) which measure network flows, and Automatic Meter Reading (AMR)
for sensing network loads. While these devices have increased the level of
digital control available within power distribution networks, they use varied
communication protocols. In addition, significant efforts to increase the amount
of renewable and distributed energy sources/storage have been made by state and
local governments, yet in some areas, network limits have been reached.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed power distribution system curriculum is
designed to educate students in the operation and planning of smart electric
power distribution systems. The curriculum centers around a reconfigurable
distribution automation and control (RDAC) laboratory coupled with software
programs to visualize collected data and to control the distribution system.
Project tasks include teaching and lab materials development, implementation and
evaluation as well as faculty development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project
will create mature versions of previous work by making necessary adaptations for
implementation and testing at multiple academic institutions. The subsequent
evaluation procedure for these enhanced materials will create a process such
that new learning materials developed under this project are expected to also
yield successful course and laboratory modules that could be widely distributed.
The project will contribute to the effort to modernize the curriculum on power
distribution system in the nation's universities.