* 1226588
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Ghanaian Slums: Constructing Democracy in Unexpected Places
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Jeffrey Paller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 07/31/2013
* USD 17,640.00

Scholars and international media commonly portray slums as ungoverned urban
communities outside the reach of the state. Yet African slums reveal
considerable variation in their ability to access and maintain public services.
Some slums are able to attract state resources to build toilets, construct
sewers, pave roads, collect garbage, and provide security. Other slums secure
resources but are unable to maintain them--sewers overflow, roads deteriorate,
and police do not secure order. A third type of slum struggles to access or
maintain any public services. The central question of this dissertation asks:
Despite similar contexts of weak formal institutions and poor living conditions,
why are some slum communities able to attract and maintain public services while
others are unable to attract and manage these same services? By examining the
variation in how slum communities demand, secure, and maintain public services,
this dissertation provides important and overlooked insights into the process of
local-level democratization in Africa.

The dissertation hypothesizes that a slum's success depends on three underlying
political conditions--the type of community leadership, the form of community
organization, and the degree of state legal recognition. These conditions enable
or impede the development of accountability mechanisms that residents use to
hold their leaders to account.

The project combines ethnographic methods, focus groups, and a household survey
in the Greater Accra Region of Ghana. The comparative ethnographic case studies
are based in slum communities with similar population profiles, but with varying
levels of public service access and maintenance. The survey is novel because it
will consider all slum communities in Ghana and will include embedded
experiments that test trust in leaders and informal institutions.

The intellectual merit of the project is significant. First, it contributes to
investigations of state and society. The project re-conceptualizes slums as
political spaces where a slum's position toward the state--specifically its
degree of legal recognition and level of state investment that it attracts--
provides a potentially powerful formula to understand variation between slums.
Second, the dissertation shifts the study of democracy away from national
institutions to the community-level where informal institutions shape political
activity. Third, the project treats public goods provision as a political
process that includes demands (from the residents), distribution (by the
government), and maintenance (by the community). Fourth, the dissertation
advances scholarship on the rule of law in developing countries.

The project also has broader implications because it has the potential to impact
policy-making aimed at democracy promotion, development, and slum-upgrading
initiatives. As the number of individuals living in slums approaches one billion
people, there is an emerging need to treat slums as dynamic spaces and analytic
sites for political inquiry.