* 1226686
* FSML:   Acquisition of a next generation high throughput DNA sequencer (Ion Torrent) for the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* James Sanders, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 118,690.00

The Skidaway Institute of Oceanography is awarded a grant to purchase high-
throughput genome-sequencing equipment to provide a critical improvement in the
infrastructure required to conduct nucleic-acid-based research at the Skidaway
Institute of Oceanography. This next-generation DNA sequencing platform
represents a quantum leap in DNA sequencing technology, bringing true high
throughput DNA sequencing capacity within the reach of the field and marine lab
research community. Massively parallel high throughput DNA sequencing is a core
technology enabling global genetic analyses including whole genome sequencing
and transcriptomics, which have transformed research in a wide array of fields,
including in the Ocean Sciences. Research activities at the Skidaway Institute
of Oceanography have increasingly utilized DNA and RNA sequence data with DNA
sequencing required by at least 20 funded and several pending projects.
Approximately 1/3 of the Skidaway Institute faculty (6 of 16) and several local,
national and international collaborators routinely utilize sequencing technology
as part of their research programs. Sequencing technology is being used to push
the frontiers of many fields, but especially in biological and chemical
oceanography where microorganisms dominate the biogeochemical cycling of
critical nutrients and other elements. This technology is critical for
elucidating new perspectives on the structure of food webs and parasitic and
disease processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This improvement will allow researchers
to exponentially increase the amount of sequencing that can be generated for the
same research funds. As a result, experiments requiring high throughput
sequencing will become feasible in smaller projects, including student research
activities. Acquisition of this capacity will enhance several educational
opportunities through ongoing programs with other institutions, including the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Savannah State and Clark Atlanta.
Skidaway faculty, staff and students also work with local K-12 educational
systems to provide both pre- and in-service teachers with research experiences.
Collaborations with partners on the Skidaway campus including the University of
Georgia's Marine Education Center and Aquarium, Georgia Institute of
Technology's Chemical Ecology Laboratory, Georgia Southern University's Applied
Coastal Research Laboratory, The Georgia Department of Natural Resources
Underwater Archaeology Field Station, The Nature Conservancy and NOAA Gray's
Reef National Marine Sanctuary, also provide outlets for outreach and joint
research. For more information about the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
please see its website at: http://www.skio.usg.edu/.