* 1226763
* Conference:  Plant Virology Satellite Symposium for 31st Annual Meeting of American Society of Virology, July 21-25, 2012 at the Monona Terrace Convention Center in Madison, WI
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Anne Simon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2013
* USD 6,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project is to help support the Plant Virology Satellite
Saturday Symposium at the 31st Annual Meeting of the American Society of
Virology, which will take place from July 21-25, 2012 at the Monona Terrace
Convention Center, Madison, Wisconsin. The Symposium is sponsored by the Plant
Virology Club (PVC), an organization within the American Society of Virology
that was initiated to support research and speakers at the annual meeting who
focus on plant viruses. The PVC sponsors a one day Symposium every other year at
the Annual Meeting of the ASV. The Symposium this year was organized by Dr. Anne
Simon, the elected Plant Virus Councilor and the PI on this project. Dr. Simon
has worked throughout her career to bring together researchers working on plant
and animal viruses and to make animal virus researchers more aware of the
exciting work that uses plant viruses as models. Most virologists receive their
graduate education in Medical Schools, which nearly uniformly ignore research
that pertains to plant viruses. Similarly, most students studying plant viruses
are educated in plant pathology departments that likewise spend little time on
animal viruses. This separation has created a gap in the appreciation of the
research currently being conducted using plant viruses by animal virologists
working in the same area. This lack of appreciation reduces the impact of the
work on model plant viruses and also has resulted in the loss of support (from
NIH and USDA) for research that uses model plant viruses. The low level of
'cross-talk' between animal and plant virologists has also retarded research in
the broad areas of virus replication/gene expression and RNA structure/function
as well as innate immunity. The most prominent example of the negative impact on
research that accompanies segregation of viruses according to host is the field
of RNA silencing, which was well known to exist as a protective mechanism
against plant viruses before its belated discovery in nematodes. Conferences
that intermix talks on animal and plant viruses are rare (e.g., the Plus-strand
RNA Virus meetings every three years), and the vast majority of talks even at
these meetings continue to focus on animal viruses. The idea for this year's
Satellite Symposium, entitled: Virus Replication and Movement: Building Bridges
Between Plant and Animal Viruses came from an issue of Current Opinion in
Virology (Nov, 2011), which was edited by Anne Simon and Grant McFadden. This
issue was designed around a series of topics that were relevant to both plant
and animal virologists, with each topic covered by an animal and a plant
virologist. These topics are: Virus replication; Virus translation; Virus
origins; Virus reorganization of intracellular membranes; and Virus cell-to-cell
movement. The authors, selected as being world leaders in their fields,
incorporated information from their counterpart's chapter into their submission,
to better tie together the intersecting fields. Dr. Simon's idea was to organize
a novel Plant Virology Symposium around each of these topics and invite the
authors to speak. All authors gave enthusiastic agreement to come and present
their current research, and place this research within the broader disciplines
of plant and animal virus research. This should result in a broadening of the
appreciation of research fields regardless of the host by audience members and
hopefully foster new areas of communication within the broad field of
Virology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Graduate Students/Postdocs who
work on plant/insect/fungal viruses will be eligible for these NSF-sponsored
awards. This will assure that the students benefiting are not engaged in human
health/related research, which is less appropriate for NSF support. Attention
will be paid to distribution of the travel awards to labs in all regions of the
US, and preference will be given to students/postdocs who are underrepresented
minorities, women and persons with disabilities. We have also arranged with
Elsevier to present free copies of the Current Opinion in Virology that this
symposium is based on, which should allow participants to immediately access
review articles that span animal and plant virology, thus further broadening the
educational opportunity. Dr. Simon has spent her career advocating for the
broadening of the education of virologists in this country and this symposium is
the culmination of these efforts. These travel awards will allow students who
might not have been able to attend for financial reasons due to the current
funding climate, to participate in this exciting intersection among many fields
of virology.