* 1226823
* RUI:   Acquisition of Tools for Top-Down Management of Aquatic Systems: Evaluating Success at the Bottom of the Food Chain
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Willard Harman, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 94,315.00

The State University of New York College at Oneonta (SUNY Oneonta) has been
awarded a grant for its Biological Field Station (BFS) to acquire an maging flow
cytometer for coordinated long-term limnological (fisheries, zooplankton and
phytoplankton) monitoring and research, and research training/education
conducted by faculty and staff of SUNY Oneonta and the SUNY College of
Agriculture and Technology at Cobleskill, and including continued collaboration
with Cornell University?s acoustic-based fisheries research program. The
instrumentation will provide for rapid zooplankton and phytoplankton detection
and image capture for their enumeration and identification in Otsego Lake and
nearby lentic water bodies, greatly increasing the numbers of collections of
zooplankton and phytoplankton (including cyanobacteria) that can be analyzed in
the laboratory. This will enhance the capability to better understand the
spatial and temporal dynamics of primary consumers and producers in inland
waters. The instrumentation will be used to (1) describe planktonic communities
influenced by trophic cascades stimulated by introduced exotics and their
management; and (2) enhance plankton analysis, contributing to a number of long-
term monitoring and research projects conducted by the BFS and collaborating
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of work contributing to the
restoration and sustainability of Otsego Lake can be compared and articulated
with data from other inland and Great lakes, and applied to lakes with similar
problems nationwide. Characterizing lakes where there is a reasonable chance of
success for top-down management strategies to positively impact symptoms
associated with increased primary productivity (eutrophication), or at least
increase the filtering efficiencies of large-bodied zooplankton where introduced
forage fish have reduced those zooplankton populations, is of great benefit to
the lake management community nationwide. These studies have direct application
to the local restoration and sustainability of lakes and wetlands in our region
and broad relevance to applied natural resource management internationally
through the application of technologies and the training of professional
managers. The SUNY Oneonta BFS has a strong tradition of training students
(college-bound high school, undergraduate, and graduate) in ecological and
environmental studies. Access to state-of-the-art instrumentation enhances
summer internships and academic-year undergraduate research programs, enabling
students to master skills needed to pursue graduate study or professional
training, or to obtain related entry-level positions. It also enhances the
resources available to a new graduate program, the Master of Science in Lake
Management, offered by SUNY Oneonta's Biology Department. For more information
about the Biological Field Station please see the website at
http://www.oneonta.edu/academics/biofld/.