* 1226416
* Health Care Providers and Patient Interactions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Mary Campbell, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 174,134.00

SES - 1226416&lt;br/&gt;Mary Campbell&lt;br/&gt;Ellen Franklin&lt;br/&gt;Amal
Rahhal&lt;br/&gt;University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Health Care Providers
and Patient Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on extant
research showing that demographic characteristics impact most social
interactions and a range of life course outcomes. Debate continues about the
impact of phenotypical differences on the quality of interactions in the health
care context. To that end, the project examines how patient characteristics
affect interactions with health care providers. The central hypothesis being
tested is whether the content and quality of interactions between health care
providers and their patients is indeed affected by phenotype and skin tone. The
study permits comparisons not only between racial groups (e.g., whites and
African Americans) but also within racial groups (e.g., darker- vs. lighter-
skinned African Americans and Latino/as). To test this hypothesis, the project
relies on field experiment methods. Specifically, videotapes of medical students
practicing medical history interviews with "standardized patients" (actors) will
be analyzed for both verbal and nonverbal interaction dynamics. The benefit of
this field experiment is that it takes place in a realistic setting rather than
a lab and yet it still provides a standardized encounter in a similar
environment. Analysis methods include quantitative modeling
(HLM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research may inform our understanding of how individual-level interactions,
in addition to well-understood factors like access to health insurance or
preventative care, influence group disparities in health outcomes. Findings may
be of interest not only to policy makers but to insurance providers, the medical
community and medical schools charged with developing training, assessment, and
intervention programs. The project also broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups and students in STEM-related research.