* 1226611
* Glacio-geomorphic constraints on the climate history of the high, arid Chajnantor Plateau, subtropical northern Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Joseph Galewsky, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2017
* USD 380,224.00

This project will investigate the timing, causes, and consequences of glaciation
in an extremely arid subtropical landscape on the eastern boundary of the
Atacama Desert. Results of a pilot study demonstrate the past existence of an
ice cap covering over 200 square kilometers on the spectacular Chajnantor
Plateau in the high, subtropical Andes of Northern Chile, where far too little
snow falls to form glacial ice today. These new results raise several intriguing
questions: How extensively glaciated was this arid part of the high Andes? How
does the timing of the glaciation compare with other records of aridity and
moistening from the region? What changes in precipitation and atmospheric
circulation were required to develop and maintain these glaciers? What is the
relative importance of glacial, periglacial, and glacially-related fluvial
erosion processes in landscape evolution in arid settings? Addressing these
questions is the goal of this project, which will proceed along three main
fronts: 1) mapping and dating of glacial landforms, 2) numerical glacier
modeling, and 3) climate modeling. The major component of the research is to
establish a rigorous geomorphologic chronology for the Chajnantor Plateau and
immediately adjacent areas of the Andes, Altiplano and Atacama Desert,
specifically including the Tatio Geysers area about 70 km to the north. The
brunt of the work will focus on glacial deposits and related features. The rocks
of the area permit reliable measurement of in-situ produced cosmogenic isotopes
such as 10Be, 26Al, and 36Cl. This allows dating of moraines, erratics, and
glacially polished bedrock to describe not only periods of maximum ice expansion
but also more detailed histories of glacial retreat. The primary purpose of the
glacier modeling will be to estimate the history of equilibrium line altitude
and glacier mass balance as a paleoclimate proxy. In particular, it will be used
to evaluate how much more precipitation is needed to sustain large ice bodies in
the field area. This, in turn, will guide atmospheric modeling efforts by
establishing a criterion that must be met by any proposed climate change
mechanism. Atmospheric model experiments and diagnostics will be used to test
climatological hypotheses that could explain the required precipitation
increases in the subtropical Chilean Andes during glacial times. High-resolution
regional models will be run to encompass approximately 30 years in both a modern
control run and in an LGM scenario. Broader significance.

The history of glaciation and the climate mechanisms that modulate it are
relatively well documented at high latitudes, but tropical and subtropical
glacial histories are less robust. The subtropical Andes between 18 degrees S
and 27 degrees S are presently unglaciated, even on mountains higher than 6 km,
but show evidence of past glacial activity. The mountains in this region are
easily cold enough to sustain glaciers today, but simply receive far too little
snowfall. This project will establish when glaciers were last present and the
amount of additional snowfall needed at that time to sustain them. This
information is an important clue to understanding what was different about
atmospheric circulation, i.e., climate, at that time to bring more moisture to
the region. Therefore, this study will provide an important constraint on models
of wetting and drying in the subtropics as a result of specific changes to
climate. In other words, understanding the history of climate in the dry parts
of the Andes contributes to predicting the impacts of climate change on water
resource variability in arid subtropical areas. Additionally, the history of
human occupation of the study area and the adjacent Atacama Desert are tied to
the history of water in the region, which this study will help to resolve. This
project is both international and cross-disciplinary in scope. It will establish
additional scientific uses of the Chilean "science preserve" of the Chajnantor
Plateau, where many astronomical observatories operate. It will also establish a
working relationship with geoscientists at Chilean universities. Moreover, the
papers and presentations resulting from this project will create a formal link
in the literature between atmospheric sciences and geomorphology.

This project is supported by the Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics Program and
the Office of International Science and Engineering.