* 1226213
* Mathematical Models for Pause-induced Delays in Bioprocesses
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Tomas Gedeon, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 269,648.00

Observations from recent biological experiments indicate that the motion of a
transcription complex or a ribosome along the template is subject to multiple
pauses of varying time durations. In the case of transcription of ribosomal RNA
in bacteria, the density of elongating complexes is sufficiently high to
experience traffic jams. Since the growth rate in a fast growing E. coli
population is determined by the availability of ribosomes, which in turn is
limited by ribosomal RNA transcription rates, the elongation process of
ribosomal RNA is a key factor determining the E. coli growth rate. This research
project uses a nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential equation (PDE) as a
mathematical model for the transcription process of ribosomal RNA. The PDE takes
the form of a nonlinear conservation law, and it was first proposed as a
mathematical model for traffic patterns in the 1950's. Although this type of
model was superseded in the study of traffic flow by models that take into
account driver reactions, it is suitable for modeling elongation processes as it
incorporates density dependent velocities and the presence of transcriptional
pauses. The PDE model is used to estimate an instantaneous elongation rate in
the presence of a non-uniform distribution of pauses, which are biologically
important yet experimentally inaccessible quantities. The second major element
of the research is the development of analytical as well as sophisticated
numerical methods for verification, validation and sensitivity analysis of the
model. Discontinuous Galerkin methods form the foundation of the computational
schemes, allowing efficient numerical solution of systems of nonlinear
conservation laws with discontinuous coefficients that encode the presence of
pauses. These new tools will be used to determine the limits that
transcriptional pauses impose on the mean and variance of the transcription rate
of ribosomal RNA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maintenance of homeostasis, capacity to
grow and ability to respond to stimuli are just a few of the characteristics of
life that depend on each cell's ability to regulate production of molecules such
as mRNA and proteins. Proteins are produced by ribosomes sliding along a long
thin strand of messenger RNA (mRNA). In turn, mRNA is generated by a
transcription complex sliding along the DNA template. These translation and
transcription processes fall within the broad classification of "elongation
processes." Although recent revolutionary advances in cell biology have improved
scientists' qualitative understanding of life on a molecular level, efforts to
construct predictive quantitative models are often limited by a lack of
quantitative experimental data. However, one important system, transcription of
ribosomal RNA, is sufficiently experimentally characterized to allow delineation
of the limits it imposes on cellular physiology. The current work develops
quantitative models of this transcription process in order to quantify
limitations it imposes on bacterial growth rates. Connections between the
molecular biophysics of elongation processes and the macroscopically observable
growth rate are quantitatively studied. The current research combines careful
modeling of a complex biological process with the development of new
mathematical and numerical techniques to answer fundamental biological
questions. The results may have a broad impact on our understanding of bacterial
physiology and, through a better understanding of the driving mechanisms of
bacterial growth, may have a long term impact on molecular biotechnology.