* 1226242
* Achieving Scale for STEM Reform: Studying and Enhancing Undergraduate STEM Networks
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Adrianna Kezar, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 595,826.00

Over the last 20 years, a substantial inventory of improvements in instructional
materials and teaching practices has been developed with the primary goal of
improving student learning and success in STEM disciplines. Although the
inventory is large and varied and covers all disciplines within STEM, evidence
suggests that it is underutilized. The nation is still striving to achieve STEM
education reform at high scale. Current patterns of extramural support that
stress grants to faculty members are often not effective in getting the improved
materials and practices into broad use by STEM instructors. However, networking
efforts have emerged as more effective in spreading innovative practices in STEM
higher education. This project is investigating how the design of networks
influences their effectiveness in spreading the use of effective teaching
practices and materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is beginning with
the fact that very little is known about networks beyond their role in
facilitating change. It is studying four undergraduate STEM reform networks
within three organizations that have different designs but a common purpose
(undergraduate STEM reform). The project goal is to understand how the networks
can be most effectively designed to spread innovations among network members and
ultimately on the campuses where they are employed. Three research questions are
being examined about undergraduate STEM education networks: &lt;br/&gt;1. How do
network members and network leaders understand or believe that network design
affects the ability to achieve network goals? &lt;br/&gt;2. What are the
perceived benefits of participation in a network related to change for the
individual network members and their campus? &lt;br/&gt;3. How do networks form
and how are they sustained in ways that help them achieve their goals?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four networks being studied are: BioQUEST, Project
Kaleidoscope (PKAL), Science Education through New Civic Engagement and
Responsibilities (SENCER), and Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL).
The literature used to frame the study is drawn from social network analysis and
communities of practice. A mixed-methods study is being used to address these
research questions using surveys of network participants and interviews with
network leaders. The use of survey methodology to ask participants about network
influences on their behavior is a frequently used approach that has proven to be
extremely accurate and valid for understanding adoption of new practices by
individuals and the impact of social networks (Everett Rogers, Diffusion of
innovations, Free Press, 2003). The formation and sustaining of the networks
will be studied through qualitative methods based on interviews of 125 network
leaders. This same approach has been used with communities of practice and is
the established approach for understanding these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is expected to
provide useful information to undergraduate STEM reformers. It is evident that
new strategies are needed to disseminate modern effective instructional
practices and achieve more widespread change. Networks have emerged as one of
the critical ways to achieve a broad spread of innovative practices. NSF is
increasingly funding networks but without knowledge about best practices for
network development or research about network design that can help achieve
desired goals. Also, this study is expected to provide needed information about
created or nonorganic networks and their ability to foster innovation and
change. It will provide missing data about structuring networks to best support
meeting their objectives and goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project provides broader impacts to STEM undergraduate education reform in
numerous ways, including partnerships among current networks and organizations
that will use the report's guide and specific study of ways that social networks
can be designed for both effectiveness and inclusiveness.