* 1226577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Origins of Diabetes Concepts in an Urban American Indian Community
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Margaret Pollak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,341.00

University of Wisconsin doctoral candidate Margaret Pollak, with the guidance of
Dr. Claire Wendland, will undertake research on the processes through which
people form concepts of disease. Her particular focus will be on how multiple
actors involved in chronic condition care develop and negotiate their
understandings of disease.

The research will be conducted in Chicago, Illinois, with American Indian
diabetics, informal caregivers, and biomedical providers. American Indians have
some of the highest rates of diabetes worldwide. While more than sixty percent
of American Indians live in urban areas, the majority of studies on the American
Indian diabetes epidemic are centered on reservations. Research methods will
include a combination of participant observation, participant shadowing, semi-
structured interviews, and the collection and analysis of diabetes-related
literature utilized by research participants. The project seeks to meet three
overarching research objectives: (1) document the factors that shape patient and
provider concepts of diabetes, (2) trace the movement of these concepts in order
to understand the extent to which patient knowledge is shaped by biomedical
models, as well as the extent to which patient knowledge influences biomedical
models, and (3) investigate what role these diabetes concepts play in the
constitution of an urban American Indian community.

The research has both policy and theory-building importance. It will extend
scholarship in anthropology and science and technology studies by investigating
how disease concepts are formed through social interactions as well as through
biomedical evidence. Findings from this research also will offer insight to
public health workers developing diabetes prevention and care programs to be
implemented in urban and multicultural healthcare settings. In addition, the
research will contribute to anthropological studies of urban American Indian
life by investigating what role diabetes and concepts of the condition
disseminated by local health and social institutions play in integrating
individuals from varied tribal and personal backgrounds. Supporting this
research also supports the education of a graduate student.