* 1226825
* FSML: Imaging instrument array for coastal landscape and ecosystem analysis at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory, University of South Carolina
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Dennis Allen, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2014
* USD 191,379.00

An award made to the University of South Carolina (USC) will enable researchers
to deploy an array of instruments capable of measuring and tracking changes in
several key physical and environmental conditions of coastal areas. The
instrument package will allow researchers at the Baruch Institute Marine Field
Laboratory to examine the estuarine environment at a spatial scale that has
heretofore been impossible. The package will contain a tethered balloon fitted
with hyperspectral, infrared, and video cameras, and a spectrophotometer.
Investigators will use the instruments to measure growth and distribution of
marsh vegetation, surface temperature, suspended materials in water, water
movement, animal distributions, and landscape pattern from tens to hundreds of
meters above the surface. A complementary ground-based laser instrument (LIDAR)
will provide three-dimensional topographic images and analyses of tidal marshes,
mudflats, creeks, beaches, and intertidal oyster reefs. Mapping of repeated
measurements will be used to quantify changes and investigate factors affecting
marsh elevation, geomorphology, tidal inundation, animal and plant
distributions, and physiological states. Coupled with ongoing time-series
measurements and process-oriented field experiments, the imaging instruments and
LIDAR will be used to address impacts and mechanisms of change due to storms,
warming temperatures, persistent droughts, and sea-level rise. The instrument
array will be based at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory in Georgetown County,
where USC and visiting investigators have been studying the salt marsh estuary
at North Inlet for more than 40 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imaging
instrument array will benefit investigators already familiar with the study
area, attract first-time visiting scientists, and provide unique opportunities
to train graduate and undergraduate students on how to use the technology to
address new sets of inter-disciplinary research questions. Images, maps, and
other products generated from instrument deployments will be used in summer
courses such as the capstone field course offered through USC Marine Science
Program and continuing education programs workshops. Products designed for the
visiting public and young audiences will be developed in association with the
North Inlet- Winyah Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve staff and
distributed through the Hobcaw Barony Discovery Center and on-line. Images,
data, and products from the tethered array and LIDAR will be available through
the Baruch Institute web site at http://www.baruch.sc.edu/.