* 1226266
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Postsocialist Movement: Performance, Political Economy, and Transmigration Between Guinea and the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Michael McGovern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 15,890.00

Yale University doctoral candidate Adrienne Cohen, supervised by Dr. Michael
McGovern, will investigate the relationship between expressive culture and
political-economic change in post socialist contexts. The researcher proposes a
reciprocal relationship between expressive practice and political economy in
which political-economic dynamics are expressed through performance and
performing artists play a role in calling new social and ethical orders into
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research to investigate this proposition will be
conducted in Guinea, West Africa, and in the United States. The Guinean
socialist state of Sékou Tourés (1958-84), like other socialist states in other
parts of the world, subsidized the modernization of expressive culture,
particularly dance and percussion, in the service of nationalist politics. When
socialism ended with Touré's death, the new regime drastically reduced
government arts patronage. Performing artists, abandoned by the state, formed
private troupes and began to emigrate in the 1990s, many taking up residence in
the United States. This project engages two generations of dancers and
percussionists from Guinea: one trained during the socialist period, and the
other trained in the post socialist era. Through multi-sited ethnographic
fieldwork among artists in Guinea's capital city of Conakry, and among
transmigrant artists in California and New York, this study examines post
socialist conditions of economic and cultural exchange between Guinea and its
diaspora. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection throughout the study will
involve a combination of ethnographic methods, including: semi-structured
interviews, participant observation, archival media research, migration
narratives, and focus groups, in which participants discuss video and audio
recordings of relevant performances. The research is important because it will
be the first to address the convergence of performing arts, post socialism, and
transmigration; it will contribute a new dimension to theories of socialism and
its aftermath under conditions of globalization and transnationalism. Funding
this research also supports the education of a graduate student.