* 1226396
* OCE-PRF: Carbon dioxide, pH and bicarbonate sensing pathways in reef-building corals and regulation of homeostasis in response to ocean acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Katie Barott, Barott                  Katie          L
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

The investigator will study the cellular mechanisms of how reef-building corals
sense changes in pH in the surrounding seawater and how the regulation of this
pathway affects coral physiological responses to ocean acidification (OA). This
project builds on the recent discovery that a bicarbonate (HCO3-) sensing enzyme
(soluble adenylyl cyclase [sAC]) involved in the regulation of pH homeostasis in
vertebrates is expressed in corals. This enzyme produces cAMP, a universal
messenger molecule used in organisms from bacteria to mammals. The
investigator's hypothesis is that the sAC pathway is involved in coral pH
sensing and regulation of pH homeostasis through the production of cAMP. Coral
sAC is stimulated in response to HCO3- concentrations relevant to coral
physiology, and differences in sAC activity and regulation will affect coral
physiological responses to OA.

To test her hypothesis, the investigator will: 1. Characterize the activity and
expression of the sAC pathway and its response to CO2, HCO3- and pH in multiple
coral species, 2. Determine how the sAC pathway affects coral physiology,
including maintenance of pH homeostasis, respiration, photosynthesis, and
calcification, 3. Determine how chronic exposure to projected OA conditions
affect the regulation of the sAC pathway in corals and how these differences
affect coral physiology.

The broader impacts of the project include developing a bilingual, multimedia
exhibit showcasing the significance of ocean acidification and its effects on
the marine environment at the Birch Aquarium in San Diego, reaching a large
Latino population, and mentoring two female doctoral students and
undergraduates.

This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to support novel research by early
career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean sciences
workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support, this project will enable
a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation of under-
represented groups in the ocean sciences.