* 1226646
* Infant Visual Attention: Neural Mechanisms and Individual Differences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gregory Reynolds, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 259,240.00

Attention is a fundamental component of effective perceptual processing and
learning. The characteristics of how a baby looks at a visual stimulus when
seeing it for the first time have been found to relate to how well she or he
processes and remembers that stimulus. Interestingly, babies who demonstrate
short looks towards a new stimulus are more likely to subsequently recognize
that stimulus compared to infants who demonstrate long looks towards a new
stimulus. Furthermore, shorter looking in infancy is associated with better
cognitive functioning in early childhood compared to longer looking in infancy.
Possible sources of variability in attention in early development remain
unknown, and relatively little is known about the relationship between brain
development and infant attention. This study examines the possibility that
individual differences in infant visual attention are based on the development
of brain systems involved in the voluntary control of eye movements. Short-
looking infants may be advanced in the development of brain systems involved in
the voluntary control of eye movements relative to long-looking infants. Looking
behavior, eye movements, and brain activity will be measured while infants are
presented with a series of visual patterns at 4 and 6 months of age. Differences
between short- and long-looking infants' brain activity involved in the
voluntary control of eye movements will be of particular interest.

Findings from this research will provide insight into the early development of
attention, and the typical range of variability in attention for normally
developing infants. This is particularly important given that certain
characteristics of infant looking behavior have been found to be predictive of
performance on a wide range of cognitive tasks in childhood. Furthermore,
children at risk for developing cognitive deficits and children diagnosed with
Down syndrome require longer inspection to process a visual stimulus compared to
normal children. Identifying biological mechanisms, such as early brain
development, associated with individual differences in infant attention can
inform future development of early identification and intervention programs for
children at risk for developmental disabilities. Attention is a fundamental
component of the learning process. Understanding the basic aspects of attention
in early development is a necessary first step to gaining a broader
understanding of the role of attention in effective learning throughout the life
span.