* 1226945
* Doctoral Dissertation Research, First and Second-Language Patterns of Variation: Acquisition and Use of Simple Present and Present Progressive Forms in Spanish and English
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Kimberly Geeslin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2014
* USD 9,145.00

This dissertation addresses the acquisition of the present progressive, and the
variation of this form with the simple present, by English-speaking learners of
Spanish in the U.S. Empirical research on the variation of these forms by native
speakers of English and Spanish, and, in particular the acquisition of the
present progressive by nonnative speakers of Spanish is scarce. While seeking to
fill this void in the literature, a second major contribution of this project is
the extension of the analysis to other types of progressive constructions (i.e.
seguir, venir, ir, andar + V-ndo) which have received considerably less
attention than the more frequent estar + V-ndo form, especially in the second-
language (L2) variationist literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively little is
known about how English-speaking learners of Spanish deal with the differences
between the uses of the simple present and present progressive forms in these
two languages. At what level of proficiency do they begin to employ both forms,
in similar contexts as native speakers of Spanish? Do they acquire the full
range of progressive constructions, and sensitivity to the same linguistic
predictors of use found in native speaker grammars? The current study will
answer these questions empirically through the use of film narrations, written
contextualized questionnaires, and surveys of language-learning experiences from
120 participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research project are:
(a) to provide a detailed analysis of the distribution and use of simple present
forms, and a range of progressive constructions, for native and nonnative
speakers of Spanish; (b) to document task variation for the forms under
investigation through multiple methods of data collection; (c) to provide
valuable data on L2 acquisition of the tense-aspect system in Spanish, which
will have implications for theories of language learning; and lastly (d) to
inform sociolinguistic and syntactic theory through detailed empirical
documentation of patterns of use of present progressive and simple present verb
forms in both Spanish and English. This project will also support the education
and training of an early-career scientist.