* 1226933
* EAGER:  Transdisciplinary Theory of Inventive Designing: Basic Concepts
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Tomasz Arciszewski, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 75,000.00

The research objective of this EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award is to explore the hypothesis that a transdisciplinary theory of
inventive design can be developed, which will offer a superior methodology for
design than presently exists. New design theories, methods, and tools are
necessary not only to maintain, but also to improve on national competitiveness.
This research will address a hypothesis that a transdisciplinary theory of
inventive design can be developed - based on knowledge from cognitive psychology
(Humphreys Theory of Phenomenal Consciousness), that will offer a new approach
to design. This project has the potential to generate transdisciplinary
knowledge that will advance design science by integrating concepts from design
science, cognitive psychology, and computer science, with emphasis on
Evolutionary Computation and Designing.

If successful, the outcomes of the project will be to enable a fundamental
scientific shift in what design scientists can contribute to the inventive
design process, and make positive impacts towards innovation in each of the
three domains of knowledge involved (design science, cognitive psycology, and
computer science). The development of innovative products and processes is a
critical factor in the competition for global market share and the key to modern
challenges related to sustainability, environmental protection, safety, economic
growth, and climate change. The specific impact on engineering will be to
improve the understanding of the inventive design process in the context of the
whole-brain concept of designing - design work in which both the left rational
and right creative brain hemispheres are engaged. Furthermore, in presenting the
model in the computational terms of Evolutionary Designing, a new generation of
computer tools for inventive designing will be developed. In cognitive
psychology, the research will improve understanding of creative problem solving,
which may provide a deeper understanding how fixation in design can be reduced
through the proper framing of the entire inventive design process.