* 1226197
* Internet Problem-Solving Coaches for Physics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Leonardo Hsu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2015
* USD 310,000.00

The ability to solve problems in a variety of contexts is a major goal of
education. However, providing students with effective instruction in problem
solving by making individualized guidance and feedback available to them during
practice is a difficult and potentially expensive task. Moving students to be
more expert-like takes time; thus any instructional tool must operate over an
adequate time span and integrated into existing instruction. Furthermore, no
standardized, easy-to-use method for assessing students' problem-solving skills
exists, hindering progress in improving problem-solving instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to help overcome these difficulties by
creating a set of web-delivered computer coaches to provide students with
effective coaching while they practice solving problems that span the content of
a yearlong introductory physics course. To make it possible for these coaches to
be useful to instructors, the software is configured so that instructors can
easily change the problems, the feedback, and the structure of the solution to
more closely fit their instructional emphasis using a graphical interface. In
this project, student problem solving is being analyzed using a rubric developed
in a previous project together with standard tests of conceptual and attitudinal
change. &lt;br/&gt;The structure of the computer coaches is based on research
from cognitive science and physics education. They are designed to 1) be highly
interactive, (2) make explicit the thought processes necessary for effective
problem solving, (3) give students practice in the basic cognitive functions
necessary for effective problem solving, (4) provide students with
individualized coaching based on careful instructional design, (5) accommodate
the multiple solution paths students might choose for solving a problem, and (6)
be adaptable by individual physics instructors to their own tastes and local
conditions. A previous project has shown that it is possible to develop coaches
with such attributes for mechanics. This project (1) develops a new underlying
software structure for those coaches to make them easier to modify, (2) uses the
new software structure to build coaches for electricity and magnetism to span
the full year of introductory physics, and (3) measures student progress toward
more expert-like problem solving over a full
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;Problem solving is one
of the most important goals and tools of an introductory physics course. Moving
students toward more expert-like problem solving can make the conceptual content
of these courses more intelligible and useful. Because of the reproducible,
fine-grained problem-solving instruction delivered by the coaches, the proposed
work contributes to the knowledge base on how to design effective instruction
(computer based or not) to help students improve their problem-solving skills.
It is a step toward achieving the promise of using the web to supplement human
instruction by providing on-demand coaching. The coaches also provide a model of
the application of research from diverse fields to the production of a practical
tool to improve student learning with the current educational system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Because problem solving is
central to science and engineering, the coaches and the rubric have the
potential not only to become widely used, but also to spawn similar efforts in
other STEM fields, and across multiple disciplines. This project demonstrates
how technology can be used to improve education by providing students with a
more interactive and individualized instruction and opportunities to integrate
effective instruction outside with that occurring in the classroom. This can be
especially important to students for whom standard instruction is difficult to
obtain such as distance-education students. The assessment strategy developed in
this project also contributes to the knowledge base of assessing complex and
meaningful abilities such as problem solving in the authentic setting of the
classroom. Finally, because good problem-solving skills, especially a logical
expert-like framework for attacking novel problems in a systematic way, are
important to all citizens in our modern, rapidly-changing society, this project
contributes to the preparation of the citizenry to face the new challenges of
the future.