* 1226143
* RUI: The Role of Facial Physiognomy in Stereotypic Trait Inference
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Debbie Ma, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 186,695.00

Until somewhat recently, consideration of target-level differences among
category members figured surprisingly little into theorizing about stereotyping.
Rather, social psychologists have focused almost solely on category membership
as the basis for stereotyping, essentially disregarding within-category
differences. Over the past decade, however, researchers have begun to examine
how differences in physical features (e.g., skin tone, nose shape, etc.) among
people who share a category membership may contribute to our understanding of
stereotyping -- a form of stereotyping that has been referred to as feature-
based stereotyping. The effect of feature-based stereotyping is nontrivial;
researchers have evidenced that features may unduly influence prison sentence
lengths, capital punishment decisions, and police officers' decision to shoot
over and above the influence of categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed research is to study whether and how differences in facial physiognomy
predict our judgments of others over and above category membership alone. The
current research project consists of 3 phases. In Phase 1, the researchers will
build a database of over 500 faces, each rated on a number of dimensions
(stereotypic, threatening, masculine, feminine, baby-faced, attractive,
trustworthy, happy, angry, sad, disgusted, surprised, fearful/afraid, and
unusual). This database will be made freely available to any investigator
interested in using these stimuli for research purposes and will afford
significant time and resource savings to others. In Phase 2, the researchers
will test the robustness of feature-based stereotyping by testing whether or not
more typical features activate stereotypes more readily, across different social
groups, different features, and different stereotyped
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, Phase 3 will investigate the process by
which features influence trait judgments. The researchers will test whether the
influence of features is mediated through categorization -- a supposition that
is has been central to decades of stereotyping research -- or, whether features
can bypass categorization and directly activate stereotypes, as some have
recently proposed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will both enhance
scientific infrastructure by developing an important set of facial stimuli for
researchers and also advance the current understanding of the processes that
govern stereotyping. Moreover, the research will facilitate the training of
undergraduate and graduate students at a predominantly undergraduate and
Hispanic-serving institution.