* 1226958
* Spatial Dynamics and Housing Markets in the U.S
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Timberlake, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 147,288.00

SES-1226858 Jeffrey Timberlake University of Cincinnati

Abstract

Spatial Dynamics and Housing Markets in the U.S. Existing research shows that
the quality of life urban residents experience varies significantly within and
across U.S. metropolitan areas. In other words, people's health, well-being, and
chances for prosperity depend on where they live. Nowadays, there is widespread
consensus among scholars and urban planners that, while individuals clearly have
choices in where to seek housing, those choices are often constrained. On the
one hand, research has focused on how, for example, racial and ethnic group
differences in resources and preferences play a role in persistent residential
segregation patterns at the neighborhood level. On the other hand, few empirical
studies have examined what shapes persistent spatial dynamics in housing markets
at the metropolitan level. Put differently, we know a lot more about what shapes
differences in quality of life within metropolitan areas than across them. To
that end, this project uses audit data from the 1989, 2000, and 2010 waves of
the Housing Discrimination Study, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development. The PIs merge these data to tract- and metro-level
information from the 1980 to 2010 U.S. Censuses and the 2006 to 2010 American
Community Survey to examine how metro-level housing market dynamics shape
contemporary residential patterns, as well as changes in housing patterns since
the 1980s.

Broader Impacts

This timely study seeks to inform understanding of housing patterns in U.S.
cities, many of which have experienced significant changes since 1980, and in
particular since the recent housing crisis. Findings may be of interest to the
general public (lenders, owners, renters, advocacy groups) and policy makers. In
addition, the project facilitates student training and data dissemination goals.
The project will support a graduate assistant who will be involved in all
aspects of data acquisition, analysis, and writing. The research team will
disseminate metadata concerning the data set constructed for this study via the
Kunz Center for Social Research at the University of Cincinnati, on whose
website the team also expects to post relevant policy briefs.