* 1226571
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: High Courts and Socioeconomic Rights in Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Scott Mainwaring, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,632.00

This project studies compliance with and the impact of high court decisions on
socioeconomic rights in Latin America by examining the policy outcomes of
landmark rulings on health, environmental and social welfare issues in Colombia
and Argentina. The central research questions are: What explains variation in
compliance with structural rulings and why do some of these rulings have greater
policy impact than others' Impact is assessed in terms of the actual results of
carrying out (or failing to carry out) new court-ordered or court-modified
poicies when compared to the ostensible objective of the ruling. The central
argument asserts that higher compliance and impact depend on the courts'
oversight mechanisms (follow-up committees, public hearings, information
requests, etc.) and the presence of a legally-empowered constituency in civil
society. The research involves fieldwork on-site, including archival work and
semi-structured interviews, as well as the construction of a database of printed
media coverage of the decisions under study.

Scholars and policy makers have long debated the ability of courts to advance
socioeconomic rights. Some deem courts ideally located to step in where deadlock
and electoral considerations prevent other institutions from venturing,
promoting coordination and dialogue, while others view judicial intervention as
prone to particularistic and irrational solutions, lacking a consequentialist
perspective. This project advances this discussion by examining the extent to
which court promoted oversight in conjunction with the presence of a legally
empowered constituency can contribute to inform the creation and implementation
of policy that responds to the larger sociopolitical context.

This research has key policy implications, since court-promoted oversight
mechanisms are relatively new additions in court's toolkits and are therefore
understudied. Their institutional features and their potential usefulness are of
critical interest to institutional designers, lawyers and members of judiciaries
worldwide.