* 1226730
* Collaborative Research: Arctic Dinosaur Paleobiology - Hypothesis Testing Through Cross-Latitudinal Comparison
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Patrick Druckenmiller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 10/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: ARCTIC DINOSAUR PALEOBIOLOGY: HYPOTHESIS TESTING THROUGH
CROSS-LATITUDINAL COMPARISON &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principle Investigator:
Patrick Druckenmiller, University of Alaska Fairbanks&lt;br/&gt;Co-Principle
Investigator: Gregory M. Erickson, Florida State University,
Tallahassee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar dinosaurs endured intense seasonal
conditions making them well suited to test major questions in dinosaur
paleobiology pertaining to physiology, migration and distribution. This project
will examine the most prolific, yet vastly understudied polar dinosaur fauna
known -the Prince Creek Formation of northern Alaska. The research will entail
collection, description, and assessment of species composition. These data will
be compared to those of lower latitude formations affording the first comparison
between a polar dinosaur fauna and typical lower latitude dinosaurian
assemblages. The study will also document the influence of the Alaskan Arctic
environment on dinosaur biology through analyses of bone and tooth growth rings.
Learning how dinosaurs occupied the Arctic will provide new insights into high
latitudinal occupation by animals as a whole. This project will bring together a
diverse team of scientists who will share new ideas and methodologies and
contribute to the education and training of graduate and undergraduate students.
Results will be submitted to scientific journals and presented publicly on the
Internet. Visits will be made to rural, northern Alaskan K-12 schools to provide
underserved Alaska Native students and teachers with an opportunity to learn
about the fossils in their area and interact with NSF-sponsored researchers.