* 1226335
* The Evolution of Media Influence in Brazil: A Longitudinal and Multi-Sited Study of Electronic and Digital Media
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Conrad Kottak, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 104,619.00

Dr. Richard B. Pace (Middle Tennessee State University) and Dr. Conrad P. Kottak
(University of Michigan) will undertake research on social and cultural changes
associated with the introduction and spread of electronic and digital media
(television, radio, cinema, CD/DVD, the Internet, cell phone, and digital
recorders). The research will be conducted in Brazil where researcher Kottak
conducted a study in the 1980s on the differential effects of newly-introduced
television on culturally and geographically distinct communities. This new
project will return to those communities as well as one other to assess
subsequent changes, including the influence of new media not present when the
original study was undertaken. The five communites to be studied range from an
indigenous Amazonian community with very little media exposure to a relatively
wealthy town with access to all contemporary media. The baseline provided by
Kottak's previous research as well as the 20th century research of other
anthropologists will make possible a cross-cultural, longitudinal, and
comparative empirical investigation. In addition to Pace and Kottak, the
research team includes four graduate students, a data analyst, and Dr. Glenn H.
Shepard, Jr., of the Department of Anthropology at the Museu Paraense Emí lio
Geldi, Belém, Pará, Brazil.

The research focus is three-fold: media production; audience engagement; and
message reception by the audience. There is a rich extant literature on
production of media in Brazil that this project will synthesize but not
replicate. Instead the research focus will be on (1) how media are "consumed"
(what is available, technology, setting, audience goals, who participates, how
it is taken up); and (2) how viewers interpret and are influenced by media
(heeding, missing, ignoring, resisting). They will also do content analysis of
television programming.

Findings from this research will provide important and unique data on
sociocultural, economic, and political changes associated with media use and
influence in different contexts. The project also supports international
collaboration and graduate student training. It is being jointly supported by
the NSF Cultural Anthropology Program, the Office of International Science and
Engineering, and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).