* 1226371
* Weak Gravitational Lensing in the Petabyte Era
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jacob Vanderplas, Vanderplas              Jacob          T
* Fellowship Award
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

The nature of dark energy is one of the fundamental astrophysical questions of
our time. This project will address the computing challenges of current and
upcoming cosmological surveys which will seek to answer this question. The
research activities will focus on weak gravitational lensing, in which the
signal is the distortion of images of distant galaxies, caused by gravitational
perturbations of photon paths as they travel through space. The interpretation
of these data is a computationally intensive process: the shapes of the raw
galaxy images must be accurately determined, taking into account correlated
systematic effects such as distortions due to the atmosphere and telescope
optics. For the upcoming Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) project, this
process must be performed on-line on around one billion separate objects per
night. Once these results are in hand, there is the further challenge of
processing them: comparing theory to various statistics derived from the
observations can give quantitative insight into fundamental aspects of the
universe: its expansion history, the growth of structure, and the nature of the
dark matter and dark energy which together make up 95% of the energy-content of
the universe.

Great strides have been made in addressing the computational aspects of weak
lensing measurement and analysis. Unfortunately, many current methods will have
difficulty scaling to the size of future surveys. LSST will image the entire
southern sky every three nights over the course of ten years, producing an
astronomical database of unprecedented size. Analysis of these data will require
the use of new database architectures with new, purpose-built parallel
algorithms. The current project will address those issues by fostering a close
link between computer science and the "domain sciences" like astronomy. The work
will take place within the Database Research Group in the Computer Science&
Engineering department at University of Washington (UW), with close ties to the
Survey Science Group in the Astronomy Department at UW. This project will
contribute fundamental results both in computational and astronomical science,
mainly through the development of techniques within the new SciDB parallel data
processing engine to address specific computational hurdles for cosmological
research with LSST. This research is vital to the science goals of LSST: current
methods will not scale to the size of the survey.

The impact of this research will reach beyond astronomy to other domain
sciences. Many domain sciences are currently producing data at an increasing
rate. Scientists in a variety of fields are beginning to see the need for close
collaboration with computer scientists who have experience in the methods
required to store, access, and process their data. At the same time, computer
scientists who are pushing the limits of computation often lack access to
datasets on which to test their methods. The PI will foster interdisciplinary
connections by developing a seminar in data-intensive computing, geared toward
graduate students in a broad array of disciplines. In addition the PI will build
on his volunteer experience with Seattle's Pacific Science Center Science
Communication Fellow program, which seeks forums for scientists to share their
research with the broader public. Through ongoing involvement in this program,
he will continue to share the exciting results of data-intensive astronomy with
members of the community.