* 1226300
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The role of visual cues in imitating a new sound
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Megha Sundara, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 8,806.00

How does a person learn to produce a new sound in a second language? The
proposed study focuses on one possible mechanism by which a second-language
learner might learn to produce a new sound: implicit imitation. Specifically,
this study seeks to understand whether visual cues might facilitate implicit
imitation of new sounds and thus help with developing speech production in a
second language. Previous research shows that during a conversation, adults
automatically and quickly converge with their interlocutors to sound more like
them. In fact, this convergence occurs even when see, but do not hear the
interlocutor. Not only does visual speech elicit imitation on its own, but
imitation is greater for audiovisual speech than for auditory-only speech. The
proposed set of experiments will examine how closely children and adults imitate
the productions of unfamiliar sounds, both gesturally and acoustically, to
determine whether they derive any benefit from audiovisual versus auditory
exposure to the same sounds. The final component of this study will be to
determine how different speaking registers can aid in imitation. The results of
these experiments should add to an understanding of how the visual modality is
relevant to second language learning, as well as determine the extent to which
children rely on visual cues in speech processing.