* 1226483
* Comparative Network Analysis: Mapping Global Social Interactions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Michael Macy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 435,000.00

Creating Tools to Map Global Network Structures

The project aims to advance methodological, descriptive, and theoretical
knowledge of variations in human societies on a global scale. Methodologically,
the project will develop accessible data collection, management, and analysis
tools for mapping network topology at the national level. In addition, the
project will develop statistically valid and efficient methods for comparing
social networks that differ in size and density. Descriptively, as the first
comparative mapping of global social networks, the project will provide a more
detailed and comprehensive picture of the similarities and differences in
patterns of social interaction across countries with diverse cultures, political
systems, mobility patterns, and levels of economic development. Theoretically,
the project will address fundamental questions about social and structural
differences between countries with different network topologies. The project
will draw upon widely used cross-national measures of individualism and
collectivism to test hypothesized structural differences between the US, UK,
China and Korea. The findings will catalyze theoretical and methodological
dialog between network scientists in disciplines that emphasize universals (e.g.
statistical mechanics)and variations (e.g. cross-cultural studies in sociology
and anthropology).

Broader Impacts This project will have broad applications: 1)for the spread of
pathogens and public health countermeasures, 2) for policy research on the
economic and cultural correlates of the "digital divide",3) for market research
on the diffusion of innovations, 4) for social movement research on "domino
effects" like those observed in the cascading collapse of the former Soviet
Union and more recently in the Arab Spring, and 5) comparative studies of social
capital and economic development. Computer scientists will benefit from
comparative data that may be helpful for tailoring the design of online social
network sites. Network scientists will have access to a rich new source of
social network data on a global scale. Finally, the development and
dissemination of effective methods to collect, manage, analyze, and compare
multiple networks of hundreds of millions of nodes will constitute a significant
contribution to the social science community, especially when coupled with
technical education and training of social science undergraduate and graduate
students to effectively utilize research tools and distributed/parallel
computing frameworks for analyzing very large datasets.