* 1226811
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Coast Salish Foods and Landscapes: Restoration Paradigms and Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Stevan Harrell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 18,092.00

University of Washington doctoral candidate Joyce LeCompte-Mastenbrook,
supervised by Dr. Stevan Harrell, will undertake research on the relationship
between indigenous traditional food movements using public lands and external
management of those lands. Advocates for increasing use of traditional foods
recognize a strong link between cultural disruption, alienation from the land,
contemporary dietary practices, and high rates of metabolic diseases in Native
communities. Devolution of decision-making within land management agencies
appears to have fostered increasing collaborative and co-management agreements
between tribes and public land managers on lands comprising treaty-reserved food
gathering areas. The goal of this project is to understand the effects of cross-
cultural collaborations between Native communities and land management agencies
on the paradigms, policies, and practices of each.

The researcher will undertake 12 months of research among the Coast Salish
tribes of Washington State and the federal land managers responsible for the
lands being used by those tribes. The researcher will gather data with a mix of
social science methods including participant observation; documentation of Coast
Salish indigenous environmental knowledge; formal and informal interviewing;
cultural domain analysis; Thematic Apperception Tests; and analysis of archival
records. The research is important because it will contribute to theories of
under what circumstances policies that promote cultural diversity are compatible
with policies that promote biological diversity. Findings also will fill gaps in
the ethnography of the Pacific Northwest Coast peoples. This award also supports
cross-cultural collaborations and communication, and the education of a graduate
student.