* 1226903
* Modeling the influence of sediment, climate, and tectonics on the incision of bedrock channels through highly soluble strata
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Matthew Covington, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 09/30/2016
* USD 262,795.00

Recent work in geomorphology has focused on understanding incision processes in
bedrock channels. However, in many aspects, the relationships between lithology
and incision remain unquantified. In particular, chemical weathering is
typically ignored when modeling stream incision. While this may be reasonable
for lithologies that exhibit a relatively low rate of weathering, it may lead to
significant errors for lithologies that are highly soluble such as carbonates,
which are common in many of the world's mountain ranges. In contrast to bedrock
channel models, the current generation of speleogenetic models, which simulate
the formation of caves in soluble strata, consider only the dissolution process
and neglect the effects of mechanical erosion and sediment. Therefore there is a
crucial disconnect between the common assumptions within the two communities.
This project will develop a mechanistic model for the incision of bedrock
channels through soluble strata. The model will include formulations for
dissolution, sediment transport, and mechanical erosion distributed across
channel cross sections and will be forced with stochastic variations in
discharge and sediment supply. The model will be used to test hypotheses
concerning: 1) the controls on the relative importance of mechanical and
chemical processes, 2) the factors that determine channel width, and 3) the
influence of sediment on cave form. The model will be further employed to
explore the partitioning of geomorphic work between surface and subsurface
channels in fluviokarst terrain.

The incision processes in bedrock play a crucial role in setting the relief of
mountain ranges and determining the response of landscape to tectonics and
climate. However, most current models of incision in bedrock channels do not
consider effects of chemical erosion processes. These processes are particularly
important in landscapes containing highly soluble rocks, such as limestone or
gypsum. Interpretations based on models that ignore chemical processes may lead
to faulty conclusions in settings containing such rocks. Additionally, the caves
that form in highly soluble rocks provide valuable records of climate and
landscape evolution over geological time scales. Cave channel cross sections
often preserve long records of incision. Sediment deposits and abandoned fossil
levels within caves contain information about past climate conditions and
landscape response. The model developed in this work will aid in the
interpretation of such records. Therefore, through improved interpretations of
cave records, the current work will lead to clearer understanding of the
response of landscape to climate change and anthropogenic forces. Furthermore,
approximately 20-25% of the world's population depends on drinking water from
aquifers formed in soluble rocks, and an improved knowledge of the process of
cave formation and transport of sediment through these aquifers will provide
information that can be used to improve management of these fragile resources.
With respect to outreach, the project will work with a local science center that
provides experiential science education for young students from a multi-state
area, and help them to develop curricula concerning caves and landscape
evolution. In addition, the project will train a postdoctoral scholar.