* 1226772
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:Not In My Backyard: Intra-Group Party Competition in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Tsering Youdon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 07/31/2013
* USD 17,640.00

A competitive party system is necessary for the consolidation of democracy
(Mainwaring 1999, Mair 1997, Sartori 1976). In Sub-Saharan Africa's
democratizing states, however, politicians are often seen attempting to minimize
the competition they face by building parties that monopolize votes along ethnic
lines (Mozaffar et al. 2003, Horowitz 1985). Yet, legislative elections across
African countries reveal considerable variation in the extent to which ethnic
identities map directly onto partisan alignments. While the votes of certain
ethnic groups are monopolized by single parties, other groups have multiple
parties that effectively vie for their support. This sub-national variation in
levels of intra-ethnic party competition, both across time and space, requires
theoretical explanation and empirical analysis if we are to understand the
future of democracy in Africa's multiethnic societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is associated with its examination of how
politicians build local bases of party support in countries with limited
democratic experience. The research examines the following questions: Why are
some politicians able to build ethnic party monopolies while others fail? How
are such ethnic parties sustained? Under what conditions does intra-ethnic or
intra-regional competition emerge? How do economic and sociological factors
affect the emergence of political competition within groups? The research
suggests that intra-group electoral competition is dependent on the access
parties have to economic resources. This project will therefore examine whether
a party's influence over the distribution of economic resources affects its
ability to sustain its political monopoly over the votes of co-ethnics. This
argument challenges two commonly offered explanations regarding political
competition in Africa, namely: the role of electoral rules and clientelism.
Although focusing on electoral institutions provides theoretical expectations on
the number of parties and the type of competition one ought to observe in a
particular district, the theory fails to explain the variation that exists in
the electoral options available to voters given similar electoral rules. In
addition, theories that rely on clientelism fail to explain why politicians
would create parties to compete with already existent co-ethnic parties, given
the group's access to state resources is improved by presenting the president
with a unified group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This argument is tested using sub-
national data from two African countries that share similar economic, political,
and sociological characteristics, yet exhibit considerable variation in the
electoral options available to voters across ethnic groups: Kenya and Malawi. To
assess the nature of party competition at the sub-national level within these
countries, data will be collected on the campaign pledges made by politicians at
the local level: their number, substance, and the relationship between pledges
made by different parties. Party pledges are a valid measure of the nature of
party competition because they reflect the issues around which parties seek to
compete; that is, parties update their pledges in response to what opposing
parties offer. The study's design also holds many of the independent variables
constant to establish the link between the hypothesized independent variable,
economic diversity, and the observed variation on the dependent variable,
constituency level party systems. Besides collecting data on economic diversity,
party pledges and party competition, the project includes a survey and semi-
structured interviews with politicians and business leaders to better
demonstrate the links between business and politics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the research are connected with its contributions to
scholarly and policy concerns related to democratization. The research should
inform debates on the link between economic resources and party system
development. Understanding the dynamics behind political competition is
important to move beyond common assumptions that ethnic rivalries in multi-
ethnic societies are the reason for democracy's failure. In fact, the research
will demonstrate that intra-ethnic competition promotes democratic practices; in
so doing it will suggest reforms aimed at promoting democratization and
development over the longer term.