* 1226964
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An experimental approach to phonetic transfer in the production and perception of early Spanish-Catalan bilinguals
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Marcos Amengual Watson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2014
* USD 13,922.00

This dissertation project examines the influence of one language on the other in
bilinguals who learn both languages from a very young age and who continue to
use both languages extensively within a bilingual community. Previous research
has suggested that the dominant language interferes with the acquisition of the
phonetics of the other language even when bilinguals have the most favorable
conditions to learn both, which is the case of Spanish and Catalan speakers on
the island of Majorca (Spain). The hypothesis of this study is that bilinguals
are able to perceive the vowels in Catalan that do not exist in Spanish and that
they are also able to produce them accurately but that previously unexamined
factors, including whether the words are shared between two languages
(cognates), and a speaker's language dominance, use, age and attitudes about
language, also play a role in how accurately they perceive and produce vowels in
certain words.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;40 Spanish- and 40 Catalan-dominant
bilinguals will participate in three experiments. The first, will investigate
the production of the Catalan and Spanish target vowels. The second experiment
will test their perception of these vowels. Finally, the third experiment will
test whether they know which vowel is correct in a particular word. If these
speakers perform these tasks accurately it would refute the claim that the
dominant language interferes with the acquisition of the other
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present study will inform methodologies in
the study of bilingualism, not only in phonetics, but also in the domains of
psycholinguistics, sociolinguistics, and language contact, providing a clearer
picture of production and perception patterns at the level of the word and at
the individual sound level. This award will support the scientific training of a
promising scholar.