* 1226343
* Community Computational Platforms for Developing Three-Dimensional Models of Earth Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,550,000.00

Precise information about the structure of the solid Earth comes from
seismograms recorded&lt;br/&gt;at the surface of a highly heterogeneous
lithosphere. Full-3D tomography based on adjoint and&lt;br/&gt;scattering-
integral methods can assimilate this information into three-dimensional models
of elastic and&lt;br/&gt;anelastic structure. These methods fully account for
the physics of wave excitation, propagation, and&lt;br/&gt;interaction by
numerically solving the inhomogeneous equations of motion for a heterogeneous
anelastic&lt;br/&gt;solid. Full-3D tomography using adjoint and scattering-
integral methods requires the execution of&lt;br/&gt;complex computational
procedures that challenge the most advanced high-performance
computing&lt;br/&gt;(HPC) systems. Current research is petascale; future
research will require exascale capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will establish an interoperable set of community computational
platforms?vertically&lt;br/&gt;integrated systems of hardware, software, and
wetware that will allow a significant community of&lt;br/&gt;investigators to
employ the techniques of full-3D tomography to refine Earth structures. Two
tomographic&lt;br/&gt;platforms will be built on highly scalable codes for
solving the forward problem: the AWP-ODC 4th-order,&lt;br/&gt;staggered-grid,
finite-difference code, which has been widely used for regional earthquake
simulation and&lt;br/&gt;physics-based seismic hazard analysis, and the
SPECFEM3D spectral element code, which is capable of modeling wave propagation
through aspherical structures of essentially arbitrary complexity on scales
ranging from local to global. A third platform, based on the Unified Community
Velocity Model (UCVM) software developed by the Southern California Earthquake
Center (SCEC), will provide a common framework for comparing and synthesizing
Earth models and delivering model products to a wide community of geoscientists.
These platforms will be deployed at the NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputing Center
(NWSC).