* 1226321
* PhET Interactive Simulations: Using Research-Based Simulations to Transform Undergraduate Chemistry Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Emily Moore, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 478,867.00

The PhET Interactive Simulations group at the University of Colorado is
expanding their expertise of physics simulations to the development of eight-to-
ten simulations designed to enhance students' content learning in general
chemistry courses. The simulations are being created to provide highly engaging
learning environments which connect real life phenomena to the underlying
science, provide dynamic interactivity and feedback, and scaffold inquiry by
what is displayed and controlled. In a second strand of the project, a group of
experienced faculty participants are developing and testing lecture materials,
classroom activities, and homework, all coordinated with well-established,
research-based teaching methods like clicker questions, peer instruction, and/or
tutorial-style activities, to leverage learning gains in conjunction with the
simulations. The third strand of the project focuses on research on classroom
implementation, including measures of student learning and engagement, and
research on simulation design. This strand is establishing how specific
characteristics of chemistry sim design influence engagement and learning, how
various models of instructional integration of the sims affect classroom
environments as well as learning and engagement, and how sim design and
classroom context factors impact faculty use of sims. To ensure success the
project is basing sim design on educational research, utilizing high-level
software professionals (to ensure technically sophisticated software, graphics,
and interfaces) working hand-in-hand with chemistry education researchers, and
is using the established PhET team to cycle through coding, testing, and
refinement towards a goal of an effective and user friendly sim.

The collection of simulations, classroom materials, and faculty support
resources form a suite of free, web-based resources that anyone can use to
improve teaching and learning in chemistry. The simulations are promoting deep
conceptual understanding and increasing positive attitudes about science and
technology which in turn is leading to improved education for students in
introductory chemistry courses both in the United States and around the world.