* 1226972
* Collaborative Proposal:  Landscape evolution and sediment-nutrient fluxes in a wetland-stream restoration experiment
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert Walter, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2016
* USD 184,417.00

Prerequisite to designing sustainable stream and riparian restorations with high
potential for improved ecosystem services is to increase multi-disciplinary
knowledge of how these systems evolve and respond to environmental change and
human impacts. The goal of the Big Spring Run (BSR) restoration experiment in
southeastern Pennsylvania is to better understand the geological, biological,
and environmental mechanisms responsible for development and stability of
landscape patterns in shallow vegetated flow systems, and to test a new paradigm
of stream-wetland restoration. This new approach is based on the hypothesis that
removal of historic sediment that buried a pre-existing Holocene wet meadow for
approximately three centuries can effectively restore a number of ecosystem
functions. Goals of the restoration include enhancing hydrologic exchange
between stream channels and shallow groundwater within the restoration area,
increasing the residence time of groundwater emanating from springs onto an
organic-rich floodplain, and improving water quality by reducing sediment and
nutrient loads in surface water flowing out of the restored reach. The exchange
of water and nutrients between surface and ground water fosters removal of
sediment and nutrients in wetland ecosystems where surface water flow speeds are
low and organic carbon availability is high. Comparison of pre- and post-
restoration data enables us to determine whether or not these and other
restoration goals are achieved, and to evaluate how an incipient wetland
landscape evolves after restoration. With a team of 26 scientists and resource
managers from 12 agencies and academic institutions, we recently completed the
3rd yr of pre-restoration monitoring at BSR. Post-restoration monitoring began
after 1 km of valley bottom restoration was completed in August, 2011. Water
quality monitoring includes continuous operation of three USGS stream gaging
stations (with turbidity sensors and suspended sediment samplers), 18 USGS
piezometers, and over 30 shallow groundwater wells installed by USEPA within the
restoration watershed. In addition, we use numerical modeling to 1) investigate
the evolution and stability of stream-floodplain systems over a range of
environmental conditions, 2) identify ground water flow paths and zones of
nutrient transformation, and 3) predict whether this new paradigm of stream
restoration will be sustainable under present-day sediment inputs and hydrologic
fluxes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will have broad implications
for restoring streams and improving water quality. Prior to this work, the
dominant paradigm for stream restoration was based on the assumption that causes
of stream impairment are largely the result of modern land use (e.g., excess
storm water runoff from urbanizing areas) rather than a legacy of centuries of
human impacts that included the burial of original wetland-stream landscapes
beneath several meters or more of historic mud. Restoration at BSR involved
removing historic sediment so as to accommodate storm flow within the entire
valley bottom, and at a much lower velocity, flow depth, and shear stress than
in the impaired state. We anticipate that such sediment removal and wetland
rehabilitation will be a sustainable means of reestablishing ecosystem diversity
and function, reducing storm water discharge to downstream reaches, and
improving water quality in watersheds where similar impairments have been
identified.&lt;br/&gt;