* 1226844
* The Effects of Indigenous Autonomy in Southern Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Matthew Cleary, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 229,921.00

In 1995, several hundred municipalities in the southern state of Oaxaca, Mexico,
formally gained the right to govern themselves autonomously, according to local
customs based on indigenous communal traditions. This political development may
represent one of the most extensive experiments with indigenous autonomy in all
of Latin America, given the degree of autonomy granted, its formal-legal nature,
and the sheer number of citizens involved (approximately 1.25 million Mexicans,
just over 1% of the national population, now live under "traditional" local
governments). No other Mexican state has ever replicated the Oaxacan reform, and
even in Oaxaca autonomy was granted only selectively, to a subset of the state's
indigenous communities. This has resulted in a complex mosaic of local political
institutions, in which some indigenous-majority towns are governed by local
custom, while others are not. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars and policy makers
have divergent views about the effects of this type of political arrangement.
Proponents of the Oaxacan reform, for example, argued that autonomy would help
maintain strong communal attachments in indigenous communities, thus protecting
their languages and cultures while reconciling local political customs with
state and federal political institutions. Yet for the most part these claims
have not been tested against empirical facts, and there is some reason to be
skeptical that autonomy has had purely salutary effects. To give just two
examples: some scholars have argued that autonomy would increase the power of
local strongmen while inhibiting the federal government's ability to protect
individual rights. Others have speculated that the Oaxacan reform might harm
indigenous communities in the long run by exposing indigenous customs to greater
federal scrutiny and oversight. Importantly, these specific claims about the
effects of local autonomy in Mexico are also applicable to other areas in which
federal governments might consider (or might have already implemented) autonomy
arrangements for indigenous minorities, including in the United States and
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is
associated with its intensive study of institutions in multi-ethnic societies.
While many countries are faced with the challenge of integrating minority groups
into the larger political system in a way that is respectful and acceptable to
both, the nature of the political reforms in Oaxaca has created a particularly
good research setting for investigating the effects of different strategies for
integration. In a narrow sense, this research will determine whether or not
local autonomy in the Mexican context actually confers several of the effects
that are commonly attributed to it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the study extend from its focus on how political institutions can protect or
harm the rights and cultures of ethnic minority groups. The results of this
research project should interest scholars and policy-makers in countries that
struggle with the types of political conflict common to multiethnic societies.