* 1226983
* Near-Real Time Data Streaming from the Coweeta LTER Environmental Sensor Network
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Theodore Gragson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 230,236.00

The University of Georgia has been awarded a grant to upgrade the existing
network of Coweeta LTER weather, streamflow and terrestrial microclimate sensors
to transmit data wirelessly via satellite, cellular, radio or WLAN transmitters
as appropriate to the setting of the sensor. Coweeta LTER field operations are
based at the USFS Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory, one of the oldest and best-
known centers for forest ecosystem and hydrologic research in the world, while
the network to be upgraded supports regional scale research across Southern
Appalachia (http://coweeta.ecology.uga.edu/). Southern Appalachian forests are
among the most biodiverse and productive in the temperate world, but they are
also experiencing some of the most rapid exurban growth in the continental U.S.
The current sensor network includes 30 stations at multiples sites along a west-
to-east elevational, hydrologic and climatic gradient from the Great Smoky
Mountains National Park to Mars Hill College (north of Asheville, NC), and a
latitudinal gradient from the Duke Forest (Durham, NC) to the Whitehall Forest
(Athens, GA).

The upgrade of the regional Coweeta LTER sensor network for wireless
transmission will reduce travel costs to retrieve data and to maintain and
calibrate instruments. It will also reduce the expense of post-processing data
and make it possible to publish data to a public website in near real-time. The
upgrade will introduce uniformity in observational practices and equipment
across the network thus creating diverse opportunities for increased
collaboration with academic, local, state and federal agencies as well as local
non-profit groups. Users would be able to link their own observations to the
Coweeta LTER data to explore entirely new scales of interactions that include
improving the capacity to manage the ecosystem services of water quantity, water
quality, and biodiversity in southern Appalachia.