* 1226859
* Improving Off-Season Research Access to Shoals Marine Laboratory, Appledore Island, Maine
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* William Bemis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 281,350.00

Cornell University is awarded a grant to develop off-season access to the Shoals
Marine Laboratory (SML), a seasonal field-station on 95-acre Appledore Island in
the Gulf of Maine and co-operated with the University of New Hampshire
(http://www.sml.cornell.edu/). Since inception of research facilities at the
island in 1973, the island has been closed to research activity from September
to May due to lack of reliable power sources and limited sea access. This
project involves adding large battery storage capacity to increase the breadth
of research and training that can be undertaken at the island. The improvements
to the electrical system will reliably provide for offseason housing and
laboratory needs at a 500 square foot dry laboratory via an uninterruptible
power supply consisting of a very large array of batteries chargeable by
existing wind and solar power sources. The location of the system's installation
near existing main generators will take advantage of centralized circuits with
the goal of developing a green grid for the 24 buildings and facilities on the
island.

All-season access for research on Appledore Island via these improvements will
increase the effectiveness of SML to researchers and students who study bird
habitat utilization and migration, seasonal distribution and reproduction of
marine mammals such as harbor and gray seals, and intertidal settlement patterns
of marine invertebrate larvae. The improvements will also enable SML to continue
progress in sustainable engineering, reducing its carbon footprint, and limit
its fuel expenditures.

Opening SML to off-season researchers and students will expand opportunities for
new and/or expanded studies of the flora and fauna of the island and its unique
location and access to a variety of field sites. For example, the Appledore
Banding Station has operated for more than 25 years and banded more than 100,000
birds, yet is limited by only having island access from late spring to early
fall. Intensive research on the populations of great black backed gulls (Larus
marinus) and herring gulls (L. argentatus) on the island during the summer will
be expanded to more intensive migratory and habitat usage studies over the
winter months. Another developing research area concerns gray seals (Halichoerus
grypus) and harbor seals (Phoca vitulina) in the southern Gulf of Maine. The
critical months for observing reproductive behaviors of the nearby population
span from December through April, when the only access is long trips from the
mainland thus offseason access to Appledore Island will make it possible to
begin monitoring this population throughout the year.