* 1226550
* Learning from Touchscreens in Early Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Heather Kirkorian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,692.00

Each year, young children spend more time with interactive screen media such as
computers and iPad-style tablet devices. Moreover, children are starting to use
these devices at younger ages. Many child-directed mobile applications claim to
be educationally valuable, yet we know almost nothing about the potential impact
of these newer technologies on young children. A growing body of research
suggests that traditional, non-interactive video (television, DVDs) is not
educationally valuable for children younger than three years of age. However,
some studies suggest that toddlers learn from video if children can influence it
with their own behavior. For instance, toddlers are more likely to learn from
video when interacting with a person on screen (e.g., during live video chat).
What remains to be seen is whether video needs to be socially interactive (i.e.,
with a real-life social partner) in order for young children to learn. Can video
interactivity alone promote learning from screens by young children? If so, how
is it effective? With support from the National Science Foundation, the research
group led by Heather Kirkorian, Ph.D., of the University of Wisconsin-Madison,
will begin to answer these questions. In a series of experiments, these
researchers will ask children to learn new words and to find hidden objects
using either interactive video (e.g., "Touch the screen to see where I'll hide
the sticker") or non-interactive video (e.g., "Watch the screen to see where
I'll hide the sticker"). The researchers predict that children younger than
three years of age will learn better from the interactive video than from the
non-interactive video.

This project will help to inform parents, teachers, policymakers, and other
child development experts about the usefulness of educational, interactive media
products for young children. This new knowledge will also inform producers about
the creation of these products in order to maximize learning. Interactive
screens have the potential to succeed where traditional screens have failed to
offer any benefit to children younger than three years of age. If interactive
screens prove to be educationally valuable for very young children, then
curriculum-based mobile applications may hold the same promise to reduce
education gaps for at-risk children that educational television programs such as
Sesame Street have had for older preschoolers by fostering early learning.