* 1226417
* Collaborative Research: Stereotype Validation and Intellectual Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Jason Clark, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 08/31/2015
* USD 190,507.00

A wealth of research has shown that group stereotypes can have devastating
effects on how people perceive and behave in their social environments. Over the
past fifteen years, some of the most extensively studied questions in this
domain have focused on how negative group stereotypes can influence a person's
performance on tasks that involve intellectual abilities. Research on these
influences, collectively known as stereotype threat, has shown that women and
minorities may perform more poorly when they are made aware of culturally
shared, negative stereotypes prior to performing an academic task. While
hundreds of studies have examined many factors related to these effects, no
research to date has identified the potential ramifications of stereotype
awareness that happens only after, rather than before, a person has finished
performing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how post-performance
stereotype activation can increase the certainty that people have in negative
perceptions about their own intellectual performance. This elevated certainty,
triggered by stereotypes, is important because it should carry a number of
adverse consequences. In essence, when a person becomes more certain that their
performance on a task was poor, this should have the potential to decrease
beliefs in their abilities, alter academic and career interests, and inhibit
future achievement in relevant domains. This project aims to develop a broad
understanding of these "stereotype validation" effects within the context of
female and minority performance on standardized tests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
twelve proposed experiments represent a programmatic, theoretically driven
approach to investigating potential susceptibility factors, downstream
repercussions, and intervention strategies that may reduce this bias. Beyond
developments within psychological research, this project should also inform
scholarship in other disciplines (e.g., education and business) and has the
potential to shape common practices in applied contexts (e.g., standardized
testing and employee selection). In addition, the research findings should
advance our understanding of the psychological factors that may affect female
and minority engagement in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate and graduate student members of
the research teams will be afforded many educational opportunities. Through
active engagement, these students will acquire valuable skills in the
preparation, conduct, and communication of scientific research. Furthermore, the
universities where this research will be conducted are racially, ethnically, and
socioeconomically diverse. At the University of Iowa, the student body is
comprised of individuals from nearly 100 countries. Howard University is a
Historically Black University where more than 90% of graduates identify
themselves as members of racial or ethnic groups underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. Therefore, a high level of diversity should be reflected in the
research teams and also among the individuals who will serve as participants in
the studies.