* 1226818
* Quantifying Sampling Biases and Silicate-Derived Sr in Continental Runoff: A Coupled 87Sr/86Sr - 88Sr/86Sr Study
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2015
* USD 342,000.00

The Strontium isotope (87Sr/86Sr) record of seawater is one of the best-
reconstructed marine isotope records. It has been widely used to estimate
temporal changes of continental and hydrothermal inputs to seawater, and
temporal variations have been correlated with periods of glaciations, mountain
building and major magmatic events. Despite this impressive record, estimates of
the present-day mass balance of strontium in seawater fundamentally disagree,
highlighting the challenges of interpreting the marine strontium isotope
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at investigating how severely
present estimates of continental runoff into the ocean are biased, and how such
biases can be corrected. The interpretation of the marine record critically
hinges on an unbiased understanding of the present-day mass balance and forcing
factors. In addition to the radiogenic (87Sr/86Sr) isotope composition, the
stable (88Sr/86Sr) isotope signature may yield insights into the balance of
silicate- vs carbonate-derived strontium, and thus the balance between silicate
and carbonate weathering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be conducted under
the umbrella of the Global Rivers Observatory, a collaborative, international
network of scientists and community volunteers aimed at observing river systems
in time-series fashion. Citizen scientists and REU students will be engaged in
sampling representative rivers draining the West and East coasts of North
America. Local schools are invited to participate in the "My River, My Home"
student art project.