* 1226471
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using ERPs to Track the Scope of Inhibition in Bilingual Speech
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 17,814.00

With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Rhonda McClain will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation under the direction of Dr. Judith Kroll and Dr.
Eleonora Rossi. Speaking fluently in a second language is a notoriously
difficult skill to develop as a late learner, presumably because the second
language competes for selection with the native language. Current research
demonstrates that bilinguals experience persistent activation of both languages
even when speaking one language alone. A critical question is how bilinguals
prevent speaking the more dominant or native language when trying to speak the
second language. Recent studies have reported that the native language becomes
inhibited, or suppressed, in order to speak in the second language. However,
little is known about what type of information becomes inhibited in the native
language. One possibility is that all of the words in one language are
suppressed. Alternatively, a network of words that bear resemblance in meaning
to each other become active or inhibited together. Another possibility is that
specific words that had been spoken in the other language are inhibited. It is
also unclear whether inhibition is momentary or long lasting. The planned
experiments will test the scope of inhibition (what is inhibited) its time
course (the duration of inhibition) by using electrophysiological measures that
may provide a more sensitive index of the earliest moments of speech planning. A
comparison of bilinguals and monolinguals will also determine whether the
repeated requirement for bilinguals to inhibit their native or more dominant
language confers expertise in the realm of inhibitory control relative to
monolingual speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research has a number of
broader implications. It will contribute important foundational knowledge about
multilingualism that will inform educational issues in a society in which many
learners are faced with the task of acquiring a second language past the
earliest stages of childhood and at risk for academic failure unless they
acquire the second language rapidly. The inhibitory processes that are the
target of the planned investigation hold implications for better understanding
the ability of bilinguals to maintain the two languages under conditions that
may support the use of only one language. The research will also contribute to
the training of an increasingly diverse group of language scientists by
including undergraduate research students who are themselves bilingual.