* 1226412
* Collaborative Research: Stabilized Organic Carbon and Paleoenvironmental Interpretations of Late Quaternary Paleosols
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Elmer Bettis III, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2016
* USD 86,781.00

Collaborative Research: Stabilized Organic Carbon and Paleoenvironmental
Interpretations of Late Quaternary Paleosols&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Thompson, Iowa State University, EAR-1226949&lt;br/&gt;Elmer Bettis III,
University of Iowa, EAR-1226412&lt;br/&gt;Rolfe Mandel, Kansas University,
EAR-1226757&lt;br/&gt;Jingdong Mao, Old Dominion University,
EAR-1226323&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Paleosols are widespread
archives of paleoenvironmental information. Many Quaternary paleosols are
laterally extensive, readily correlated, and suggestive of periods of regional
climatic or geomorphic stability. This grant focuses on organic matter (OM) in
paleosols. The objectives of this grant are (1) to identify and rank the
importance of mechanisms of OM stabilization at the millennial scale, and (2) to
significantly refine paleovegetation reconstructions of midcontinent, Late-
Quaternary environments. At five sites in Kansas and Nebraska, OM will be
studied in buried paleosols as old as 44.6 ka. These paleosols were chosen (1)
to characterize paleosol organic matter in the two most widespread surficial
materials in the Midcontinent (alluvium and loess), (2) to compare OM that has
witnessed primarily aerated conditions (loess soils) with OM that has been
subjected to alternating aerated and saturated condition (alluvial soils); (3)
to systematically lengthen the periods in which OM has been buried, giving
opportunity for early diagenetic changes to occur; and (4) to capitalize on
information available from previous studies.&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve
understanding of which components of soil organic matter are preserved over
millennial time scales and why they are preserved. Such understanding will
inform reconstructions of Quaternary paleoenvironments and landscapes that are
based on OM-hosted proxies. Of particular interest is the hypothesis that a
significant component of stable carbon in paleosols consists of
charcoal.&lt;br/&gt;By evaluating the significance of charcoal in paleosol OM,
the roles that fire can play in carbon storage, landscape evolution, and
interpretations of paleoclimate can be elucidated. Because some forms of OM bind
together mineral particles, paleosol OM components may regulate the ability of
sediments to resist erosion, thus impacting landscape evolution. The research
will also help to refine geochemical models that predict the amount of carbon
that can be effectively sequestered in soils and provide new insights concerning
the long-term stability of terrestrial OM and its impact on global carbon
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;This project will broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in earth sciences through collaboration with colleagues and students at
Alabama A&amp;M Univ. AAMU students be invited to join the research team during
summer sessions as part of ISU's George Washington Carver Summer Internship
program and they will be recruited for graduate studies at Iowa State Univ. and
Univ. of Iowa.