* 1226724
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Gender and Fishing Practices in a Cosmopolitan Littoral
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jennifer Johnson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,395.00

University of Michigan doctoral student Jennifer Lee Johnson, supervised by Dr.
Rebecca Hardin, will investigate the gendered practices and politics of working
with and managing fish in Uganda's fisheries. Focusing on Lake Victoria
(Nyanja), this project is guided by the overarching proposition that women are,
and have long been, crucial to sustaining fisheries-related economies. Though
women's work sustains a socially and ecologically cosmopolitan Nyanja, accounts
and analyses of their role in fisheries have been virtually invisible in the
environmental history, economic anthropology, and managerial science of this
lake, as in studies of many other freshwater and marine fisheries. This research
seeks to contribute findings that will partially fill this
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI will conduct 15 months of fieldwork in
Uganda, investigating how a shifting and gendered set of vernacular fisheries
practices are intimately bound up in the politics of comfort, commerce and
control along Uganda's shore (or "littoral") areas. She will employ multiple
social science research methods, including: participant observation at selected
littoral sites, in markets, and in formal managerial settings; career history
interviews with a purposeful sample of women and men who work with fish; oral
history interviews with elders residing at littoral sites; discourse analysis of
the 'received wisdoms' recounted in scholarly, professional, media and archival
sources; and descriptive GIS mapping of diverse fisheries supply chains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this study will advance the scientific
understanding of social-ecological interactions in historically and
contemporarily dynamic resource-interdependent societies. This study's focus on
how fisheries-related economies produce particular kinds of protein and income
and create gendered relationships of interdependence and social difference
within and across nation states will contribute to environmental anthropology,
the anthropology of Africa, and the growing field of multi-species ethnography.
By developing concepts of vernacular practice and littoral politics, this study
will also make important theoretical and methodological contributions to
contemporary debates in technical resource governance and sustainability and
development studies more broadly. Funding for this research also supports the
training of a social scientist.