* 1226546
* Education and Earnings Trajectories Across Generations
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Neeraj Kaushal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2016
* USD 124,994.00

SES-1226546

Yao Lu Neeraj Kaushal Columbia University

Abstract

Education and Earnings Trajectories Across Generations Canada and the United
States are two of the largest immigrant destinations in the world. For decades,
the two countries have received large inflows of immigrants from many common
sending nations while pursuing markedly different policies regarding the
admission and integration of immigrants. This project examines education and
earnings trajectories of immigrants and their descendants in both countries, in
light of these notable regulatory differences marking labor market and social
policies. The project employs nationally representative cross-sectional and
longitudinal data to examine: (1) Selection patterns of recent immigrants from
the same sending countries with respect to education, host-country language
proficiency, and entry-level earnings; (2) Changes in these selection patterns
since 1990 and the economic well-being of immigrants over time; and (3)
Educational attainment and earnings of second-generation immigrants compared to
their parents' generation as well as comparison groups in their destination
country. To that end, the project takes advantage of sophisticated and
comparable census data for the US and Canada. The incorporation of a
longitudinal component advances social science by adjusting for potential
selectivity bias typically associated with cross-sectional analyses.

Broader Impacts This research will improve our understanding of how the
selection and labor market incorporation of immigrants affects social mobility
patterns in the world?s leading immigrant destination countries, with
implications for other countries experiencing large-scale immigration. Findings
may be of interest to business and community leaders, as well as the general
public. Findings may also assist policy makers as they design policies to
promote economic development in receiving societies. The project also provides
training opportunities for students.