* 1226449
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The grammar of counting and measuring. A view from Tupi languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Angelika Kratzer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,760.00

Linguists and philosophers have long been fascinated with the distinction
between so-called "count nouns" (e.g. dog) and "mass nouns" (e.g. blood). Across
languages, these two classes of nouns tend to exhibit distinct morphological and
syntactic properties that primarily show up when those nouns combine with
numerals and quantifiers. Grammatical phenomena affected by the mass/count
distinction include number marking and the use of classifiers and measure
phrases. The project will investigate the linguistic expression of counting and
measuring in two under-studied and endangered Tupi languages spoken in Brazil:
Yudja (Juruna family) and Kawaiwete (Tupi Guarani family). Yudja and Kawaiwete
are languages that do not obviously fit into known typologies of the count/mass
distinction, and thus raise new questions for our understanding of how natural
languages encode fundamental conceptual categories. Three aspects of the grammar
of counting and measuring will be investigated: (i) the semantic and syntactic
properties of numeral constructions and their compatibility with what appear to
be notional "count" or "mass" nouns; (ii) the syntax and semantics of measure
constructions, and (iii) the semantics of nominal quantifiers. The project will
use a mix of methodologies, including fieldwork elicitation, production and
comprehension tasks, and the examination of narratives.

This project will contribute to the documentation of two endangered languages.
The results will be made available to the indigenous communities who speak the
two languages, and will be discussed in workshops for indigenous teachers in
local schools. The theoretical component of this research has as its audience
semanticists, cognitive psychologists, linguistic typologists, philosophers of
language, and specialists on Tupi languages.