* 1226555
* Modernized Research &amp; Training Laboratories for Coker West Wing, Highlands Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* James Costa, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 286,603.00

Western Carolina University is awarded a grant for laboratory renovations at the
Highlands Biological Station (HBS) located in the Blue Ridge of western North
Carolina http://highlandsbiological.org/. Established as a center for research
and training in the heart of the southern Appalachians, a temperate zone
biodiversity hotspot, the William Chambers Coker Laboratory has been the primary
locus of research and training at HBS for over 50 years. HBS serves all 17
institutions in the University of North Carolina system and annually attracts
dozens of researchers from the US and abroad, hosts numerous visiting college
and university classes, and for decades has offered an extensive program of
summer courses in diverse areas of field biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Built in
the 1950s, the West Wing of the Coker Laboratory is extensively used yet
increasingly outmoded with modernization a top-priority renovation project to
improve accessibility, and increase capacity and capability for research and
training. Improvements will include (1) increasing the number of research
laboratories in the west wing and equipping them with adequate work surfaces,
lighting and electrical outlets, and (2) expanding and reconfiguring the main
training lab to increase the amount of well-configured bench space and add
additional equipment such as a fume hood, sinks, and storage for lab supplies.
Common to both of these areas are electrical upgrades (the existing electrical
system is not grounded and consists of 2-wire romex) and insulation/climate
control (there is presently no insulation in this block building, and no
humidity control). Improving safety and functionality through electrical and
HVAC upgrades and reconfiguring research and teaching space of this wing for
optimized use will yield a net increase in research laboratory space by 33%, and
teaching/training space by 62%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A prodigious quantity of
scientific research and graduate and undergraduate courses have taken place in
the Coker Laboratory over the years, largely centered around the unique and rich
flora, fauna, and ecology of the region. As research base for numerous senior
research groups and training ground for undergraduate and graduate students in
many areas of terrestrial and aquatic ecology and organismal biology, these
improvements will further enhance the high quality research and educational
experiences for which HBS has been known for decades. Scientific productivity is
closely linked to quality of research space, and HBS's ability to host
researchers in expanded, modernized and ergonomically designed laboratories
translates into quality publications and other research products. The Coker West
Wing improvements also permit HBS to provide higher quality and quantities of
immersion training in field biology, critical to preparing current and future
generations of tertiary students from a variety of partnering institutions.
Engagement with the local and regional communities will enable citizens to
connect with and better understand the natural world through HBS-sponsored
workshops, programs, and related activities for groups ranging from K-12
students to life-long learners to professionals conservation non-profits and
federal and state agencies.