* 1226258
* Scalable Electronic Structure Calculations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Brandon Cook, Cook                    Brandon
* Fellowship Award
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

The efficient simulation of nanoscale systems with quantum mechanical precision
is vital for many disciplines including physics, chemistry, biology and
materials. Density functional theory (DFT) has been very successful in the
accurate description of material properties with moderate computational effort.
Traditional DFT calculations with full diagonalization of the Hamiltonian have
long been recognized as too computationally expensive and as a result
improvements have been sought. Recently, efforts have been focused on developing
order-N methods, where computational time increases linearly with the number of
atoms in the system, and on parallel algorithms that scale to thousands of
processors. Current state-of-the-art software scales to around 10, 000 CPU
cores. However, next-generation systems currently under construction have an
order of magnitude more CPU cores or contain a very large number of GPU co-
processors. For example, the Titan project at Oak Ridge National Lab will
contain 299,008 CPU cores and may additionally have GPUs when completed in late
2012. The primary goal of this project is to research and develop an open-source
DFT package based on the "Lagrange function" family of basis functions with
parallel scalability a priority from the beginning. Concurrent with code
development, studies of large bio-molecules and nanoscale devices will be
performed with the dual purpose of advancing scientific knowledge in those areas
and providing suitable test cases for the method and software capabilities.
Research problems to be investigated include molecular electronics, electronic
transport in multi terminal nanodevices, carbon based device design (graphene
and nanotubes) and predition of properties of nanowires with varying dopant and
defect distributions.

The work is expected to have significant broader impact. Release of the code
with an open source license will allow contribution to and application of the
method by diverse research groups. The lack of fees or onerous restrictions will
encourage adoption by many groups, particularly those in smaller institutions
lacking the budget for currently available codes. In contrast to other open
source packages such ABINIT and GPAW the method will be able to simulate systems
containing many atoms (of order 10,000) with very modest computational resources
such as a few multi-core workstations. The open nature of the website and
project is intended to foster collaboration and build partnerships.