* 1226854
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Religion and Gender Identity in Northern Thailand
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Jennifer Cole, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,200.00

University of Chicago doctoral candidate Michael Chladek, supervised by Dr.
Jennifer Cole, will research how religious practices may contribute to gender
identity development in northern Thai society particularly in terms of how
Western concepts of gender and identity are affecting local understandings of
masculinity. He will explore the impact of changing notions of manhood on the
institution of Buddhist monasticism, which is only open to men in Thailand. The
findings will contribute to a deeper understanding of religion, gender, and
social change more broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve 18
months of ethnographic fieldwork in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai, two northern
provinces of Thailand. The researcher will conduct participant observations at
two schools for novice monks, conducting in-depth interviews with monks about
their everyday lives to understand how Buddhist monasticism may shape their
experience of being men. To understand the general relationship between
monasticism and manhood, the researcher will conduct interviews with lay
Buddhists in the area; he will analyze news articles, books, and other media;
and he will participate in local events concerning the issues of gender and
monastic ordination, conducting in-depth interviews with key people involved in
these discussions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute a social
science perspective on how globalization may impact local gender roles and
understandings of manhood, especially regarding the role of religious practice
in shaping ideas about gender and will deepen our understanding of how new
meanings of gender and identity arise and take hold within societies. This
project also contributes to the training of a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;