* 1226663
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Defining Discrimination in France and the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Abigail Saguy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2013
* USD 10,243.00

This study examines why legal protection on the basis of sexual orientation is
recognized in some areas of law and not others, how some but not all unequal
treatment of sexual orientation minority citizens becomes legally defined as
discrimination, and how those on both sides of the issue justify their stances.
For example, France permits civil unions and prohibits workplace discrimination
but strictly prohibits procreative assistance to homosexual couples. In
contrast, the U.S. prohibits federal recognition of same-sex couples, but most
states permit adoption and artificial insemination. Comparing France and the
U.S.. which differ in their political and legal structure, the role played by
social movement organizations in public policy, and the degree of controversy
generated by moral issues in general ? provides analytical leverage on how these
factors may matter. Specifically, the investigator asks: 1) how do political
actors frame different legal concerns (e.g. marriage and filiation, hate crimes,
workplace discrimination); 2) what legal, institutional and cultural factors
across national cases account for the differences and similarities in how they
frame these issues; and 3) how do they justify the uneven recognition of rights
within their own countries? To answer these questions, he analyzes
observational, interview, and archival data, including legal code, judicial and
legislative debates, media coverage, and arguments made by sexual orientation
law experts, including activists, public figures, intellectuals, and scientists.
The investigator conceptualizes these debates as decision making processes that
require political actors to judge the moral status and origin of sexual
orientation and weigh it against their conceptions of the common good.

This study provides a lens through which to analyze issues facing contemporary
democracies, such as the limits of immutability arguments for rights claims, the
expanding influence of bioethical justifications for inclusion, and
relationships between science and politics.