* 1226494
* RUI: Landscape-scale Implications of Mineral Reaction Rates and Mechanisms in Tropical Soils: Insights from Soil Chronosequences and Synthesis Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Peter Ryan, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 137,580.00

Tropical soils are not uniformly kaolinite-rich and nutrient-depleted, and this
project aims to examine rates and mechanisms of mineral reactions (and
associated chemical changes) that occur with maturation of tropical soils.
Ultimately, pronounced leaching of base cations and silica drives humid tropical
soil solutions towards a nutrient-poor, low pH, Al-rich composition that favors
crystallization of kaolinite; however, data of the Food and Agricultural
Organization of the United Nations indicate that 65 % of tropical soils do not
fit this end-member Oxisol state. Pedogenic Fe-smectite (S) forms in many
tropical soils as a metastable precursor to kaolinite (K), and a recent study of
a humid tropical soil sequence by the PI and collaborator in Costa Rica
indicates that the transformation of S to K occurs over time spans on the order
of about 100,000 years via intermediate kaolinite-smectite (K-S) phases. The
reaction occurs on a layer-by-layer basis, and the preservation of S layers
within K-S crystals enables Al to be sequestered in expandable S interlayers,
thus limiting plant-toxic Al in solution. Furthermore, the cation exchange
capacity of K-S is about 5 times greater than K, further underscoring the need
to better constrain these reactions. Accordingly, this project seeks to test the
hypothesis that humid tropical soils, regardless of mean annual precipitation
(MAP), undergo step-wise transformation from S to K-S before ultimately
producing K. This hypothesis will be tested by examining the roles of time and
climate (as MAP) on the rates and mechanisms of the S to K-S to K reaction in
soil chronosequences from three separate climate zones along the Pacific coast
of Costa Rica. Preliminary data indicate that rate is positively correlated to
MAP. Mineral reaction mechanisms will also be examined by carrying out synthesis
reactions where solution composition and time are controlled. Middlebury College
is a residential liberal arts college with a long tradition of involving
students in hands-on, experiential research. This is particularly true in the
Geology Department, which over many decades has cultivated a critical-thinking,
problem-oriented curriculum that includes a required year-long senior thesis.
Positive demographic changes in the Geology Dept provide a much greater
opportunity for this and all projects in the department to extend to typically
underrepresented students. Graduating geology majors from the classes of 2008 to
2013 are comprised of 15 % (8/53) American students of color, whereas the
geology majors from 2000 to 2007 consisted of less than 2 % American students of
color (1/65). Female students comprise 46 % of geology majors over the past 15
years, and in the classes of 2012 and 2013 combined, 13/19 students are female.
15% of Middlebury geology theses result in co-authored publications with
faculty, and 50 % of Middlebury geology majors attend graduate school, so these
demographic shifts present the opportunity to add diversity to the broader
geologic community. Thus, this project will target a diverse group of students
in a strong program with a proven record of success in undergraduate research.
The project also has an international undergraduate scope, which includes a
field excursion to the Osa Peninsula to do field work with University of Costa
Rica (UCR) geologist Guillermo Alvarado and undergraduate students from UCR and
Middlebury College, as well as analytical and experimental research at the
Instituto Andaluz de Ciencias de la Tierra in Granada Spain, where the PI and
students will collaborate on detailed mineralogical and geochemical analysis of
tropical soils. The NSF Office of International Science and Engineering
contributed to the international component of this project.