* 1226228
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Location in Resource Rent Distribution and the Projection of Power in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Graeme Blair, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

It is well established in the social sciences that the presence of natural
resources like oil and diamonds often leads to pernicious outcomes including
sluggish economic growth, non-democratic governments, and civil conflict. Though
it is relatively well-understood how oil and diamonds cause bad economic and
governance outcomes, it is much less clear how these factors are related to the
emergence of civil wars. Nigeria, Indonesia, Sudan, and the Democratic Republic
of Congo are often held up as examples of wars over the territory where
resources come out of the ground. This project clarifies that in fact civil wars
are less likely to take place in these resource-rich regions, and instead take
place far away from oil wells and diamond mines in peripheral parts of resource-
rich countries. The project aims to identify through a case study of Nigeria and
two rebel groups within it, one in the resource-rich South and one in the
resource-poor Northeast, why this might be. The explanation developed in the
project centers on the threat of protest and sabotage by residents in the
resource region, which leads the state to use revenues from natural resources to
buy off those threatening groups and to send additional military forces to the
region to forestall remaining threats. The project will, first, develop a new
dataset of state military power in sub-national regions by digitizing and coding
Michelin Tire Company maps of sub-Saharan Africa from 1960 to present to test
the military forces argument. Second, interviews would make up case studies
comparing two rebel groups, one in a resource-rich and one in a resource-poor
region in Nigeria, to further test the theory of the mechanisms driving the
resource-conflict relationship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual
merit is rooted in its novel theoretical and methodological contributions.
Unlike many existing studies, the project's theory predicts not only in which
countries civil war will take place, but where within the countries, and an
explanation for why conflicts take place in these places. The research is also
novel methodologically. It will combine qualitative evidence collected in West
Africa with quantitative evidence from cross-regional data across states or
provinces on the location of civil wars within resource-rich states. Few studies
in political science leverage quantitative evidence at the sub-national level,
and a very few use cross-regional evidence from multiple
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the intellectual contribution,
the project has several broader impacts. The roads dataset - extending the
coverage of existing data available only for the present back to 1960 - would
substantially improve quantitative research on Africa. There are few reliable
data covering the continent, and fewer still of substantive importance for
social scientists. Roads are hypothesized, for example, to chart the projection
of state power and economic activity over time. The entire dataset would be
publicly disseminated. Donor funds, NGO time, and diplomatic action often aims
to help states avoid the pernicious effects of new natural wealth. A study of
the way governments respond to the new resources would inform new efforts to
avoid them. The author aims to highlight flawed perceptions of the likely
location of civil war threats, and three prescriptions to avoid them. First,
social scientists' main advice is often revenue transparency. The theory
developed suggests that is not nearly as important as disclosing how governments
spend it and, critically, where. Second, regional economic equality may be
critical, so the governments' hands could be tied to promote distributing
revenue equally, and donor funds used to smooth the gaps. Finally, evidence on
the effects of security force deployments could help prevent the power vacuums
that are hypothesized to enable rebellion.