* 1226130
* OCE-PRF: Melt Inclusions as Windows into Melt Generation and Crystallization Beneath Off-Axis Seamounts at Mid-Ocean Ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Virginia Wanless, Wanless                 Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, the investigator will explore the evolution of oceanic crust by
analyzing the composition of the lava flows from off-axis seamounts near the
Juan de Fuca Ridge.

Oceanic crust is created at the axis of mid-ocean ridge spreading centers and is
subsequently modified by off-axis volcanism. While mid-ocean ridge basalts
erupted on-axis are typically relatively uniform in composition, off-axis
seamounts erupt a wide range of compositions suggesting a complex system of melt
generation, accumulation, and crystallization beneath these volcanic edifices.
The investigator will use geochemical analyses of melt inclusions and associated
glasses (including major, trace, and volatile elements) from lavas erupted at
several seamounts to geochemically define the magmatic plumbing system beneath
off-axis seamounts from melt generation to eruption on the seafloor.

Results will be integrated with an ongoing study of melt inclusions at the
adjacent ridge segment, which will provide a direct comparison between on- and
off-axis magmatic systems at depth. Thus, the investigator will be able to
systematically assess melt generation, accumulation, and the depth of
crystallization beneath off-axis seamounts.

The broader impacts include sponsoring an undergraduate student from an under-
represented group to work on the research project as a summer intern, and
graduate student mentorship. Findings from this project will be presented to the
general public in an effort to inspire young scientists at "family science
nights" at the New Bedford Ocean Explorium. Data and interpretations will be
presented at international conferences. Once published, all data produced will
be made available to the scientific community though incorporation into PetDB
(www.petdb.org).

This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to support novel research by early
career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean sciences
workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support, this project will enable
a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation of under-
represented groups in the ocean sciences.