* 1226480
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Citizens' Social Group Stereotypes as a Basis for Political Reasoning.
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Meredith Sadin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2014
* USD 22,540.00

Early work in political science indicated that citizens structure their
political attitudes around 'visible social groupings' meaning that, in an effort
to simplify political choices, citizens turn questions of policy into moral
judgments about the groups involved (Converse 1964). However, much of the
research on citizens' group-centric attitudes has neglected a primary means by
which citizens organize and evaluate one another: economic differences. This
oversight is surprising, considering the recent scholarly and media attention
given to rising inequality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fill this gap, the
Co-PI is undertaking a multi-stage dissertation project that examines the manner
in which citizens use stereotypes about economic groups as a shortcut for
selecting candidates and determining which policies to support. Using a two-
stage data collection project comprised of a nationally representative survey
and a follow-up survey experiment, the Co-PI will examine the beliefs that
citizens have about these groups and how these beliefs are consequential for
political reasoning. The proposed study will address three questions. First,
what is the nature of the public's beliefs about economic groups? Second, how
are these beliefs consequential for citizens? policy attitudes? Third,
recognizing that these attitudes may not be fixed and are susceptible to
priming, under which conditions are these beliefs more or less significant for
public opinion?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses a double-sided
blindness in the existing research in political science. While inequality
scholars have addressed the institutional causes and consequences of rising
inequality, they have been slower to evaluate links between the changing
composition of social groups and group-centered political behavior. Conversely,
while political psychologists have produced abundant work on racial and gender
stereotypes, they have discounted economic differences. The line of questioning
proposed here builds on and contributes to key debates in both political
psychology and the study of inequality, in addition to identifying the real
world political consequences of such attitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Research on economic differences is especially timely. Over
the past few decades, inequality has risen at an alarming rate, while mobility
has stagnated. The New York Times declaration that we are in a 'New Gilded Age'
all suggest that economic-based groupings have become increasingly salient to
voters and, in turn, influential for both public opinion and political outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to maximize the impact of the proposed study, the
Co-PI plans to make the data publicly available as well as easy to incorporate
into other datasets. In doing so, this data-collection project will hopefully
facilitate a wide array of studies that are not considered in the Co-PI's
dissertation and will provide a theoretical and data-driven starting point for
additional research on economic status and public opinion as well as (when
matched to higher-level data) representation and broader economic factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI will also submit the research proposed here to
scholarly conferences and journals in order to disseminate insights about the
attitudes that are relevant to political behavior to a wide audience and provide
a methodological precedent for future research.