* 1226975
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Women Migrants and Sending Households in the Context of South-South Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Molly Doane, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 24,559.00

Doctoral student Laura Nussbaum-Barberena (University of Illinois at Chicago),
with the guidance of Dr. Molly Doane, will undertake research on the
implications of increasing disparity between the economies of countries within
the global South during a period of global political and economic
transformation. The research will focus in particular on South-South labor
migration and its effects on economic disparities and changing notions of
citizenship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on Nicaraguan women
who travel to Costa Rica for work. In the wake of privatization measures, poor
Nicaraguan households attempt to meet the rising costs of social reproduction by
sending labor migrants to Costa Rica. While this permits economic stabilization
in Nicaragua and economic growth in Costa Rica, migrants themselves along with
their family members appear to face downward mobility. Preliminary evidence
suggests that migrants resist this process by negotiating rights, policy
changes, and citizenship. The researcher will carry out ethnographic research
with a transnational alliance of two organizations: one of Nicaraguan migrant
women in Costa Rica and one of their women relatives in Nicaragua. The
researcher will collect data through participant observation and semi-structured
interviews. Archival research will take place in government offices and
newspaper archives in Costa Rica and Nicaragua. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings
from this research will help to theorize the unpredictable regional and cross-
border dynamics of economic restructuring. Findings may also inform improved
labor, immigration and social welfare policy. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.