* 1226726
* Bigelow Laboratory Marine Biological and Oceanographic Computational Resources
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 349,347.00

Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences is awarded a grant to establish a
centralized computational environment at its new Ocean Science and Education
Campus in East Boothbay, Maine. Upon completion, this project will provide much
needed computational infrastructure and enable Bigelow Laboratory to make a
major transition to sustainable, cost-effective management of data and
computational resources during the next decade. The new system will be comprised
of hardware to provide expanded Parallel Processing Power, improved short-term
Storage Capability, and Cloud Backup/Archival options for researchers at the
institutional level, and MVC Framework Software for business operations in the
National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota (NCMA) at Bigelow Laboratory.
The resulting computational environment will meet the current research needs of
the Laboratory, and will allow for scalable expansion to meet future research
needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bigelow Laboratory supports several ongoing
education initiatives that require computing resources to meet their objectives:
the Keller BLOOM program for high school students, the NSF-funded Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program, college-level courses taught by
Bigelow Senior Research Scientists through an academic partnership with Colby
College, the Professional Development Workshop for Science Teachers, and the
Bigelow Postdoctoral Education Program. Each of these initiatives will greatly
benefit from an enhanced computational environment since it is often difficult
to procure adequate resources that provide students, educators and postdocs with
the ability to analyze their data and continue to collaborate with Laboratory
researchers beyond time spent at Bigelow. The environment resulting from this
funding represents a significant computational expansion that will meet the
growing needs of these educational initiatives and will provide Bigelow
Laboratory with the ability to expand the educational scope of these programs
and the freedom to develop future offerings centered on high performance
computing. For more information about Bigelow Laboratory please visit the
website at http://www.bigelow.org.