* 1226644
* Threat Reduction as a Novel Mechanism Linking Empathy and Prosocial Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Poulin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 394,988.00

Empirical research has long demonstrated that empathy, the human ability to
understand and attend to the emotions of others, promotes actions on behalf of
individuals who are suffering or otherwise in need, such as donating time and
money or performing an unpleasant task on their behalf. In principle, this
knowledge could be used to promote helping behavior where it is most needed: For
example, in the caring professions or in the domains of volunteering, charitable
giving, or supporting close others.

Surprisingly, however, it is presently unclear why empathy leads to helping
others, and this lack of knowledge limits researchers' ability to predict under
what conditions empathy is most likely, most effective, or most amenable to
intervention. To date, attempts to explain empathy's effects have predominantly
focused on potential helpers' feelings of distress about a person in need,
emotions called compassion or empathic concern, or on the empathy-induced belief
that a person in need is part of oneself. However, it is not at all certain that
these two models exhaust the list of possible explanations for empathy's
effects. The present research aims to expand the terms of the debate over
empathy and helping by focusing on a novel explanation for empathy's effects:
reduced feelings of threat and anxiety driven by the function of the
neurohormones (hormones released within the brain) oxytocin and vasopressin.

A series of five laboratory-based studies will test this prediction. Most of
these experiments will involve assigning participants to laboratory conditions
in which they either do or do not feel empathy for a person in need, assessing
participants' feelings of threat and anxiety via reaction-time and
cardiovascular measures, and observing participants' helping behavior towards
the person in need. Across these studies, this research aims to demonstrate
that: 1) empathy leads to reduced feelings of threat and anxiety, 2) reduced
feelings of threat and anxiety account for the effects of empathy on helping, 3)
oxytocin and vasopressin account for the effects of empathy on both feelings of
threat/anxiety and prosocial behavior, 4) the effects of these neurohormones
(which are strongly related to parental caregiving) are strongest on behalf of
neotenous (baby-faced) individuals, and 5) empathy reduces cardiovascular
reactions to stressful experiences.

In sum, this research will advance understanding of the psychological and
biological mechanisms by which empathy promotes prosocial behavior. In so doing,
this work will shed new light on the foundations of helping behaviors in humans,
and may suggest avenues for encouraging helping in desired contexts. In
addition, this research will help to explain why helping behavior and social
connections more generally are beneficial for health and well-being, and may lay
the groundwork for interventions to increase the health benefits of helping
behavior by increasing the role of empathy in these activities.

In addition to the scientific and practical contributions of the findings from
this research, the conduct of this research will provide training for graduate
and undergraduate students in genetics, advanced statistical techniques, and
psychophysiology. The university where this research will be conducted is
ethnically and socioeconomically diverse, which will be reflected in those who
participate in the research as well as the graduate and undergraduate members of
the research team. Furthermore, a majority of the research team will be females,
who have historically been underrepresented in the sciences.