* 1226832
* Collaborative Research: Constraining rates of C-O bond reordering in biogenic calcite: Implications for clumped isotope thermometry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alberto Perez-Huerta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2015
* USD 56,595.00

Temperature is a central aspect of climate, yet reconstructing the temperature
history at Earth's surface over geological timescales has remained a challenging
goal. Much progress has been made using the oxygen isotopic compositions of
fossil carbonates such as shells, but these compositions depend both on the
temperature during growth of the carbonate mineral, and on the oxygen isotopic
composition of the water in which the mineral grew. Thus the oxygen isotope
paleothermometer requires estimates of the oxygen isotopic composition of
ancient waters, and the reconstructed temperatures will be in error if these
estimates are incorrect. Carbonate "clumped isotope" thermometry is a new method
that has generated wide interest within the geoscience community because it does
not require assumptions about past water isotopic compositions, and moreover the
method is capable of reconstructing both past temperatures and past water
isotopic compositions. The temperature information is contained not in the
overall isotopic composition of the mineral, but in the preferential "clumping"
of the heavy isotopes carbon-13 and oxygen-18 into bonds with each other.
However, while this feature lends the method great promise for solving long-
standing questions in paleoclimate, geobiology, tectonics, and petrology, the
same feature also leads to an inconvenient truth about preservation of the
original isotopic signal: It is far easier, chemically and kinetically, for the
abundances of carbon-13 ¬ oxygen-18 bonds to be altered during burial than it is
for the bulk carbon- or oxygen-isotopic composition to be altered. The
abundances of carbon-13 ¬ oxygen-18 bonds can be altered by simple burial
heating of the mineral that causes carbon and oxygen atoms migrate through the
mineral lattice through a process called solid-state diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the kinetics of such C-O bond reordering
using a combination laboratory and natural experiments focusing on brachiopod
shells. The laboratory experiments will use methods borrowed from experimental
petrology to determine Arrhenius parameters allowing prediction of the
temperature-dependent rates of solid state C-O bond reordering. The natural
experiments will help to evaluate the laboratory experimental results, and will
focus on 300 million-year-old brachiopod fossils from North America. Brachiopods
are an ideal material for such a study because they are widely used in
paleoclimate studies, they have approximately-known initial temperatures and
times of formation, they are resistant to recrystallization, and because
contrasting burial histories can be compared. A major goal of the laboratory and
natural experiments is to define the temperature - time domain in which original
clumped isotope compositions can be preserved. Stated differently, investigators
seek to answer questions such as "at what burial temperature does a fossil shell
begin to loose its original clumped isotope composition due to solid state
reordering."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed work will result in the
scientific training of at least two graduate students and two undergraduate
students. The Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) and Johns Hopkins University (JHU)
graduate students will each visit Perez-Huerta's lab at the University of
Alabama to conduct electron backscatter diffraction analysis, and the students
will visit the collaborating institution (TAMU or JHU) to learn clumped isotope,
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, cathodoluminsecence, and other
techniques utilized in the study. The students will present findings at
international meetings and prepare results for publication. The work is
quantitative in nature and will provide training relevant both to academic and
applied aspects of geoscience.