* 1226804
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Grammar of the Katso Language in Yunnan, China
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Carol Genetti, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,078.00

Katso is an endangered minority language spoken in a single farming village in
China's Yunnan Province. The speakers are descendants of Mongol troops who
conquered the region in the 13th century under Kublai Khan. The language evolved
from extensive contact between the Mongols and other local minorities such as
the Bai and the Yi, and is thus considered a mixed language. Today it is
classified as variant of the officially recognized Yi language (Tibeto-Burman)
although the two are mutually unintelligible. The 5000 speakers are under
increasing pressure to speak Mandarin since that is the only way to pursue an
education or find employment outside the village. Consequently, many children
now learn Katso as a second language. It is therefore crucial that Katso be
documented while it is still vibrant and in daily use.

The goals of the project are to create a comprehensive corpus of Katso and write
a detailed grammar of the language. The corpus will consist of digital audio and
video recordings accompanied by transcriptions with linguistic annotation. The
language captured will include a wide variety of discourse types, such as
traditional narratives, personal anecdotes, conversation, ceremonies, idioms,
jokes and songs. Archived with both the speaker community and at a professional
language archive, the corpus and the resulting grammar will create a permanent
record of the language for future use by villagers and scholars alike. The
project will considerably expand our knowledge of this unique language and
provide the foundation for future scholarly investigations into fundamental
questions on mixed languages and language contact, historical change, and
language classification. The project will benefit the Katso community. Materials
such as recordings of traditional songs and stories will be made available, and
interested speakers will be trained and mentored. In addition, workshops on
language documentation will be offered to interested students at the Yunnan
University of Nationalities.