* 1226780
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Navigations of Chronic Illness and Autonomy among Miskitu Lobster Divers in Atlantic Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Paul Kroskrity, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 17,399.00

Doctoral student Clinton D. Humphrey, supervised by Dr. Paul V. Kroskrity, will
undertake research on how social, political, and economic contexts affect
people's understanding of their own physical and psychological experience. The
project is important because it will contribute to a growing body of research in
the social sciences that examines how socio-cultural processes may configure the
ways in which individuals attend to, perceive, and conceptualize bodily
sensations in times of illness.

The research will be conducted for 14 months with Miskitu lobster divers on the
Autonomous Atlantic Coast of Nicaragua. The Miskitu divers' livelihoods depend
on deep diving but it too frequently results in chronic and debilitating
decompression illness, also known as the bends. The researcher will use a unique
video analysis technique to delineate how discourse, patterns of embodied
interaction, and cultural resources shape Miskitu encounters with this illness.
His video recordings of lobster divers will allow him to conduct microanalyses
of discourse, gesture, gaze, and bodily movement, to determine how these divers
attune their senses and navigate their working bodies in the unique undersea
environment as they simultaneously attend to signs of danger and sickness.
Follow-up interviews and participant observation with targeted research
participants will explore local explanations of illnesses. Collectively, these
data will guide an investigation of how Miskitu lobster divers perceive, endure,
and endeavor to make sense of the ailments they feel in their bodies in
different social and environmental contexts.

This study advances research on sensory experience with a distinctive micro-
analytical emphasis on discourse, embodied-communicative interaction, and
political-economic processes. The researcher will share research findings with
local programs designed to assist these commercial divers and their families.
Supporting this research also supports the education of a graduate student.