* 1226676
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Knowledge Production in Environmental Risk Research in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Adriana Petryna, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 18,421.00

Doctoral candidate Britt Dahlberg (University of Pennsylvania), under the
guidance of Dr. Adriana Petryna, will conduct research on the role of scientific
and community practices in defining what it means for a place and its residents
to be designated "at risk." Taking as a case example a United States town
founded around asbestos manufacturing, her research will examine the ways in
which other community concerns become incorporated into, or displaced by, a
renewed focus on asbestos as an environmental health emergency. Through
ethnographic attention to the multitude of perspectives and experiences in the
town, her research will identify the ways in which a narrow focus on asbestos as
a health threat may exclude concerns about asbestos' broader social and economic
effects (as well as other concerns altogether) from public discourse.

This dissertation project will employ participant-observation, interviewing, and
document analysis to understand how residents, community groups, and government
agencies each define the main risks of the town, communicate these with one
another, and how their interactions shape the ultimate scope of the on-going
environmental risk investigation, as well as public understandings of the
primary risks, and ideal futures, for the town.

This project will advance anthropological and science and technology studies'
understandings of (1) how bodies, health, and environment are being re-
conceptualized and reconfigured around ideas of "risk" and "environmental
health;" (2) how expertise, evidence, and the terms for evaluating knowledge-
production practices are re-negotiated when science is used to address public
problems and when citizens are involved in the making of knowledge about the
environments in which they live; and (3) the forms of governance operating in
contemporary public health research and interventions which increasingly
incorporate the built and social environment into health research. This project
will also contribute to knowledge of the politics and stakes of involving
communities in environmental health research, which may be used to improve
community-science collaboration practices. Supporting this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.