* 1226362
* Compressive Computation: Novel Algorithms for Computation with Compressively Sensed Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Daniel Kaslovsky, Kaslovsky               Daniel         N
* Fellowship Award
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

This project will provide the scientific community with new tools for analyzing
large and complex data sets though the design and implementation of new
algorithms using compressive sensing. While typically complex and high-
dimensional, modern data sets often have a concise underlying structure.
Compressive sensing is a new data-acquisition paradigm that allows sparse data
to be randomly undersampled without sacrificing reconstruction accuracy.
Compressive sensing relies on theoretical results that allow for an overwhelming
majority of the information content in sparse data to be captured from a
relatively small number of random measurements. Recent advances in the core
cyberinfrastructure areas of computation and data analysis have demonstrated
that efficient matrix computations may also be realized through randomized
techniques. Based on the same theoretical underpinnings, the success of both
compressive sampling and randomized numerical linear algebra suggest a new
framework by which random sampling can be integrated into data acquisition and
processing for new, highly efficient, computational algorithms. As randomized
matrix operations are amenable to parallelization, such algorithms may achieve
further efficiency from modern multi-processor architectures. The main research
objective of this work is the design of both structured sensing matrices and new
randomized computational algorithms for processing compressively sensed data. A
careful theoretical study will result in understanding how mathematical
operations on compressed samples may be used to manipulate the data from which
the samples were acquired. With this understanding, algorithms will be designed
for integrating the compressive sensing acquisition process with randomized
numerical matrix computations.

Massive amounts of data are produced by a wide range of scientific disciplines
(e.g., genomics, astrophysics, internet and network analysis) as well as by
commerce and industry (e.g., inventory databases, consumer behavior tracking).
New algorithms for efficient processing of such data may therefore realize both
economic and scientific impact. As compressing sensing is particularly
applicable to imaging, the medical community stands to benefit from the results
of this research through reduced image acquisition times and faster diagnoses
from novel computation. The theoretical advances that will result from this
proposal are applicable to other mathematical areas such as numerical analysis
and computational harmonic analysis. The algorithms from this work will be
implemented in high-quality code made publicly available to the general
scientific community.