* 1226817
* The Relationship Between Soil Degradation, Rural Livelihoods, and Household Well-Being
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Clark Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 02/29/2016
* USD 399,958.00

The goal of this project is to better understand the connections between soil
degradation and rural poverty. Soil degradation is a decline in the productivity
of the soil for agriculture and other uses, and is usually the result of long-
term continual agricultural use without the addition of mineral or organic
fertilizers. Soil degradation is widely perceived to be a key factor undermining
the livelihoods of small farmers, especially in the developing world, who
represent a large fraction of the world's poorest households. Scientific
understanding of the extent and severity of this problem has been limited by the
absence of data that links soil degradation and household well-being. This issue
is of particular interest in parts of East Africa, where rural poverty is
endemic, agricultural yields are low and stagnant, and few farmers have the
resources to fertilize their fields. To address this issue, this project will
consider the case of Uganda, a country where soil degradation and rural poverty
are particularly severe. The core of the project is the construction of a new
dataset that links changes in soil productivity and household well-being over an
11-year period. Building on a large household and soil survey conducted in 2003,
the same households will be re-interviewed, and agricultural plots will be re-
sampled and analyzed. This new longitudinal dataset will be analyzed using
multivariate statistical techniques to test three core hypotheses: (1)
Households with poor soil productivity in 2003 will have experienced more
negative changes in well-being and more out-migration over the 11-year period;
(2) Households that were poor in 2003 will have experienced more negative
changes in soil productivity; and (3) Changes in well-being and soil
productivity will be positively correlated when other influences have been
accounted for. Findings from the research will advance theories about the
relationship between demography and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ameliorating soil degradation and reducing
rural poverty are central goals of agricultural and development policies in poor
countries, but to date these policies have been implemented with little
scientific understanding of the connections between these two processes. This
project will provide important new insights into the severity and drivers of
soil degradation, as well as the contribution of soil productivity to the well-
being of rural households in East Africa and other parts of the world where this
is also an issue. The results will be disseminated through presentations at
scientific conferences and will be made available to policy makers. The project
is collaboration between the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Purdue
University, the International Food Policy Research Institute, and the National
Agricultural Research Laboratories of Uganda. It will support two graduate
students and will be integrated into existing undergraduate courses at the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill and at Purdue
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported through co-funding
between NSF's Geography and Spatial Sciences Program and the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE).