* 1226992
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Political Ecologies of Value: Tourism & Social Conflict in Baja California Sur, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Sarah Lyon, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 12,188.00

University of Kentucky doctoral candidate Ryan Anderson, supervised by Dr. Sarah
Lyon, will undertake research on the local ecological effects of conflicts about
development projects. Anderson will focus on tensions that may arise between
economic values, on the one hand, and moral and cultural values on the others.
He will carry out the research on the East Cape of Baja California Sur, Mexico,
where preliminary research indicates that a large-scale development project has
residents deeply divided. The research is designed to explore connections
between the social production of cultural, ethical, and economic value and how
people use, understand, exploit, and shape the geographic and ecological spaces
in which they live.

Anderson will conduct 12 months of ethnographic fieldwork with two communities
in the region. He will employ a multi-faceted research design that includes
participant observation, open-ended and semi-structured interviews, GPS mapping,
and photographic documentation. These data will allow him to 1) document the
range of resident responses; 2) understand the relationship between competing
social values and design and use of tourism destinations; and 3) and identify
connections between the larger political economy of tourism and local impacts on
culture, society, and access to critical resources such as public space and
water.

Findings from this research will contribute to social scientific understanding
of how different kinds of values affect and are affected by local economic
development projects and tourism projects in particular. In addition to
supporting the training of a social scientist, this research will be significant
for community members, academics, and policymakers at both the local and global
level.