* 1226306
* Planning Grant for EPSCoR Missouri
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* John Walker, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 374,766.00

This EPSCoR planning grant will identify the most powerful points of leverage
for building Missouri's research and technology enterprise. The NSF Research
Infrastructure Improvement Program: Track-1 (RII Track-1) proposal will use
those leverage points to develop and sustain a national leadership
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EPSCoR governing committee will solicit concept
papers and convene stakeholder discussions to define research themes and inform
the plans for cyberinfrastructure, external engagement, workforce development,
diversity, evaluation and assessment, and sustainability. The EPSCoR team will
work with state officials to finalize the Science and Technology Plan. The
governing committee will ensure all stakeholders are fairly represented, and an
external advisory board and experienced EPSCoR consultant will guide the
planning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The focal area for
EPSCoR Missouri will be biosciences as supported by cyberinfrastructure. This
focus was determined by examining comprehensive research on Missouri's job and
wealth generation potential, relevant support services, educational
opportunities, research activity, recent events, infrastructure, and stakeholder
input. The research identified seven "target clusters" as key to Missouri's
economic development, and NSF funding across these clusters points very clearly
to a state-wide strength in the biosciences. The biosciences are increasingly
dependent on the ability to manage, mine and store very large datasets, that can
traverse widely divergent phylogenies and span molecular, cellular and
population scales. Missouri's overall cyberinfrastructure, however, limits
further growth in bioscience research. With the opportunity to increase the
power and breadth of the state's cyberinfrastructure, Missouri scientists can
expand work in areas of strength - among them modeling of protein structure,
metabolic networks and ecological interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The Missouri EPSCoR planning process will build a network of
stakeholders who are invested in education and workforce development
initiatives. This network will include all relevant research, education,
government, and industry stakeholders as we increase collaborative capabilities
through better communication and cyberinfrastructure, and plan for a sustainable
steady state through an RII Track-1 award. With 34 institutions of higher
education (including top-notch private universities, a Research-I land grant
university, an HBCU and a large network of 2- and 4-year institutions) and
world-class research centers and industry, Missouri can become a national leader
in bioscience, producing and sustaining a diverse STEM workforce.