* 1226562
* SBP-Creating a Diverse Society that Works: Investigating the Role of Social Identity Threat in Interracial Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Daryl Wout, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The lack of positive contact between members of different racial groups has
constituted a major social problem throughout American history. Even though
racial and ethic diversity in the United States is growing, interracial contact
remains relatively rare. Positive interracial contact is important because it
has been linked to reductions in prejudice and discrimination and to greater
access to intellectual, social and economic capital. When interracial contact
occurs, however, research has demonstrated that it is rife with anxiety and
discomfort for both racial majority and minority group members. Furthermore,
people's anxiety and discomfort during interracial contact has been associated
with decreased interest in pursuing future interracial contact. The present
research examines how two factors - the racial diversity of an interaction
partner's friendship network and the goals that he or she adopts for the
interaction - influence people's experiences during interracial interactions.
This research proposes a novel, theoretically based model for how these factors
independently and collectively influence people's comfort and anxiety when
engaged in interracial interactions and their desire to engage in future
interracial interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous research has
examined how racially diverse (vs. homogenous) friendship networks affects
interracial interaction expectations, this work examines the role of friendship
networks in the context of another situational factor - people's goals for the
interaction. Five experimental studies will test whether an interaction
partner's racial friendship network (racially diverse or racial homogeneous) and
the partner's goals for the interaction (learning or performance goals)
influence ethnic minority and White individuals' interaction experiences. In
particular, we will measure Black, Hispanic and White college students'
experiences of social identity threat, anxiety, and avoidant behavior prior to
and during the interaction, as well as their interest in engaging in future
interracial interactions. It is hypothesized that an interaction partner who has
a racially diverse friend network and who also adopts a learning goal prior to
the interaction will reduce participants' social identity threat, anxiety and
avoidance behavior, and will foster a more positive interaction. Thus the
research will test whether shifts in people's goals within the interaction
context can reduce identity threat, opening the door for positive interracial
contact?even in the absence of a diverse friendship network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring the perspectives of majority and minority
group members, this research will provide novel theoretical and empirical
contributions to the existing literatures on interracial contact and social
identity threat by broadening our understanding of the challenges faced by
people engaged in interracial contact. Moreover, this research will provide
practical guidance on how to better structure interracial interactions to
facilitate smoother exchanges and greater enjoyment for both minority and
majority group members. This understanding is essential as we enter an age of
increased globalization and intergroup contact and as we strive to maintain our
competitiveness both at home and internationally. As faculty of color, both PIs
are committed to broadening diversity with the sciences and thus serve as role
models and mentors for graduate and undergraduate students from disadvantaged
and underrepresented backgrounds that will be involved in the planning,
execution, dissemination, and publication of the research findings.