* 1226599
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:The Institutionalization of Medicine in Rio de Janeiro, 1850-1930
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* William Summerhill, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2013
* USD 18,341.00

This dissertation analyzes the Brazilian state's institutionalization of
medicine through its increased criminalization of traditional medical practices
relating to women's healthcare. Three questions are central to explaining
institutionalization via criminalization: what was the changing institutional
nature of the medical profession, specifically the field of obstetrics and
gynecology? How did the state?s push towards medical institutionalization affect
the Brazilian population?s access to healthcare, in particular women?s access to
pre- and post-natal medical services? And how and why did the state monitor,
control, and ultimately, criminalize traditional medicine practices, most
notably midwifery?

Although gender continues to illuminate analysis of the legal history of
medicine mediciine, legal historical scholarship has yet to explain the role of
gender in medicine across places and times. This dissertation seeks to fill that
gap in late-nineteenth-century Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The actions and writings
of both the state and licensed doctors reveals the processes of the
institutionalization of medicine. Whether the law and rhetoric actually
increased or decreased women?s access to affordable pre- and post-natal
healthcare is the focus of analysis. The project concludes by explaining how the
criminalization of traditional midwifery practices contributed to
institutionalization. The legal jurisdiction over the practice of medicine
contributed to socioeconomic changes during turn-of-the-century Rio de Janeiro,
changing governance patterns, and creating a modern medical infrastructure.
These changes included structural inequalities in the class- and race-based
society. By using previously untapped court cases, medical theses and journals,
public health records, criminal law, and census data, this project is the first
study of the intersection of healthcare, gender, race, and the law in late-
nineteenth-century Rio de Janeiro.

Health care inequalities remain a cross-national concern today, and this study
will provide a contribution to ongoing discussions of how inequalities have been
created and continued.