* 1226855
* Collaborative Research: The Democratic Peace - An Experimental Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Jessica Weeks, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 259,344.00

Countless studies have found that democracies never fight againts other
democracies, but scholars continue to debate why this pattern exists. Some argue
that the democratic peace is a spurious result of omitted variables such as
shared interests. Others believe that democracy causes peace but disagree about
the mechanisms generating this relationship. Previous attempts have faced three
serious obstacles: endogeneity, collinearity, and over-aggregation. As a
consequence, it has been difficult to isolate the conditions under which
democracy contributes to peace and to understand the mechanisms behind its
causal power.

For decades, U.S. and foreign leaders have cited the democratic peace when
analysing foreign affairs and justifying democratic enlargement. This topic is
even more critical today, given the tremendous pressure for democracy in the
Middle East, Asia, and North Africa. By clarifying the circumstances under which
democracy fosters peace, and by identifying the mechansism through which it
operates, this project could help leaders forecast the effects of
democratization and the likelihood of war. Moreover, by indicating which
institutional features of democracy contribute to peace, the research could
inform the design of new democracies. Finally, studying how democracy affects
not only war but also economic and diplomatic relations will result in new and
general knowledge about the sources of international cooperation.

The researchers propose to overcome these three obstacles, mentioned above, by
conducting micro-level experiments. Existing theories of the democratic peace
have testable but unexplored implications about the preferences and beliefs of
individual citizens and elites. The researchers will conduct a series of survey
experiments in which U.S. citizens, including a subset of citizens who most
resemble political elites, read about foriegn policy scenarios. The aspects of
the situation, including whether the potential adversary is a democracy, will be
varied. The experiments will provide micro-level evidence about how democracy
affects preferences about war, while avoiding problems of endogeneity and
collinnearity that have hampered previous research. The researcers will also
study why individuals react differently when the target is a democracy rather
than an autocracy. Democracy could promote peace by changing perceptions about
the threat the opponent poses, the expected cost of war, the likelihood of
success, and the morality of using violence. These and other perceptions will be
examined in order to shed light on the causal mechanisms.