* 1226488
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  A "Revolutionary Emotion":  Empathy, Public Opinion and the March to Equality
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Erica Czaja, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 08/31/2013
* USD 22,540.00

This research explores the revolutionary role of empathy in American politics.
This dissertation is concerned primarily with the effects of empathy across
social group lines, and specifically, how empathy for individuals from marginal
groups influences dominant group members' attitudes and behavior toward those
marginal groups. Central to this research is the distinction between sympathy,
which refers to feeling sorry for another, and empathy, which involves "putting
oneself in another's shoes," feeling what the other is feeling, and
understanding the other's perspective. These two emotional phenomena can lead to
very different political outcomes. By definition, because empathy involves
putting oneself in another's place, it puts people on an equal plane--at least
mentally--and thereby increases awareness of existing inequalities and desires
to remedy them using political means. Empathy is a revolutionary emotion. In
contrast, in sympathy, no shift to the other's perspective or increased
awareness of inequality occurs. Instead, the observer's pre-existing worldview
remains, and while she may feel sorry for the other and want to help with the
other's plight, the type of help supported is often private in nature and does
not challenge the status quo or change systemic inequalities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arguably the greatest political achievement of the civil
rights movement, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, is just one historical example
of an important political outcome that may be attributable to public empathy.
The passage of this landmark legislation is often linked directly to events that
occurred earlier that year in Selma, Alabama on "Bloody Sunday," when images of
extreme police violence against peaceful African American protestors were
broadcast around the nation, producing public shock and outrage, which some
believe ultimately provided the political will and urgency to pass the Voting
Rights Act (Lee 2002). However, political scientists still do not have a
theoretical framework for understanding the mechanisms behind this massive
egalitarian shift in white Americans' opinions. In the subfield of political
psychology, there are numerous theories about why and under what conditions
groups conflict and harbor negative out-group attitudes--whether in-group
favoritism, stereotypes, prejudice, or intolerance--particularly with regard to
the attitudes of dominant group members toward lower status groups. But there is
comparatively little about what produces favorable or egalitarian attitudes
among dominant group members for lower status groups. Scholarship on the other-
regarding values of altruism, humanitarianism, and egalitarianism is somewhat of
an exception, but more work needs to be done in order to understand what
motivates people to consider and value the rights and well-being of others in
the first place, particularly when those others belong to an out-group. Drawing
from the rich literatures on empathy and perspective-taking in the fields of
psychology and philosophy, this dissertation suggests that empathy is a key
emotional mechanism that can explain egalitarian shifts in public opinion, like
that which occurred among whites during the 1960s. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project represents one of several tests in the dissertation of the
theory of empathy and equality. In the simplest terms, this theory is that
empathy can increase equality by increasing public preferences for equality,
which may manifest as increased support for egalitarian policies or increased
adherence to egalitarian values. To test this proposition, empathy will be
exogenously elevated in a large, population-based survey experiment of white
Americans (n=1400). Methodologically, this technique combines the best of both
the observational and the experimental worlds: the generalizability of
representative surveys and the causal inference of traditional experiments (Mutz
2011). The 2x2 study design builds upon treatments used in pilot testing, which
supported the main hypotheses. First, a pre-treatment survey containing
emotional trait measures will be administered a month prior to the experiment in
order to assess individual differences in sensitivity to empathy cues. In the
experiment, empathy will be manipulated for a single mother and Hurricane
Katrina survivor, whom is described in a fictional newspaper editorial and
pictured (randomly) as either African-American or white. Subjects will be
randomly assigned to either a treatment editorial that facilitates empathy or a
control editorial that contains the same information but lacks empathy appeals.
A post-treatment survey containing preference measures for policies affecting
Hurricane Katrina survivors, single mothers, women, and African-Americans (the
key dependent variables in the analysis) will immediately follow the experiment.
OLS regression models that include a treatment dummy variable, treatment-
partisanship interaction terms, and standard control variables will be used to
evaluate the overall causal effects of empathy, and, also, its possibly unique
effects on Democrats and Republicans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is of
broad social value because, in many societies including the United States, the
attitudes of dominant majorities toward minorities shape how societies
ultimately deal with their minorities, including the level of civil rights,
privileges, and protections they grant them. Variation in dominant group
members' egalitarianism toward minority groups has significant implications for
whether a society will engender conflict or peace, injustice or justice, and
inequality or equality. If the proposed research finds evidence to support the
theory of empathy and equality, real changes in U.S. society could result. With
this knowledge, political actors could strategically use empathic appeals to
erode discrimination against marginal groups and rally public support for
policies designed to address inequalities in citizens' life opportunities and
basic civil rights. In short, this research could spur reductions in inter-group
conflict and advances toward greater justice and equality in American society.