* 1226655
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patterns of variable grammatical marking in Palenquero creole
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Rena Torres Cacoullos, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 10,994.00

Creole studies have advanced competing hypotheses about the structure and
origins of creoles--languages based on two or more prior languages--most
prominently contact with a colonial language, substrate influence, and universal
linguistic processes. The Spanish-based creole Palenquero is spoken in the Afro-
Hispanic community of San Basilio de Palenque, Colombia. This project examines
variably occurring forms in Palenquero in order to test hypotheses about their
functions and provenance. In the domain of the noun phrase, the focus of study
is the demonstrative-article 'e' as the result of contact with Spanish, a reflex
from the substrate Kikongo, or the product of language-internal demonstrative-
to-article grammaticalization. In parallel, in the domain of verbal categories,
this research investigates whether tense-aspect expressions function as
grammatical markers and their possible sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
creole forms may share surface similarity to those of presumed donor languages,
adjudicating between hypotheses about their functions and origins requires
comparison of their distribution patterns. The Variationist Comparative Method
will be employed. The data will be naturalistic speech gathered in
sociolinguistic interviews with 50 Palenquero speakers, which will be recorded
and transcribed. 1,500 tokens for each functional domain will be extracted,
coded for factors operationalizing hypotheses, and submitted to multivariate
analysis. The constraints on variant forms will be compared with constraints on
apparently similar forms in Spanish and Kikongo and in light of predictions from
grammaticalization theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the level of the community,
this study will offer linguistic descriptions which can serve in the development
of educational materials for the local schools. Moreover, innovative in this
project is the training of community members to revise transcriptions, which
provides an opportunity for involving community members in the scientific study
of their language. More generally, this study contributes to the documentation
of Afro-Hispanic language varieties, which have been socially stigmatized, and
to demonstrating their systematicity in the structure of linguistic variation.