* 1226841
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Resident Perspectives on Cultural Tourism in Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Erve Chambers, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 13,341.00

University of Maryland doctoral candidate Melissa Stevens, supervised by Dr.
Erve Chambers, will conduct research on resident perspectives on cultural
tourism by looking at processes of identity formation and negotiated ethnicities
in resident-tourist interactions. Until recently, social science research on the
impacts of interactions between residents and tourists has assumed a
unidirectional power dynamic that resulted from the motivations of tourists and
the impacts on residents. But more recent research suggests that residents are
not passive in these interactions. This research will explore this possibility
through research at a cultural tourism enterprise in the village of Longido, a
primarily Maasai community in the heart of northern Tanzania's safari tourism
circuit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will employ a mix of social
science research methods, including observations of resident-tourist
interactions, surveys of tourists, and interviews with residents. The data will
be analyzed to determine the nature and direction of influence, with a
particular focus on Maasai representation of Maasai identity in a cultural
tourism setting, Maasai motivations, and its effects on the touristic
relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research will contribute
to theorizing ethnicity as a malleable rather than inherent human
characteristic. Tourism is of growing significance developing economies.
Understanding tourism processes and relationships is thus critically important.
Community-based cultural tourism initiatives, such as the Longido enterprise,
have the potential for reducing poverty and encouraging local-level conservation
activities but this potential depends on host community autonomy. By exploring
the bi-directional nature of the resident-tourist power dynamic, this research
seeks to contribute to a better understanding of how residents of tourist
destinations shape as well as are shaped by the global phenomenon of tourism.
Supporting this research also supports the education of a graduate student.