* 1226297
* Computational Infrastructure for the Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2019
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2019
* USD 5,690,110.00

The Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) supports a diverse
community of experts who model Earth surface processes. It does so by
developing, supporting, and disseminating integrated software modules that
predict the movement of fluids, and the flux (production, erosion, transport,
and deposition) of sediment and solutes in landscapes and their sedimentary
basins. CSDMS provides open-access to numerical models, maintains data for
modelers and educational resources on earth science modeling for teachers,
provides computing resources for members, offers help in advanced model
coupling, and is a platform of discussion for earth science research.

This project aims to enhance the CSDMS cyber-infrastructure. The current CSDMS
Modeling Framework will be extended for use within a web browser, on a wider
variety of computational platforms, and on other high performance computing
clusters to ensure robustness and sustainability of the framework. Community-
generated models will be converted into ?plug-and-play? components through the
development of automated wrapping tools. Methods for quantifying model
uncertainty will be adapted. Benchmarking data will be incorporated into the
CSDMS modeling framework to support model inter-comparison. Finally, a robust
mechanism for ingesting and utilizing semantic mediation databases will also be
developed within the Modeling Framework. In addition, six new community
initiatives will be pursued: 1) an Earth - ecosystem modeling initiative to
capture ecosystem dynamics and ensuing interactions with landscapes, 2) a
geodynamics initiative to investigate the interplay among climate,
geomorphology, and tectonic processes, 3) an Anthropocene modeling initiative,
to incorporate mechanistic models of human influences, 4) a coastal
vulnerability modeling initiative, with emphasis on deltas and their multiple
threats and stressors, 5) a continental margin modeling initiative, to capture
extreme oceanic and atmospheric events generating turbidity currents in the Gulf
of Mexico, and 6) a CZO Focus Research Group, to develop compatibility between
CSDMS architecture and protocols and Critical Zone Observatory-developed models
and data.

CSDMS streamlines the computer modeling of myriad societally relevant processes,
including melting glaciers, landslides, erosion, wetland evolution, water
cycling, flooding, and coastal change. Through its community support mechanisms,
CSDMS catalyzes the process of idea generation and hypothesis testing, enabling
the rapid creation and application of models tailored to specific settings,
scientific problems, and time scales. CSDMS? community approach allows the
efficient development of models that are more powerful than could be developed
by any single group ? redundancy is reduced, models are better vetted, the
capability for innovation is expanded, and energy can be focused towards earth-
surface domains that are poorly represented or controversial. CSDMS ensures that
models are accessible and transparent by soliciting and publishing model
documentation. Staff at the CSDMS Integration Facility convert models into
modules that can be easily coupled together; this modularity gives rise to new
applications for existing software. This new award will enable CSDMS to enhance
its cyber-infrastructure by developing: 1) software products and approaches
designed to be accessible, easy to use, and relevant, 2) new community
initiatives to advance earth-surface process modeling across many disciplines,
and 3) educational products and training workshops aimed at various entry
levels.