* 1226288
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The statistical mechanics of bed load sediment transport: Meshing theory, experiments and advanced computations of coupled fluid-particle behavior
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Mark Schmeeckle, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2017
* USD 249,835.00

Probabilistic descriptions of particle motions, borrowing key ideas from
statistical mechanics, offer a compelling strategy for connecting statistical
descriptions of particle motions with dynamical formulations of coupled fluid-
particle behavior. This research is aimed at incorporating this style of
analysis in studies of bed load sediment transport, growing the connection
between small-scale mechanistic descriptions of transport and larger-scale
problems of river morphodynamics and tracer motions. The work involves: (1)
formally defining an ensemble of particle configurations and velocities in a
manner similar to formulations from classic statistical mechanics, notably to
clarify effects of active particle patchiness in calculating transport rates;
(2) pursuing a theoretical formulation of the exponential-like distribution of
particle velocities from statistical-mechanics arguments; (3) pursuing a set of
physical and computational experiments designed to fully clarify the
relationship between the particle diffusivity and the ensemble-average particle
velocity; (4) using our numerical sediment transport modeling system, the first
discrete-particle transport model to have four-way coupling (mass and momentum
exchange between the solids and fluid), to explore detailed mutual interactions
between turbulence structures and sediment motions; and (5) pursuing
theoretical, experimental and computational work focused on the effects of
covariance in particle activities and velocities in computing sediment fluxes,
and the spatiotemporal organization of motions of mixed particle sizes in
response to turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The negative consequences of human
modifications to rivers, such as by dams, irrigation withdrawal, and mining
activities, remain difficult to forecast and mitigate. This is partly because
current understanding of sediment movement remains insufficient to predict many
of the river bed geometric changes, and the transport and fate of contaminated
river sediments that occur during varying river discharges. The work is aimed at
elaborating a theoretical framework, informed by experiments and advanced
computations, for describing the transport of bed load sediment, tracer
particles, and sediment-borne substances. The work will clarify how flow
turbulence and the associated patchiness in particle entrainment and deposition
contribute to variability in transport rates. The probabilistic basis of the
theory, together with the advanced computations of coupled fluid-particle
systems, represents an important melding of techniques for understanding the
physics of sediment transport. In addition, the work involves: (1) a
collaborative structure of student education that will greatly enrich the
intellectual experiences of students from two universities; (2) developing
compelling teaching tools deriving from visualizations of experiments and
numerical simulations; and (3) providing one-of-a-kind data sets to the science
community.