* 1226731
* Collaborative Research: Grounding the Behavioral Immune System in Mental and Physiological Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Joshua Ackerman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 129,227.00

Humans, like many other vertebrate species, developed a physiological immune
system designed to detect and destroy harmful organisms that have entered the
body. Recent research suggests that, in addition to this physiological immune
system, there evolved a behavioral immune system comprised of psychological and
behavioral mechanisms designed to detect and defend against pathogen threats
even before they enter the body. For example, people are quick to notice and
avoid others who display cues of infection (e.g., coughing, lesions). The
studies in this proposal will examine the behavioral immune system in depth, and
link its action to multiple aspects of physiological and psychological
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research has treated the physiological
and behavioral immune systems independently. Yet, an evolutionary perspective
suggests that there should be an adaptive relationship between physiological and
psychological functioning. Thus, the studies in this proposal test the
prediction that concerns about disease increase behaviors designed to prevent
initial contagion (e.g., avoiding others who appear sick), as well as increase
physiological processes designed to destroy pathogens that have entered the body
(e.g., secretion of cytokines). Activation of both behavioral and physiological
immune systems would provide the best possibility of overcoming a disease
threat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research also examines the specific processes
underlying behavioral immune system activation. To be effective, the behavioral
immune system must be sensitive to the possibility of contagion. Some physical
characteristics are more associated with disease than other physical
characteristics (e.g., the presence of a rash more than hair color). In
addition, sometimes people feel more susceptible to disease than at other times
(e.g., after touching a bloody cut versus after washing their hands). We propose
that both of these factors - implicit disease associations and perceptions of
disease susceptibility - influence the degree to which the behavioral immune
system is activated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Last, this research examines ways of
down-regulating behavioral immune system activation. Prior research suggests
that disease concerns can lead people to avoid and have negative attitudes
toward individuals who, although are not actually contagious, display physical
characteristics that are stereotypically associated with disease (e.g.,
obesity). Thus, understanding ways of down-regulating such disease-based anti-
social behavior is key for reducing prejudice and discrimination. Our studies
examine how minimizing disease-associations (e.g., decreasing the link between
disease and obesity) as well as reducing perceptions of disease susceptibility
(e.g., making people feel immunized against disease) can reduce behavioral
immune system activation and therefore decrease prejudice toward groups
stereotypically associated with disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In sum, the
studies in this proposal integrate research from social cognition, immunology,
and evolutionary psychology to test three broad hypotheses: (1) Behavioral
immune responses to disease threat are complemented by anticipatory
physiological immune responses (2) Behavioral immune system activation is
mediated by those physiological responses and by specific implicit cognitions,
and (3) The behavioral immune system can be down-regulated by manipulating those
implicit cognitions. The results of these studies will have an important impact
on theoretical and empirical work in social psychology, cognitive science, and
other related domains of study. The proposed research is therefore
interdisciplinary in nature, and will foster synergistic connections between
research in domains that historically have had relatively little contact but are
increasingly being integrated (e.g., psychophysiology and prejudice).
Additionally, the execution of the proposed research will involve training for
both graduate and undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;from groups underrepresented
in science careers.