* 1226469
* 2012 Industrial Ecology GRC/GRS, Les Diablerets, Switzerland, June 17-22, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2012
* Sangwon Suh, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 30,000.00

1226469 (Suh) The Gordon Research Conference on Industrial Ecology (GRC-IE) will
be held at the Les Diablerets Conference Center, in Les Diablerets, Switzerland,
June 17-22, 2012. A companion meeting for graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers, the Gordon Research Seminar on Industrial Ecology (GRS-IE) will be
held in conjunction with the GRC-IE on June 16-17, 2012. This award is in
partial support for U.S. participant costs. The scientific program provides the
opportunity to present and deliberate on research at the frontiers of this
highly interdisciplinary field. The format of the conference also allows
substantial unprogrammed time for informal exchanges among diverse individuals
at different stages of their careers. The 2012 GRC-IE focuses on the global
sustainability imperatives and the role of industrial ecology in addressing
them. Sessions are organized in the form of questions such as How do we green
rapidly industrializing nations and what's the role of IE in developing
countries? (Session 4) or What is the role for LCA in informing policy makers,
given the complexity of socio-economic and technological interactions? (Session
6). The final session is designed as a panel discussion for identifying cutting-
edge research agenda for IE to address global sustainability imperatives.
Industrial ecology makes important contributions to the development of
knowledge, technologies and policies that can reduce the environmental impacts
of industrial systems, both directly and as a basis for private strategy and
public policy - by situating technological analysis in a broader economic and
social context. By providing financial support to U.S-based graduate students
and post-docs, and to U.S.-based scholars who would not otherwise be able to
participate, this award will help promote the development of a robust and
diverse industrial ecology research community. GRC-IE and GRS-IE are designed to
offer stimulating and even provocative new research ideas. The GRC-IE Conference
will be attended by about 150 scientists, engineers and other researchers in the
field of industrial ecology from the United States, Europe, and Asia, as well as
Latin America and Africa. The GRS-IE seminar is held in conjunction with the
GRC-IE as a forum for graduate students and researchers in industrial ecology.
The program of GRC-IE and GRS-IE involves substantial portion of female
scientists as speakers, and we will draw participation by minorities and early
career researchers and students.