* 1226883
* NRI-Large: Collaborative Research: Soft Compliant Robotic Augmentation for Human-Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Daniela Rus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Miller
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,099,650.00

This proposal addresses the hardware, control and planning technologies required
to achieve soft robotic systems, in order to offer inherent safety and
adaptation to the human-machine systems of the future. The project is motivated
by a broad range of aspects of human-robot interaction, including soft
augmentation tools for safe compliant manipulation, soft exoskeletons for
rehabilitation of neuromuscular disorders, or active clamping systems that can
conform to arbitrary surfaces. The proposed research will address the
algorithmic and device-level challenges that arise in the design of soft
compliant robots capable of pose-invariant and shape-invariant grasping. A
combination of algorithmic solutions to modeling, control, planning, and
adaptation will lead to new soft compliant manipulators that do not need
accurate geometric models for grasping. By designing soft compliant fingers and
hands, new approaches to grasp planning and manipulation will be enabled. A
novel composable actuation system and supporting planning and control algorithms
with features inspired by natural muscle will be developed.

Broader Impacts: Soft robots are inherently low-cost. Affordable soft
manipulators will enable in-home assistants for the elderly or incapacitated,
but these robots must be able to manipulate the natural world as easily as
people do. The next generation robot manipulators will also support new levels
of factory automation, in which robots will work synergistically with humans
with the ultimate goal of reducing the cost of manufacturing in the USA. The
proposed soft devices will provide a new approach to assistive and
rehabilitative usage of compliant robotic platforms. Their functional compliant
properties will enable them to work side-by-side with human beings or as part of
their bodies, to augment and improve human productivity and performance. This
new wearable soft robotic technology will not only help workers perform tasks,
but also improve the quality of life for many people. In addition, the PIs have
a long tradition of integrating research and education by providing research
training at all levels, from high-school teachers and students to undergraduate
and graduate students, and postdocs. A range of activities to reach out to
undergraduate students, high-school communities, women and minorities is
planned.