* 1226064
* Investigating the long-term record of seismically induced erosion preserved in the stratigraphy of Lake Quinault, Washington
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Elana Leithold, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,945.00

In this project the long-term record of large Cascadia earthquakes contained in
the sedimentary fill of Lake Quinault, a deep, glacial moraine-dammed lake on
the Olympic Peninsula, Washington, will be investigated. Lake Quinault is
ideally situated to provide a long record of both seismicity in Cascadia and its
upland drainage-basin scale impacts. A high resolution seismic reflection survey
will be conducted to provide information about the thickness and overall
geometry of the lake's sedimentary infill and to identify lake-margin slump
deposits that may have been triggered during earthquake events over the past
several thousand years. Long (ca. 12 m) piston cores will be recovered from at
least five locations near the basin center, and event layers will be identified
and interpreted using core descriptions, geophysical measurements, and
x-radiography. The layers will be correlated to the lake-margin stratigraphy to
help establish their co-seismic origin, and radiocarbon analyses of macroscopic
plant debris will be used to evaluate their relationships to a well-established
regional paleo-seismological history. Geochemical analyses of the sediments will
be performed to test the hypothesis that following a great subduction zone
earthquake, the production of sediment by deep-seated bedrock landslides will
overwhelm erosion via nearer-surface mechanisms on a decadal time scale. Because
of their hypothesized greater depth of origin from beneath the surface, we
predict that compared to other strata, the organic matter and sediments
accumulating in Lake Quinault immediately after a large earthquake and
continuing for several years will be relatively depleted in isotopes including
14C, 10Be, and 26Al and will have relatively higher 26Al/10Be ratios.

The goal of this project is to improve understanding of the terrestrial upland
response to great subduction or other large earthquakes on the Cascadia margin
of North America. Previous studies of subsided coastal lowland soils, low-lying
coastal lakes and lagoons, fjords, and deep sea turbidites have established that
these events have occurred in this region at 300-500 year frequencies. Based on
research in other areas of the world with large topographic relief, earthquake-
triggered landslides are likely to be one of the most significant hazards to
life and infrastructure faced during and in the immediate aftermath of future
events. By documenting the sedimentary and geochemical record of landslides
triggered by repeated earthquakes spaced over the past thousands of years, this
study will offer insight into potential decadal-scale impacts of future events
on sediment supply to riverine and coastal environments, with implications for
both fresh and salt water ecosystems. Our results will provide important
information for stakeholders in the Pacific Northwest, including the Quinault
Indian Nation (QIN), who have jurisdiction over the lake, and will develop tools
for assessing earthquake hazards in other regions. Our study, moreover, will
help to elucidate the role that landslides and other mass wasting processes
associated with large earthquakes have played in the evolution of topography
above Cascadia and other subduction margins over millennial time scales.