* 1226406
* OCE-PRF: Interannual variability in estuarine exchange due to oceanic forcing conditions and offshore river plumes
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Sarah Giddings, Giddings                Sarah          N
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 12/31/2016
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, the investigator will build upon current modeling efforts to
explore the influence of river plumes at the estuary mouth and implications for
ocean/estuary connectivity in the Pacific
Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuarine systems and their connectivity to the
ocean influence important biological and biogeochemical processes such as
nutrient exchange, productivity, larval recruitment, and acidification. Residual
circulation governs the exchange between the ocean and the estuary and thus
plays a large role in influencing these important processes within estuaries and
along the coast. Many remote forcing mechanisms alter conditions at the estuary
mouth and thus alter estuarine exchange. The purpose of this study is to
investigate a less studied remote forcing mechanism: the influence of a plume at
the estuary mouth and the implications for ocean/estuary connectivity. The
investigator will test the following hypotheses: &lt;br/&gt;1. The presence of a
river plume at the estuary mouth during wind-driven downwelling and relaxation
events strengthens the decrease and/or reversal of exchange flow due to
downwelling alone &lt;br/&gt;2. Interannual variability in estuarine exchange
flow in the Pacific Northwest (PNW) are governed by variations in river plume
location and volume &lt;br/&gt;3. Plume presence decreases ocean/estuarine
connectivity while enhancing along-coast connectivity &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address these hypotheses, the investigator will build upon current modeling
efforts to understand ocean-estuary interactions in the PNW estuaries of the
Salish Sea (the inland Washington and Canadian waters including Puget Sound and
the Strait of Georgia), Grays Harbor, Willapa Bay, Tillamook Bay and Coos Bay.
The research will take advantage of an already developed regional modeling
system and extensive observational datasets. Further model development will
incorporate additional runoff sources from a hydrologic model and nested sub-
grids to resolve smaller estuaries. Model runs over a decade both with and
without the Columbia River inflow will be used to address the above hypotheses.
Although there is a particular interest in understanding PNW estuaries, this
work relates more broadly to better understanding of estuaries along upwelling
coasts as well as estuaries influenced by offshore river plumes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include educational opportunities for
the public and students through established outreach mechanisms. The
investigator will build upon existing visualization tools to develop an
interactive museum exhibit and classroom tool that uses the model output to
visualize circulation and water properties within the Salish Sea emphasizing the
connectivity with the ocean. The exhibit will use a touchscreen interface to run
an interactive program with directed learning objectives and contain an
exploratory mode. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Centers for Ocean Sciences Education
Excellence (COSEE) and Ocean Inquiry Project (OIP) have offered to act as host
organizations. COSEE will help establish connections with other outreach
programs and informal science learning centers to determine the best location
for testing initial exhibits and visualization tools as well as provide guidance
on setting learning objectives appropriate for the broad audience expected to
interact with the exhibit. OIP will also provide guidance on learning objectives
and help evaluate the tools by providing access to their boat-based outreach
program and in teacher training activities as test venues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to support novel
research by early career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean
sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support, this project
will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an
independent research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation
of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.