* 1226998
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Poverty Alleviation in Developing Nations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Robert Shapiro, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 08/31/2013
* USD 18,118.00

Poverty reduction is one of the central challenges for development in new
democracies. Many of these democracies operate in a context of weak
institutions, where policy implementation is subject to the discretion of
politicians, This proposal investigates the strategies used to target private
benefits and how voters' access to benefits affects their behavior. This project
studies the conditions under which local politicians pursue partisan targeting
strategies and when voters can circumvent these strategies.

This project consists of three components that combine quantitative and
qualitative methods, including a dataset that compiles information on the number
of families identified as poor by the government, the number of families issued
benefits, the partisan composition of local governments and the state assembly
units. These data are used to assess whether the number of households given
access to anti-poverty programs across local government units is determined by
political characteristics. The second component is a survey of voters and local
politicians. These data are used to test individual-level hypotheses on partisan
targeting bias, voter-intermediary strategies used to access benefits, and the
ability of politicians to monitor votes across partisan contexts. Finally, focus
group will be conducted to illuminate mechanisms found in the quantitative
results. This research aims to provide a micro-level understanding of party-
voter linkages and partisan strategies of clientelistic distribution that is
applicable to a diverse range of democratic settings in the developing world.

The goal of this project is to identify the causes and consequences of party
capture of anti-poverty programs, a problem that threatens efforts to alleviate
poverty in many developing democracies. In addition to improving scholarly
understanding of clientelistic strategies in a democratic context, the results
will also be useful to the development and policy communities who are focused on
improving the efficiency of these programs. Ultimately, the core ambition of
this research is to provide analyses that can contribute to the fight against
local corruption: a problem that has devastating effects on the lives of the
poor.