* 1226581
* Collaborative Research: The role of layered Fe(II)-Al(III)-hydroxides in the biogeochemical cycling of iron and trace metals in riparian environments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Evert Elzinga, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 261,041.00

Technical description.

The biogeochemical cycling of iron in aqueous geochemical environments is
intimately linked to the cycling of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur, and
strongly impacts the solubility and speciation of trace metals and metalloids in
these systems. The research proposed here focuses on coupled Fe and trace metal
cycling in riparian soils, which are located at the interface between dryland
habitats and aquatic environments and play a key role in the transfer of
nutrients and contaminants between upland and aquatic ecosystems. We observe the
formation of layered Fe(II)-Al(III)-hydroxide minerals during reaction of
aqueous Fe(II) with Al-oxide and clay mineral substrates under geochemical
conditions common to submerged soils. We hypothesize that these previously
unrecognized Fe(II) phases play a critical role in the biogeochemical cycling of
Fe and trace metals in riparian environments. These secondary minerals form fast
(on a time scale of hours in model systems, and within several days in
experiments performed with wetland soil) and are therefore expected to be a
major sink for Fe(II) released during reductive dissolution of Fe(III)-oxides.
In addition, owing to small particle size, layered structure, and high Fe(II)
content, these Fe(II) minerals are likely to be highly reactive towards redox-
active contaminants such as Cr(VI) and may control retention of divalent metals
such as Ni(II) and Zn(II) through adsorption and coprecipitation reactions. We
hypothesize that the Fe(II)-Al(III)-hydroxide phases formed during initial
reaction of Fe(II) with Al-bearing substrates are metastable transitional phases
which over time will age into more crystalline Fe sorption products with reduced
reactivity towards trace metal(loid)s. We will study the thermodynamic, kinetic
and mechanistic aspects involved in the formation of these novel Fe(II) phases,
and to characterize their structure and reactivity over a time span ranging from
seconds to years. A suite of state-of-the-art spectroscopic techniques,
including Q-XAS, bulk XAS, and Mossbauer analyses, will be used to address these
issues. This project will fill a major gap in our knowledge of Fe cycling in
reducing and riparian environments, and will improve our understanding of
contaminant fate and transport in these dynamic systems.

Broader significance and importance.

About 4-6% of the Earth's land surface is intermittently or permanently
submerged. Soil flooding causes drastic changes in the chemistry of soil pore
waters, driven mostly by microbial activity as soil microbes are forced to
switch from using oxygen to alternative electron acceptors for respiration of
organic carbon. Use of Fe(III)-oxide minerals in microbial respiration causes
reductive dissolution of these minerals, which leads to the build-up of high
aqueous concentrations of dissolved Fe(II) and release of toxic metal(loid)
impurities associated with the Fe(III)-oxide minerals. The research addresses
the fate of Fe(II) and metalloid pollutants released to solution during
flooding. We have identified a previously unknown precipitation mechanism which
may repartition released Fe(II) and trace metals back to the solid phase. The
precipitation process is activated by reaction of dissolved Fe(II) with Al-
bearing soil minerals causing precipitation of secondary
Fe(II)-Al(III)-hydroxide minerals. Precipitation of these new Fe(II) phases
occurs rapidly and extensively under conditions typical of flooded soils, and is
therefore likely to be an important process governing the fate of released
Fe(II) in these systems. Formation of the Fe(II) minerals removes toxic metals
from solution as well as metals are incorporated into the structure or adsorb
onto the surface of the new phases. The research proposed here will characterize
the main geochemical parameters controlling the formation and reactivity of
these Fe(II) phases in flooded soils, and provide quantitative thermodynamic
data allowing for prediction of their occurrence in natural systems. The results
of this project will fill a major gap in our understanding of the geochemical
processes controlling soil and water quality in riparian systems, which includes
environments as diverse as polar bogs and fens, tropical swamps, coastal and
freshwater wetlands, paddy rice fields, and floodplain soils. The work is of
importance in assessing the restoration of former wetlands (through re-
establishment of riparian conditions) as a management option for floodwater
control and restoration of biodiversity at sites where (re)mobilization of
previously accumulated pollutants is a concern. Our work is also expected to be
of major significance to remediation strategies involving biostimulation of
metal-reducing microbial populations to immobilize subsurface contaminants.