* 1226421
* Proposed Renovation of Mata de Platano Field Station in the Karst Region of Puerto Rico, West Indies
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Armando Rodriguez-Duran, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2013
* USD 48,803.00

The Bayamón Campus of the Inter American University of Puerto Rico (IAUPR), a
university that mainly serves a Hispanic community, is awarded a grant for the
construction of three additional bedrooms and one bathroom at Mata de Plátano
Field Station (MPFS) and Reserve in the Karst Region of Puerto Rico, West
Indies. The Field Station and Reserve are located in the municipality of
Arecibo, within the northern karst region of the island of Puerto Rico, and is
considered one of the most biologically diverse regions on the island. MPFS
serves all three programmatic components available to field stations, namely:
research, education, and outreach. The new structure will allow continuing to
increase the pool of scientists working in this region, the collaboration with
other universities in Puerto Rico and abroad, and offer an improved educational
platform from which we can provide outreach activities for K-16 students and the
public in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MPFS provides facilities that permit
fundamental discoveries about environmental processes in the karst region; and
promotes participation by local and visiting researchers and students. The last
three years MPFS has seen more activity than the previous seven combined, making
increasingly significant contributions to the knowledge of karst ecosystems.
Some areas of research include animal ecology, plant biology, conservation,
paleontology, parasitology, invasive species, and geology. The station also
contributes to the education of diverse groups of people. At MPFS, field trips
and workshops are offered on a regular basis to schools, universities, teachers,
and community groups from the island and the United States. Workshops are
offered on topics such as island ecology, bat and boa interactions, karts
ecology, and plant reproductive biology, often in collaboration with other
programs designed to improve the education of science and math teachers.
Undergraduate courses in Ecology, World Vision and Literature, Essay and
Narrative, and a graduate course on Population Ecology use the station
regularly. Two children's books written around the "MPFS experience" are
commonly used in schools where both the author of the books, as well as the
scientist from MPFS, are often invited to offer talks. Numerous newspaper, TV
and radio programs also help the outreach efforts.