* 1226361
* Collaborative Proposal: Expanding CCB FEST - Community College Biology Faculty Enhancement through Scientific Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Kimberly Tanner, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 10/31/2017
* USD 563,806.00

In a collaborative project involving San Francisco State University and the
Foothill-DeAnza Community College District, Summer Teaching Institutes continue
to be offered to community-college faculty of the San Francisco Bay area. These
institutes introduce faculty to the concepts and attitudes of scientific
teaching and provide professional development for faculty to change their
practices to include goal setting and assessment to determine whether the goals
have been met. In this expanded second stage of the project, a second Advanced
Summer Institute is available to graduates of the first who are interested in
collaborating to develop a common assessment tool. This tool applied to the
population of San Francisco area community college students generates powerful
data measuring the effectiveness of scientific teaching on student learning.
Additional activities of the emerging learning community include Teaching
Squares, groups of four faculty at one or several institutions who meet together
regularly to share teaching strategies and observe each others' classes; and
Classroom Partnerships between a mentor community college faculty member and a
SFSU graduate student interested in pursuing college-level teaching as a career.
The enthusiastic response to the first phase of this project demanded that it be
extended and amplified. To do so in the direction of establishing data on
effectiveness makes the experience all the richer. This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts toward Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.