* 1226627
* Facilities Improvements for Ecological Research at Michigan Tech's Ford Center and Research Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Andrew Burton, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2015
* USD 343,639.00

Michigan Technological University has been awarded a grant to create a wet
laboratory facility, establish short and long range Wi-Fi capability, and
improve lodging facilities for cold-season use at the Ford Center and Research
Forest (FCRF), located 42 miles south of the main campus. The entire range of
forest community-soil associations common in the upper Great Lakes is available
for research and instruction on the FCRF property. The wide-ranging research at
the FCRF currently includes studies of climatic manipulations on forest
ecosystem processes, genetic adaptation of oak and aspen to a changing
environment, and the effects of wildlife and management on forest community
composition and ecological function. These and other projects will benefit from
the FCRF improvements, which will enable on-site processing and analysis of
samples collected from ongoing and future ecological research conducted at the
FCRF; real time remote access, via the internet, to field sensors located
throughout the property; and on-site residency for winter research and outreach
efforts. The wet lab facilities will improve the quality of research that can be
performed at the FCRF by allowing rapid, efficient sample processing and will
greatly expand the types of research those housed on site can perform. They also
will allow analytical procedures to be integrated into lab activities conducted
during courses offered at the FCRF by Michigan Tech and other universities. The
FCRF hosts many K-12 field trip groups and day- to week-long outreach groups for
topics related to ecology and environmental science. Wet lab facilities will
enable these groups to incorporate hands-on analytical activities using samples
collected in the field, which cannot be accomplished with current facilities. In
addition the new Wi-Fi capability for accessing field research sites will allow
teachers to incorporate real-time data and webcam images from FCRF research into
teaching units they develop as part of teacher institutes hosted by Michigan
Tech. More information on the Ford Center and Research Forest can be found at
http://www.mtu.edu/forest/fordcenter/.