* 1226404
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Hydrodynamic and Granular Controls on Bed Load Flux Intermittency: Application to Steep Mountain Streams
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Thanos Papanicolaou, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/28/2014
* USD 149,902.00

Understanding how fluid flow drives sediment transport in a river is fundamental
for predicting erosion and landscape evolution, managing river infrastructure,
and protecting and promoting fish habitat. Bed load transport - the movement of
sediment in frequent contact with the river bottom - remains notoriously
unpredictable, despite almost a century of quantitative research. The problem is
particularly acute in steep mountain streams where transport occurs close to the
threshold of motion, and the resulting large-magnitude bed load pulses cannot be
predicted using existing mathematical models. There are two unique aspects of
mountain streams that we will examine here: (1) the presence of large, rarely-
mobile boulders that generate large-scale fluid turbulence structures; and (2)
highly energetic grain-grain collisions that cause coordinated motion of many
particles. We will perform two parallel sets of laboratory experiments to
examine the influence of these two factors on the formation and breakup of
granular bed structures. Flow will be mapped using particle image velocimetry,
while acoustic sensors will quantify bed load transport, pressure sensors will
measure fluid stresses, and laser-induced fluorescence will be used to image the
granular bed. These measurements will allow us to determine the relative
contributions of fluid and granular stresses to bed load transport, and to
develop a refined bed load transport equation that is better suited for
prediction in mountain streams. We will test whether a recent framework
developed in soft-matter physics, which unites the description of transport in a
wide class of disordered systems, can be useful for understanding the
statistical mechanics of sediment transport in
rivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floods erode streambanks, take out bridges and fill
reservoirs with sediment. In steep mountain streams, large boulders form natural
dams that can suddenly give way during a rain storm, sending catastrophic pulses
of sediment downstream that endanger property and lives. These events occur
infrequently, making it difficult to obtain the measurements required to
understand the physical processes and to build predictive models. In this study
we will use a set of scaled laboratory experiments, which allow us to
effectively speed up time by scaling down size, to understand the physical
processes driving the movement of boulders in mountain streams. We will measure
the forces exerted on boulders by the moving water, and among boulders as they
collide with each other, under carefully controlled conditions. We will then
build a mathematical model that uses this physical understanding to predict
when, and how much, boulders will move in floods of different magnitudes. This
model will help Earth scientists studying the long-timescale evolution of
eroding landscapes. Results will also be useful for engineers and managers
charged with protecting and maintaining infrastructure, and restoring natural
river function, in mountain settings. In addition, this grant will provide
important training for future scientists, as the experiments will be led by a
doctoral student and post-doctoral researcher, and also involve several
undergraduate students.