* 1226439
* Heterogeneity and Complexity in Bronze Age Europe: Divergence of Social Trajectories on the Great Hungarian Plain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Paul Duffy, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 91,614.00

Under the direction of Dr. Paul Duffy and Dr. William Parkinson, funding from
the National Science Foundation will support the excavation and analysis of an
unusual cemetery population in Eastern Hungary dating to the Middle Bronze Age
(2100 - 1400 BC). During the Bronze Age, Europe comprised a plethora of
societies connected through trade, travel, and migration. In most parts of the
continent, scholars believe that economic inequalities and hereditary offices
emerged for the first time and regional political hierarchy flourished. In
contrast, the Bronze Age cultures of Eastern Hungary are known to have undergone
significant transformations in social complexity without corresponding increases
in social inequality. Although studies of Bronze Age Europe have focused on the
way in which hierarchy emerged and operated in complex societies, little is
known of areas where agricultural and metallurgical production intensified but
social inequality did not. This project offers an opportunity to study how
population density, metallurgical production, and trade can substantially
increase without power and control falling into the hands of a minority.

The cemetery in question belongs to the Otomani culture of the Great Hungarian
Plain, and the results of the analysis will be compared to cemeteries in
neighboring areas. An international, multi-disciplinary team will conduct
systematic investigations at the Bronze Age cemetery, examining the funerary
customs, distribution of wealth, patterns of migration, and participation in
macro-regional trade of its members. Thirty to forty human burials - likely
inhumation, urn cremation, and scattered ash burials - will be excavated. The
treatment of the body in this cemetery and the health, diet, and regional origin
of individuals within it will be described based on osteological and isotopic
analyses. The form, style, and origin of fine ceramics will be recorded, and the
distribution of foreign trade items such as bronze and gold will be studied. The
intellectual merit of this research will be to test the idea that long-distance
trade and foreign ideologies were pivotal to the emergence of regional political
hierarchies.

The proposed research broadly impacts long-standing anthropological debates over
social variability in non-state societies and brings together specialists from
Canada, the United States, Hungary, and Greece to provide major training
benefits for American and Hungarian students. In addition to addressing
important theoretical concerns, a number of remote sensing and geoarchaeological
techniques will be employed to enhance excavation planning, generate a broader
picture of cemetery use, and advance the use of non-intrusive technologies for
the detection of graves and other mortuary features. This combination of several
independent lines of evidence to describe the mobility of people and objects in
mortuary contexts will provide critical information about the trade and
population shifts underlying social transformations in Bronze Age Europe, and
offer insights into the range of social complexity observed worldwide.