* 1226781
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Accountability, Presidential Power, and the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Sean Gailmard, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 21,490.00

This project aims to analyze the implementation of legislation. To implement a
law, administrative agencies pass their own policies in order to fill in details
not specified by the law. A major question in the study of democratic
accountability is how agencies are held accountable and whose interests are
reflected in the ways laws are implemented. The Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) is responsible for carrying out this review process.

The intellectual merit of this project is associated with its study of an agency
whose processes have not yet been subjected to systematic analysis. The purpose
of this project is to analyze when, why, and how the review process is used. The
primary research task is to compile a new dataset of all policymaking by
agencies, indicating which policies were chosen for review and the outcome of
review. To compile this dataset, OIRA's yearly summary documents and requests
will be coded alongside more detailed information regarding exchanges between
OIRA and agencies. The new data on instances of OIRA review will be combined
with existing data on all agency policymaking from 1983-2010. When complete, the
dataset of all policymaking, which includes both policies reviewed and not
reviewed by OIRA, will permit an analysis of when, why, and how the review
process is used.

The broader impacts of the project are associated with its research output and
training components. The project will advance our understanding of the
implementation of laws which, in turn, influences the opportunities of
underrepresented groups. Further, the project will involve the training of
undergraduate students in the research process.