* 1226891
* FSML:   Power, Equipment and Connectivity for the University of Cincinnati Center for Field Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Hinkel, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 167,076.00

The University of Cincinnati Center for Field Studies (UCCFS) has been awarded a
grant to support vital infrastructural and research needs. The major
improvements include: internet connectivity with appreciable bandwidth, two
weather stations, power and water service for the east side of the campus, solar
panels and two essential research instruments that will be housed in a recently
constructed laboratory facility. UCCFS was established in 2008 through an
agreement with the Hamilton County Park District (HCPD). This 17-acre tract,
formerly a Shaker farm, is in the middle of Miami Whitewater Forest (MWF), a
4,000-acre preserve located 12 miles to the west of the university. This
property, which lies between the Great Miami and Whitewater Rivers, includes
wetland habitats, restored prairie and mixed mesophytic eastern deciduous forest
with a mosaic of climax beech-maple and oak-hickory forests. The setting of
UCCFS is unique because it is one of the relatively few field stations located
near a major urban center. The station has a considerable history of
environmental data recorded for this area including intensive studies of the
parks in the Cincinnati area by UC botanist E. Lucy Braun in the 1920s. Many
others have followed in her footsteps, so there is a long record of ecological
observations and species inventories from these sites that can be paired with
more modern data collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the principal
objectives of the UC Center for Field Studies is to promote rigorous and
sophisticated research programs designed to meet six of the major challenges of
our national research agenda. Accordingly, investigations focus on: 1)
biological diversity, species composition and ecosystem function; 2) ecological
aspects of biogeochemical cycles; 3) ecological implications of climate change;
4) land use dynamics and habitat alteration; 5) the impact and control of
invasive species; and 6) hydrologic forecasting. Research activities are
integrated with educational programs to achieve multiple goals: 1) advance
discovery in the environmental sciences while promoting hands-on training,
teaching and learning; 2) broaden participation from underrepresented groups in
science by offering opportunities for field research to urban scholars; 3)
accrue benefits to society through the generation of advanced understanding of
environmental issues through the training of a diverse cadre of new scientists
who will become the leaders and teachers of tomorrow; and 4) engage the public
in discussions and hands-on scientific study through involvement in research
projects and the participation of research scientists in community activities.
For more information about the UC Center for Field Studies, visit the web site
at http://www.artsci.uc.edu/biology/cfs/.