* 1226944
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Motivated Information Processing: A Policy Case
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* John Jost, New York University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 07/31/2013
* USD 21,560.00

Why do people so often hold tight to their political attitudes, even in the face
of contradictory evidence? This project focuses on the ways in which our goals
and desires can shape how we evaluate, remember, and experience politically
relevant information. Several policy issues in the United States today are
highly contentious. Disagreement at times centers not on how best to tackle the
problem, but on whether the problem exists. This project draws from several
literatures to hypothesize that the motivation to protect the economic system in
the United States may impact the way that individuals process information about
policy issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;System Justification Theory posits that
individuals are motivated to defend, bolster, and justify the socioeconomic and
political arrangements in which they live. This motivation is stronger in some
people than others and can also be affected by situational factors. System
justification is often beneficial in the short term, in that it alleviates the
anxiety, uncertainty, and fear elicited by threats to the status quo. However,
in the long term system justification can interfere with intentions or active
attempts to correct system-level problems. Recent empirical evidence indicates
that, to the extent that policy initiatives are seen as threatening to our
economic competitiveness, individuals may be motivated to deny problems in order
to maintain the societal status quo. This research has also demonstrated that
ideological differences in policy attitudes between those who identify as
partisans are at least partially due to individual differences in system
justification motivation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But how are policy beliefs
maintained in the face of contrary evidence? Recently, political scientists have
begun to explore the possibility that the way we interpret political information
is driven largely by motivational forces. In this dissertation, I explore the
hypothesis that system justification motivation biases processing of policy
evidence. Using surveys, qualitative data, and experimental methods collected
from diverse samples across the United States, I examine the perceptual and
cognitive mechanisms by which system justification motivation operates.
Specifically, I explore how the public processes information, both in their day-
to-day lives and when exposed directly to new information. Using knowledge
gleaned from these studies, I will then explore potential interventions to help
individuals overcome the effects of system justification motivation and redirect
them toward more accurate processing of policy information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates theory and methods from political
science and social psychology. In doing so, it aims to make basic and applied
contributions to the political information processing, motivated cognition,
system justification, and policy attitudes literatures. First, it aspires to
offer a more nuanced consideration of the psychological underpinnings of
political identification in order to better understand ideological and partisan
variability in resistance to change. Second, this research hopes to demonstrate
that cognition may be affected by situational, system-serving needs rather than
merely the desire to maintain one?s own prior beliefs or the beliefs of one?s
social groups. Third, it offers a political psychological account for the
ineffectiveness of policy education and programs to address disagreement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research also aims to suggest interventions that may
inspire public policy directed at minimizing biased information processing. It
aims not to persuade individuals that various policies are an urgent concern,
but rather to provide them the tools to reach objective conclusions about policy
information themselves. It also has important implications for education.
Findings in support of the research hypotheses would encourage an increased
focus on critical thinking and logic, and increased exposure to and skills in
interpreting policy information. By disseminating findings from this project
both in peer-reviewed journals and to educators, interdisciplinary solutions to
complex political problems might be found.