* 1226180
* Closed-loop Deep Brain Stimulation, Synchrony breaking and Chimera State
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Yixin Guo, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 164,996.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop both computational and
mathematical methods to break pathological synchrony and reduce bursting firing
patterns presented in the basal ganglia of Parkinson' patients. A large-scale
biologically faithful computational network is built to describe the
parkinsonian state of the basal ganglia and thalamocortical circuit. In the
computational method, the investigators conduct multi-site delayed feedback
stimulation (MDFS) on the computational network. Various algorithms are
developed to optimize the administration of MDFS. Based on the hypothesis that
pathological outputs from the internal segment of the golobus pallidus (GPi) may
induce parkinsonian signs by compromising thalamocortical (TC) relay, the
objective function in the optimization is to diminish TC relay error in the
parkinsonian state. In the mathematical method of synchrony breaking and burst
reduction, a five dimensional system of nonlinear differential equations of GPi
neuron is considered. A map reduction approach is applied to the GPi model
neuron to obtain more tractable representation of the Poincare map that can
capture the fundamental behavior of the GPi neuron. The reduced map is used to
derive conditions that will settle a subgroup of uncoupled and fully
synchronized GPi ensemble into different stable states of subthreshold
oscillation, tonic fire and bursts with various spike numbers. The investigators
expect to find the existence conditions of chimera states-the coexistence of
synchrony and asynchrony-in this ensemble of GPi neurons that may lead to
methods of mild stimulation of pathological synchrony breaking.

The conventional deep brain stimulation delivers an ongoing stream of high
frequency electrical pulses to a stimulation target in the brain. Even though
the conventional deep brain stimulation has achieved remarkable successes in
alleviating symptoms of Parkinson's patients, it has several significant
drawbacks, such as high energy cost and laborious tuning in stimulation
parameters. More importantly, such form of stimulation is considered "dumb"
because the external stimulation force is not guided by the changes in the
brain's electrical activity relevant to the disorder being treated. The
computational frame work in this project will address the important challenges
in advancing deep brain stimulation via less invasive and "smarter" closed loop
protocols, multi-site delayed feedback stimulation, guided by the changes in the
brain. The investigation of chimera states will link the phenomena of chimera
states observed in dynamical systems to biophysically faithful models of
neurological movement disorders. The successful finding of chimera states will
assist in finding methods to break the synchrony of parkinsonian states with
minimal amount of stimulation intervention.