* 1226942
* The Development of Social Essentialism
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Marjorie Rhodes, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,976.00

As early as four years of age, children begin to believe that people who share
membership in an ethnic or gender group are similar to each other, and different
from members of other groups, in many non-obvious and fundamental ways. For
instance, children think that if one girl dislikes math, other girls (but not
boys) will dislike it too, or that if one member of an ethic group commits a
crime, other members of the group may do so as well. This type of thinking is
known as essentialism. Essentialist beliefs about social groups represent the
core of stereotyping and prejudice.

The objective of this research project is to examine how essentialist beliefs
develop in young children and how we might be able to prevent their formation.
In particular, these studies examine the role of language that describes
abstract categories (e.g., girls play with dolls)in the cultural transmission of
essentialist beliefs. These studies test the hypotheses that parents produce
this type of language when talking about groups for which they hold essentialist
beliefs, and that hearing this type of language leads children to develop
essentialist beliefs about those groups as well. In this way, parents may
unknowingly transmit essentialist beliefs to their children.

If these hypotheses are supported, this research will yield concrete
implications for how to reduce prejudice by reducing children's exposure to
certain forms of language. For example, educating parents on the consequences of
using language that describes abstract categories, and encouraging them to
reduce the use of such sentences, could lead to a reduction in the next
generation's tendencies towards prejudice. Grounding these changes in mechanisms
that have been empirically shown to influence the formation of essentialist
beliefs could lead to more effective efforts to reduce societal prejudice.