* 1226681
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Welfare Provision under Authoritarianism - Explaining Variation in Welfare Provision among Chinese Localities
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Elizabeth Perry, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 08/31/2013
* USD 17,639.00

Over the past twelve years, the central Chinese government has pushed to expand
social policies in areas ranging from minimum income guarantees to health care
insurance, but city and county governments, which have substantial authority in
allocating expenditures to these programs, have conferred very different levels
of benefits to their localities. The proposed project seeks to examine the
sources of this variation in social policy provision, and in doing so, advance
knowledge of social policy development and political decision-making in
authoritarian regimes. The main explanation to be explored is whether the
actions of citizens influence the provision of welfare and lead to the observed
variation in a context without electoral competition. And if so, how or through
what channels do citizens influence these policy decisions and who are the
citizens that governments are responsive to? Do citizens exert influence through
official channels such as public hearings or People's Congresses, or do they
exert influence through protest or other activities that take place outside of
formal institutions? Is it the wealthy that exert influence or it is the middle
class or under class? These questions will be addressed by using multiple
sources of data and a combination of qualitative and quantitative methodology.
Case studies of localities with different levels of social welfare provision
will be constructed using interviews and archival records. Quantitative analysis
of counties and cities across China will also be used to address the research
question.

The intellectual merit of this project is in its theoretical and empirical
contributions to the study of authoritarian distributive politics. Although many
social welfare policies were first adopted under authoritarian regimes, there is
a lack of theoretical and empirical understanding of the motivations for these
actions. Studying social policy development is important to advance
understandings of where social politics come from. As well, because of the
highly visible and influential programs associated with social policies,
research in this area helps shed light on how political choices are made in
authoritarian regimes. This project focusing on China is part of the
investigator's longer-term research goals to examine the theoretical foundations
of the origins of welfare regimes and expand empirical knowledge of political
decision-making in authoritarian regimes.

The broader impacts of the proposed project include promoting training,
enhancing infrastructure for research, and broadening dissemination to enhance
future research. This project promotes training by involving undergraduates in
the research experience and exposing them to content knowledge, statistical
tools, and new methods of text analysis. Through partnerships with Chinese
universities and research centers, this project also enhances the infrastructure
for research. Key results of the project will also be shared online, as well as
through workshops and conferences.

Finally, this project provides social value by improving our general
understanding of how essential social goods such as health care can be provided
to the poor and disenfranchised. As well, by identifying the forces that shape
crucial political choices in the Chinese state, this research seeks to provide
more precise characterizations of who influences politics and how they influence
politics in a context without elections.