* 1226738
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Care, Body and Rights: Maternal Health and the Production of Emergency in the Contemporary U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Frances Barg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 8,237.00

University of Pennsylvania doctoral student Elizabeth Hallowell, under the
supervision of Dr. Fran Barg, will undertake an ethnographic study of
reproductive medicine and law in the United States. Specifically, this study
will trace recent shifts in healthcare practices and policies that point to a
reconfiguration of pregnancy and childbirth as medical emergencies. This project
will combine fieldwork at two sites in southeastern Pennsylvania -- a region
where the availability of maternal healthcare is increasingly limited -- with
textual analysis of scientific, legislative, and historical documents pertaining
to reproductive medicine and federal health law. It will track this
reconfiguration at three levels: 1) individual experiences of expectant and new
mothers and their reproductive healthcare providers; 2) the institutional
reorganization of reproductive healthcare and scientific knowledge production
about maternal health; and 3) changes in U.S. health policy from the 1980s to
the present. In so doing, this research will contribute to a deeper
understanding of how pregnancy and birth are shaped by, and linked to, the
organization of institutionalized reproductive medicine and law. Typically
within the study of gender, health, and policy in the U.S., what constitutes a
body, 'good' healthcare, and 'full' political belonging are taken for granted.
This research will probe these categories as it analyzes what kinds of bodies
and forms of belonging are imagined by reproductive medicine and lawmakers in
the U.S. today. This analysis will therefore be useful to other researchers
investigating how pregnancy and childbirth are shaped, experienced, and
understood throughout the U.S. and in other countries.

The findings from this study will also be of interest to policymakers and
healthcare providers, as well as to members of the public who are engaged in
debates about healthcare. The project will consider how medical and legal
attention to certain kinds of bodily vulnerability (such as pregnancy-related
emergencies) can obscure other forms of collective vulnerability (such as the
decreasing availability of prenatal care in southeastern Pennsylvania and
throughout many parts of the U.S.). The researchers will disseminate their
findings widely to many different types of audiences, and the project will
contribute to the training of a social scientist.