* 1226511
* OCE-PRF: The Role of Chemotaxis in Bacterioplankton Ecology
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Steven Smriga, Smriga                  Steven
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 11/30/2014
* USD 170,000.00

Microbial activities at the microscale influence biogeochemical cycles at the
ocean-basin scale. Motility and chemotaxis - the sensing of resource gradients
and subsequent movement toward them - may enable bacteria to use microscale
nutrient resource patches for maintenance and growth. Indeed, some marine
bacteria can markedly outperform the classic chemotaxis model organism
Escherichia coli, which suggests that advanced chemotaxis strategies have
evolved in the marine environment. However, attaining a comprehensive
understanding of the prevalence and ecological roles of bacterial chemotaxis
remains a major challenge in microbial oceanography, especially given enormous
genetic diversity among marine bacteria. This research will tackle this
challenge within three overarching hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The
community composition of chemotactic bacteria shifts as motility increases in
response to nutrient inputs.&lt;br/&gt;2) Resource gradients trigger the
partitioning of a natural bacterial assemblage into subcommunities, as evidence
of niche specialization through chemotaxis.&lt;br/&gt;3) Planktonic particles
attract ephemeral bacterial swarms, the dynamics of which are dependent on the
sensing and chemotactic capabilities of nearby cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts include development of new molecular tools that will be of
interest to the research community. The investigator will continue long-term
involvement as a volunteer for the National Ocean Science Bowl (NOSB), an
outreach program to help high school students from diverse backgrounds prepare
for an ocean-themed academic competition. Additional activities include
mentoring undergraduate students through an institutional program, teaching, and
development of an education videogame on marine
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Ocean
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to
support novel research by early career scientists and increase the diversity of
the U.S. ocean sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support,
this project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish
themselves in an independent research career related to ocean sciences and
broaden participation of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.