* 1226165
* OCE-PRF: The contribution of Prochlorococcus mixotrophy to global ocean carbon cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Alexis Yelton, Yelton                  Alexis         P
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 02/28/2015
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, the investigator combines field research and bioinformatics to
describe and quantify Prochlorococcus mixotrophy in different cultured ecotypes
as well as uncultivated populations and incorporate this into a global ecosystem
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand and accurately predict the
complex relationships between climate and the carbon cycle, climate models must
account for the critical role of the microbes that mediate significant carbon
reservoirs in the ocean. Current models do not reflect the important ecological
or functional richness of marine microbial communities. One important marine
bacterium that should be included in these models is the marine phototrophic
cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus. It is the most abundant oxygenic phototroph in
the world's tropical and subtropical oligotrophic oceans and is responsible for
a sizable fraction of marine carbon fixation in these areas. This project will
examine in detail one aspect of how this organism contributes to carbon cycling,
through organic carbon uptake, which is more generally referred to as mixotrophy
in phototrophic bacteria. This important process is poorly understood, and has
not been incorporated into marine ecosystem and biogeochemistry models that
describe carbon flow, even though it has been shown to be prevalent among
certain marine phototrophs, especially Prochlorococcus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include educational activities for
undergraduates and K-12 students. Through the MIT summer research program for
minority undergraduates, the investigator will develop programming and
statistics curricula and work in the laboratory as a mentor to these students.
Through the Edgerton Center's programs for K-12 education, the investigator will
teach students about the importance of marine ecosystems in maintaining a
healthy climate and what is being done to understand it better. In addition,
research results will contribute to a better understanding of the future climate
by providing an oceanic ecosystem model that includes an important process that
has not previously been modeled, cyanobacterial mixotrophy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to support novel
research by early career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean
sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support, this project
will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an
independent research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation
of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.