* 1226389
* The Asymmetric Sequential Effects of Gain and Loss Media Frames on Economic Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Amber Boydstun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

People often encounter information that has been framed in different ways across
contexts. A voter might hear a presidential candidate describe a set of military
options in terms of deaths prevented, and later hear the opposing candidate
describe the same options in terms of lives saved. An online news reader
browsing the morning headlines might see one article written using language that
frames the job market in terms of gains (e.g., 90% employment), and then
encounter a different article that talks about it in term of losses (10%
unemployment). Yet despite this tendency for the same information to be framed
and reframed over time, we know very little about whether and how framing
effects might carry over beyond the immediate context in which they are first
encountered. Instead, most existing research on framing has focused on the
current - and presumably temporary - effects of frames on judgment. These
effects are dramatic, and have been shown to impact preferences and behavior
across economic, political, psychological, and health domains. Yet they may be
capturing only one snapshot of what is in fact a dynamic process.

Building on a foundation of successful pilot data, this interdisciplinary
project advances an expanded theoretical understanding of framing effects,
suggesting that frames can stick: Once a person conceptualizes something as a
loss or gain based on the current framing, it may be difficult to
reconceptualize it using a different frame. Moreover, loss frames may be
fundamentally stickier than gain frames in their ability to shape people's
thinking across time and situations. Thus, while citizens may be able to shift
with relative ease from thinking of a policy issue in terms of gain to thinking
of it in terms of loss, it may be much more difficult to shift from loss to
gain.

The intellectual merit of this project is associated with its theoretical
implications across the social sciences: its expansion of our understanding of
framing effects beyond a single shot, context-dependent phenomenon to
investigate the asymmetric effects of sequentially encountered frames and the
basic mechanisms that produce this pattern. Building on the co-PIs' joint
expertise in studying issues at the intersection of psychology and political
science, a series of experiments will replicate and extend the results of two
pilot studies that established initial evidence for an asymmetric stickiness
effect by expanding on a classic Tversky and Kahneman framing paradigm. It is
predicted that changing the framing of a problem from gain to loss will have a
larger impact on participants' preferences, compared to changing the frame from
loss to gain, consistent with the notion that loss frames are stickier than gain
frames and more resistant to reframing. Subsequent experiments will test basic
cognitive mechanisms underlying this effect, and build a bridge to future
research by testing these processes in the context of mock news stories about
the economy.

The broader impacts of the project emanate from its potential implications for
consequential policy issues, including how the order in which citizens are
exposed to gain and loss economic signals may affect public perceptions of the
economy. For instance, following an economic recession, news reports on the
economy may move from loss frames to gain frames as the economy begins to show
signs of recovery. Yet if loss frames are more sticky, as hypothesized, then the
later gain frames may have a muted effect on economic perceptions. In this way,
the sequential use of loss and gain frames in the news may directly affect the
rate at which consumer confidence - and, thus, the economy itself - recovers.
The theory advanced by the proposed research could therefore have substantial
implications for understanding and improving economic recovery in the wake of a
recession.