* 1226386
* Cytoplasmic streaming and amoeboid cell motility: Mathematical models and computational methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Robert Guy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 119,446.00

Recent experiments on cell locomotion through three-dimensional fibrous matrices
have raised new questions about the basic mechanisms of cell locomotion. In
particular, they have shown that some cells use pressure-driven protrusions
called blebs to squeeze their way through the gaps in the matrix, and it has
been hypothesized that this method of locomotion can be achieved without
adhesive interactions with the surrounding environment. The goal of this project
is to develop a comprehensive mathematical model of a blebbing cell and use this
modeling framework to explore how cells use cytoplasmic streaming for
locomotion. This model will be the first to provide an integrative picture of
how local mechanical and chemical factors work together to drive directed cell
locomotion. These models will involve the mechanochemical chemical interactions
between the cytoskeleton, cytosol, cell membrane, extracellular fluid, and the
surrounding solid structures. A necessary component to this project is
accounting for the changing geometry of the cells. Given the complexity of the
problem, efficient numerical simulations are needed to explore the models. The
investigators develop a new mixed Eulerian-Lagrangian framework to unify the
mathematical description of these complex interacting materials. Using this
framework, new and efficient methods for solving the coupled equations that
arise in the model are developed.

Many problems in biology involve interactions between mechanics complex
multiphase fluids, chemical reactions, and deforming structures. For example,
the dynamics of growing bacterial biofilms and the transport of mucus in the
respiratory system are two such processes. Our models and numerical methods can
be adapted to explore these important complex systems. A graduate student will
be trained as part of this research project. This project is ideally suited for
training graduate students with the broad background necessary for research in
mathematical biology and scientific computation. The student will interface
directly with the experimental collaborators involved in the project to learn
the essential skill of communicating ideas across disciplines.