* 1226353
* Collaborative Research: OpenTopography: A Cyberinfrastructure-Enabled Facility for High-Resolution Topographic Data and Tools
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Chaitanya Baru, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,471,339.00

1226353 &lt;br/&gt;Baru&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Geoinformatics award to the
University of California San Diego (PI: Baru) supports a three year development
project that is collaborative with Arizona State University (PI: Arrowsmith).
The project plan will improve upon and refine the capabilities of the
OpenTopography Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) data services web portal that
was previously jointly supported by NSF/EAR, NSF/OCI and NSF/CISE
(EAR-0930731/EAR-0930643). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OpenTopography (OT) was
designed to allow users web-based access Lidar generated high resolution
topographic data sets and analysis tools in support of surface Earth process
research, research training and education. This award will develop OT2, an
extensible interface and platform that will allow scientists to develop and plug
in functional modules, and a scalable system that will allow archive growth and
computer services provided by cloud computing modalities. OT2 will expand
capabilities to handle full waveform LiDAR, TLS data and bathymetric data. OT2
will continue to ingest extant airborne LiDAR and terrestrial laser scanning
(TLS) data sets from numerous sources beyond airborne LiDAR and TLS data sets
produced by continued and expanding use of the National Center for Airborne
Laser Swath Mapping Facility (NCALM) and the UNVACO hosted TLS instrument pool.
Hosted data now at OT includes also airborne LiDAR data sets flown for
EarthScope science projects, Critical Zone Observatories, NOAA, US Bureau of
Reclamation, USGS, Bureau of Land Management, the US Forest Service and numerous
state airborne LiDAR data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, OT hosts some
200 billion LiDAR returns and thousands of pre-computed digital elevation models
(DEMs) and Google Earth readable kmz files. OT management has documented high
volume use of the web portal. There are over 1,500 registered users, the site
gets between 5,000 and 25,000 page view per month and more than 12,000 automated
job runs have accessed over 250 billion LiDAR returns. OT PIs also report that
more than 35,000 pre-computed DEM tiles have been downloaded and over 70 Gb of
Google Earth imagery is streamed per month. The user base is approximately 22%
students, 27% academic researchers, 24% government scientists and 15% commercial
sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***