* 1226822
* UIS's Therkildsen Field Station at Emiquon:  A Center for River Floodplain Science and Restoration
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Keith Miller, University of Illinois at Springfield
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 23,280.00

The University of Illinois Springfield is awarded a grant to planning activities
at the Therkildsen Field Station at Emiquon (TFSE) to develop a strategic plan
with scientists, resource managers, and educators. TFSE has an active
partnership with The Nature Conservancy (TNC), Dickson Mounds Museum (DMM), and
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). In 2000, TNC purchased over 7000
acres near Havana, IL, establishing the Emiquon Preserve. Nearby, the USFWS has
2,114 acres of lands in conservation. Together, the partnership is restoring
land that was largely used for agriculture, back into a mosaic of wetlands,
bottomland forest and tall grass prairie. DMM focuses on the archeology of the
area, and interprets the restoration to the public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
scientific merit of this grant is linked to TFSE's research that helps plan and
document the Emiquon floodplain restoration. TFSE provides insights into water
quality, river floodplain ecology and microbial communities. As part of this
grant, TFSE will help establish ways to manage and disseminate data. The broader
impacts of TFSE are linked to its mission to facilitate research, education, and
outreach. The science done at Emiquon has a significant societal impact because
the high profile of the Emiquon restoration increases public interest in the
science. The field station is also a regional, community resource for science
education in central Illinois. Planning will help the station increase the
impact of existing educational partnerships, encourage volunteerism, and to
forge new educational alliances. Through annual events and public lectures,
TFSE, DMM, TNC and USFSW are reaching out to the public regionally, nationally,
and internationally.