* 1226222
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Grammar of Huambisa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Doris Payne, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,120.00

This project will produce a comprehensive grammar of Huambisa, an endangered
Jivaroan language of Peru, located in a region rich in natural resources. Known
as fierce warriors with a strong sense of freedom, the Huambisa, their language
and culture have so far managed to survive despite past and current external
pressures that seek to exploit their resource-rich territory. Despite the fact
that the Jivaroan peoples are located in an important geographical and
ecological niche between the Andes and the Amazonian regions, the Huambisa
language has received little prior documentation.

The research is based on linguistic analysis of interviews and authentic
interactions among Huambisa speakers. The information on which the grammar is
based will be organized into databases, professionally archived and made
available to the general public and the communities where the fieldwork takes
place. The documentary material includes a trilingual Huambisa-Spanish-English
vocabulary, analyzed texts and elicited data, audio and video recordings, and
still photographs. The grammar is informed by current linguistic theory, taking
into account typological, diachronic and language contact perspectives. A
primary question addressed on the basis of the grammatical description is
whether Huambisa is more like Andean or Amazonian languages, and how contact
with other languages has affected its historical development. As the first
detailed grammar of Huambisa, this project contributes both to research on
Jivaroan languages and to Andean and Amazonian studies. As the grammar sheds
light on linguistic and cultural practices of the Huambisa (oratory strategies,
greeting and unusual formal salutation rituals, and other traditional genres),
as well as on their detailed traditional knowledge of the rivers and forest, and
their history of interactions with other groups, it is of scientific interest to
anthropology, biology, ecology, ethnolinguistics and history, among other
fields.

The project will train native speakers in recording and transcribing. It will be
carried out collaboratively with members of Boca Chinganaza, a Huambisa village,
and it will help meet their expressed needs to develop and promote their
language. In particular, the text and lexicographic materials will provide a
basis for developing teaching and literacy materials for local intercultural
schools in the future.