* 1226569
* BRIGE: Electrolysis of water using the chemical energy of biofuels: A combined experimental/theoretical approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Eranda Nikolla, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,986.00

PI: Nikolla, Eranda&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1226569&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Electrolysis of water is an
electrochemical process that generates hydrogen from water. Hydrogen is a key
energy source and chemical, widely used in a number of important industrial
processes. One of the drawbacks with this process is that it is energy
intensive. In this proposal, we describe an approach that uses the chemical
energy of a biofuel, a renewable source of energy - its processing leads to no
net CO2 emissions - to run water electrolysis using solid oxide electrolyzers
(SOEs). Biofuel-assisted SOEs are solid-state electrolyzers that, in principle,
can electro-oxidize any oxygenated hydrocarbon (i.e. a biofuel) at the anode,
and utilize its chemical energy internally to drive the electrochemical water
splitting at the cathode. Our preliminary results show that the main challenges
with SOEs operating with biofuels such as ethanol are: (i) the high
overpotential losses at the cathode induced by the high activation energy
barrier required to split water on the conventional cathode materials and (ii)
the poor stability of the conventional anode materials due to carbon poisoning.
The PI's long-term research goal is to develop robust SOE electrode (anode and
cathode) materials that can efficiently generate pure H2 from water using the
chemical energy of any biofuel source. In this two year BRIGE proposal, the
overall objective is to identify robust SOE anode and cathode materials for
ethanol-assisted SOEs. We will initially focus on ethanol, since it represents a
reasonable model biofuel, containing both C-O and C-C bonds, characteristic of
any biofuel molecule. It is our central hypothesis that modifying conventional
monometallic SOE electrode materials (such as Ni, Co at the cathode and Ni at
the anode) via alloying with another element (such as Ru, Rh at the cathode and
Sn, Au, Ag at the anode) will induce geometric and electronic changes to the
parent metal surface that will impact the chemistry on these surfaces and lead
to improved performance. We propose to employ a combined
experimental/theoretical approach to unearth the surface chemistry that governs
(i) the process of electrochemical water splitting on cathode materials (such as
Ni, Co, Ni/Ru, Ni/Rh, Co/Ru and Co/Rh alloy) and (ii) the stability of the anode
materials (such as Ni and Ni/Sn, Ni/Ag and Ni/Au alloy). This information will
allow us to identify the electrode materials with the outmost activity and
stability. We expect that this work will lead to the development of robust SOEs
systems that use the chemical energy of ethanol to drive the production of clean
H2 from water. In addition, it will provide significant fundamental insights
that can be utilized (i) to achieve the PI's long-term research goal and (ii) to
develop other electrochemical systems that involve similar
chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research has broader impact
in terms of science and engineering, training and education. The fundamental
insights obtained in this project have the potential to move the field of SOEs
significantly forward by (i) determining the surface chemistry that governs the
electrochemical reactions at the SOE electrodes and (ii) developing improved SOE
electrode materials. In addition, these insights can be used to develop other
systems that involve similar chemistries such as fuel cells and low temperature
electrolyzers. This work will also contribute to the enhancement of the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum at WSU. The PI plans to use the
fundamental electrochemical insights obtained from this project to design a
course, for senior undergraduate and graduate students, titled "Fundamentals of
Electrochemistry'. In addition, the PI has arranged for undergraduate students
from underrepresented minorities at WSU to work in the lab this summer through
the Initiative for Maximizing Student Development (IMSD) and The Michigan-Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Programs. The PI is
establishing partnerships with the broader community and local high schools in
the area to educate and inspire students from traditionally underrepresented
minorities to pursue a career in science and engineering. More specifically, the
PI is arranging field trips and demonstration experiments for 11th and 12th
graders from the Pontiac and Bethune Alternative Academy High Schools in
Pontiac, Michigan. In addition, she plans to recruit two senior high school
students to work in her laboratory as a summer internship.