* 1226209
* OCE-PRF:   Resource-risk trade-offs and habitat use by an important forage species, Neomysis americana: the role of turbidity
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Rachel Lasley-Rasher, Lasley                  Rachel         S
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 01/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, the investigator will assess the abundance and distribution
drivers of Neomysis americana which is a critically important species in the
Gulf of Maine food web. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mysid shrimp play a critical role
in marine food webs by serving as prey for many fish species. Furthermore, they
function to link the flow of energy and nutrients between habitats through
vertical and horizontal migrations. Neomysis americana is the most dominant
mysid in the Gulf of Maine; however, drivers of abundance and distribution are
unknown. There are consistent observations of high abundances of N. americana in
areas of high turbidity. This correlation could be due to an abundance of
copepod resources and (or) a refuge from visual predators, specifically alewives
(Alosa pseudoharengus). This research project combines field surveys, mesocosm
experiments and behavioral experiments to shed light on proximate and ultimate
consequences of turbidity as a habitat variable for N. americana under contexts
of resources and risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data describing the abundance and
behavior of Neomysis americana will fill a critical gap in the knowledge of
coastal ecosystem dynamics in the Gulf of Maine and will facilitate comparisons
with ecosystems in which mysid-alewife interactions are well studied. Turbidity
as a driver of habitat choice has been hypothesized but never explicitly tested.
In the behavioral experiments, the investigator will determine whether Neomysis
americana detects and responds to turbidity in a context of risk and resource
gradients. Data concerning the effects of turbidity on coastal ecosystems are
timely due to the locally increasing and seasonally shifting turbidity generated
from coastal runoff and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the project include broadening participation of Native American youth through
activities engaging the Boys and Girls Club of Penobscot Bay; recruitment and
training for an undergraduate student from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
Sciences; curriculum development for the Coastal Studies for Girls program; and
collaboration with the Downeast Initiative, an organization comprised of
fisherman, government representatives and community members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Ocean Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OCE PRF) program, with goals to support novel
research by early career scientists and increase the diversity of the U.S. ocean
sciences workforce and research community. With OCE-PRF support, this project
will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an
independent research career related to ocean sciences and broaden participation
of under-represented groups in the ocean sciences.