* 1226525
* RAPID: FireStation--Understanding Earth's Most Powerful Natural Particle Accelerator
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Allan Weatherwax, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 12/31/2013
* USD 57,971.00

The investigators will develop, build, test, and deliver a suite of miniaturized
detectors, called Firestation, for optical, radio, and energetic radiation
measurements of lightning to be flown on the International Space Station (ISS).
The instrument suite is based on the NSF-funded Cubesat Firefly and will be
included in a DOD Space Test Program platform on the ISS as part of an
experiment, the SpaceCube 2.0, built at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, which
is scheduled for delivery to the ISS in 2013. The hardware for FireStation
relies heavily on existing flight spares from the Firefly CubeSat, with some
modifications needed to interface with Space Cube, rather than the Firefly
CubeSat bus. The instrument suite consists of: a sensitive miniaturized radio
receiver, a novel so-called phoswich energetic radiation detector, based on an
ultrafast inorganic scintillator, and a multi-channel photometer system,
including multi-wavelength filters and high speed readouts, providing accurate
localization of lightning flashes, as well as accurate timing at high
resolution, and multi-wavelength observation. The shared main goal of Firefly
and FireStation is to unambiguously determine if Terrestrial Gamma Ray Flashes
(TGFs) are produced by lightning, and to determine the characteristics of
lightning that produce the fluxes of gamma rays observed at high altitude. This
information will strongly constrain the processes that accelerate electrons to
~35 MeV above thunderstorms, since these electrons are thought to be the source
of TGFs. TGFs are of inherent interest, as they result from the most powerful
natural particle acceleration process on Earth, in which thermal electrons are
energized to tens of million electron volts in less than 1 millisecond. These
energized electrons create copious bremstrahlung gamma and X-rays, which can be
observed from orbiting platforms and the electrons themselves may escape to
magnetospheric altitudes and populate the inner electron radiation belt.
Undergraduate students at Siena College will be involved in all aspects of the
project, from design and development, through fabrication and test, to mission
operations and data analysis. Not only will these students get a very rare
opportunity for hands-on, end-to-end experience on a real-life space project,
they will also get a chance to travel to national meetings to talk about their
work on FireStation, and to learn from other scientists and engineers. Students
at Siena College and the Universidad Privada Boliviana (Private University of
Bolivia) will also work together on deploying a VLF ground station capable of
providing location information on lightning events.