* 1226262
* Workshop: High-Pressure Processes in Sustainable Energy  May 13-14, 2012, San Francisco, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Aaron Scurto, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 10/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Aaron Scurto Proposal Number: 1226262

This workshop on high-pressure processes is scheduled for May 13-14, 2012 at the
Hyatt Regency Hotel in San Francisco. The workshop will center on several
important areas of energy conversion at elevated pressures: 1) bio-renewable
processing: gasification, biodiesel, and lignocellulose and 2) process
intensification for lower energy and/or feedstock usage. Approximately 10
speakers will be invited to share their latest research and provide their
insight regarding developing trends and potentially fruitful research
directions. In terms of the broader impacts, students at various levels of
education (from undergraduate to graduate to postdoctoral) will be aided by this
proposed workshop. This will help educate and motivate the next generation of
researchers and educators. Students from underrepresented groups will be
encouraged to attend. At the conclusion, the PI will write a detailed report
about the various presentations and panel discussions for limited distribution
and for public distribution on his website. The presentations and the panel
discussions will yield a section on the major challenges in energy within the
high-pressure community. The report will provide valuable information and
insights that could help guide future grand challenges and research directions.

Overall, this is a timely forum on the application of high pressure processes to
important sustainability issues. In addition, the participants will provide
insight into new research directions, and they will describe potential
applications along with milestones for their realization. The results will be
disseminated through a detailed report, which will be posted on the PI?s
website.