* 1226019
* Collaborative Research: Advances in Nonlocal Dielectric Modeling and Free Energy Calculation for Protein in Ionic Solvent
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* L. Ridgway Scott, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 169,672.00

The nonlocal dielectric approach can significantly enhance the classic Poisson
dielectric model by considering the polarization correlations among water
molecules. However, current studies on the approach are mostly restricted to the
water solvent, due to modeling and algorithmic complications that arise in the
case of ionic solvents. The current ionic models that do exist fail to
incorporate crucial nonlocal dielectric effects. Recent developments also
indicate that entropic changes due to protein-ligand association are critical to
understanding binding affinity. The computation of entropy, however, remains a
very difficult task. Motivated by these challenges, this project aims to develop
new nonlocal continuum electrostatic models and new numerical quadratures for
the direct calculation of entropy and free energy for protein in ionic solvent.
The new nonlocal models will be constructed from a novel combination of the
nonlocal dielectric approach with the fundamental measure theory of hard-sphere
mixture fluids under the constrained functional optimization protocol. They are
expected to significantly improve the accuracy of electrostatic potential
calculations in comparison to the classic Poisson-Boltzmann equation, since they
reflect both ionic size effects and polarization correlations among water
molecules. The new numerical quadratures will be developed by using a special
prismatic element interpolation constructed from a prismatic mesh of a bounded
state region near a potential energy minimum point. The computing complexity
will be further reduced through using a new nonlocal model for computing
involved electrostatic potential. Lastly, new fast numerical algorithms and
program packages will be developed for solving the new dielectric models and for
implementing the new numerical quadratures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calculation of
electrostatic potential energy, entropy, and free energy for protein in ionic
solvent is a fundamental task in biomolecular simulations. The new nonlocal
dielectric models, numerical quadratures for computing entropy and free energy,
and the accompanying efficient numerical algorithms and program packages
produced from this project will be a considerable contribution to the fields of
mathematical biology, computational biochemistry, computational mathematics, and
computer science. They will play important roles in ion channel studies,
rational drug design, and other bioengineering applications, and will improve
our quantitative understanding of critical physiological processes, cellular
energetics, and affinity in protein-ligand binding, and of health and disease in
general. The findings from this project are expected to have a significant
impact on the development of mathematics, computer science, biochemistry, and
bioengineering. Because there has been substantial interest recently in
algorithms for solving high-dimensional problems, any advances made in this
project will have broad potential impact in a variety of areas that are related
to high-dimensional integrals with integrands that decay exponentially.