* 1226221
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Borderwork in Courtrooms: Documents, Oil, Smuggling in Eastern Turkey.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Firat Bozcali, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 08/31/2013
* USD 26,040.00

This project will examine oil smuggling cases in Turkish courts along the
Turkish-Iranian-Iraqi borderland. In this region, which is mostly Kurdish-
populated, oil smuggling has emerged as a substantial way of earning a living
for people facing economic devastation wrought by three decades of armed
conflict between the Turkish army and Kurdish guerillas. The project aims to
understand the persistence of illegal oil trade in the face of intense military
surveillance and frequent court cases about oil smuggling in this borderland.
The PI will examine how the mobilization of various legal arguments, court
documents with different content and scope of validity, and material qualities
of oil (such as the difficulty of marking smuggled oil when it is mixed with
legally marketed oil) frame smuggling cases as concerning contested
understandings, such as private enterprise or criminal activity. The project
will demonstrate how individuals alter legitimate ways of border crossing
through binding precedents that establish alternative framings of smuggling in
the legal system. Ethnographic work in offices specializing in oil smuggling
cases in city centers near Iraq and Iran will allow the researcher to conduct
participant-observation, in-depth, semi-structured, life history interviews, and
textual analysis of court documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
contribute to studies of borderlands. The project addresses how the material
qualities of objects (i.e. documents and oil) influence social and legal
processes, and thereby broadens its analysis of practices through which the
legal system is contested. The project will also promote a dynamic approach in
analyzing and administering the customs and border protection in eastern Turkey
and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;States have become increasingly concerned
with protecting the integrity of borders while also facilitating legal trade.
This study will contribute to understanding how this line is open to contest in
legal fora, contributing to understanding significant questions in national
security.