* 1226303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Publishers, Translators, and the Circulation of Western Texts in Iran
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Karen Nakamura, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 17,086.00

Yale University doctoral candidate Hosna Sheikholeslami, with the guidance of
Dr. Karen Nakamura, will undertake research on how and why social scientific and
philosophical ideas travel across cultures. Her particular focus will be the
role of publishers and translators in the promotion of selected theories and
thinkers; she will investigate the process that surround the selection,
translation, publication, dissemination, and acceptance of introduced
texts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is to be conducted in Tehran, Iran. The
researcher will employ a wide range of social science research methods including
semi-structured interviews, participant observation, career story interviews,
life history interviews, cognitive science methodologies, media analysis,
archival research, and intensive study of translations. Focusing on four major
publishing houses, data will be gathered from current and former publishers,
translators, editors, intellectuals, censors, bureaucrats, printers,
distributors, bookstore owners, reviewers, and readers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will be one of the
first systematic studies to add the processes of translation and publication to
theories of how knowledge circulates across societal and cultural boundaries.
Findings from this research will contribute important information about the
circulation of Western ideas and texts in Islamic societies. Funding this
research also supports the education of a graduate student.