* 1226661
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Development or Decay?: Economic Trajectories following Political Turnover in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Scott Straus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 07/31/2013
* USD 17,602.00

When and how do new political leaders overcome longstanding economic obstacles?
Despite promising periods in many countries, per capita incomes in most African
countries have scarcely increased and income inequality has grown since
independence. This "start-stop" pattern of economic performance generates
frustration with current politicians and government officials. Expectations that
a leadership change will reduce corruption and expand the distribution of
economic opportunities have fueled popular anti-incumbent movements in numerous
countries across Africa, including Cote d'Ivoire, Kenya, and Egypt. These
expectations are mirrored by international actors, such as the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, and bilateral donors, each of whom seize on
political turning points to support economic reforms and encourage new
investments in developing countries. In many countries, new leaders have met
these high economic expectations. Political turnovers in Madagascar, Ghana, and
Ethiopia, for example, preceded periods of sustained progress on a range of
development indicators. However, in other countries the record shows that
turnovers and post-turnover governments sometimes lead to economic decay,
characterized by instability, corruption, and disinvestment. Through field
research tracing presidential turnovers, elite political behavior, and economic
outcomes in Madagascar, this dissertation research will identify specific
characteristics of leadership change and explain why some spur economic
development and others do not.

Madagascar's four leadership changes (e.g. turnovers) in the past 20 years offer
an excellent opportunity for in-depth case study research into their economic
effects. Its political institutions, demographic trends, and ethnic divisions
are similar to broad patterns across Africa, and Madagascar's recent turnovers
resulted from a diverse set of processes: a general strike in 1992, an electoral
transition in 1997, an election followed by a low-grade civil war in 2002, and a
coup d'etat in 2009. These turnovers were accompanied by distinct patterns of
elite interactions and a variety of economic outcomes. The case study research
being conducted here will compare Madagascar's turnovers, using the variety of
outcomes and processes to generate hypotheses regarding the role and importance
of key actors as well as the key characteristics of turnovers. During the field
research, elites will be interviewed, focus groups will be held in four sites
across Madagascar, and government archives will be utilized to gather evidence
and test hypotheses. The findings from the case studies will add greater
theoretical depth and empirical weight to the results of a quantitative analysis
of turnovers and economic trajectories across Africa.

The potential for political turnover is a key concern for leaders, their allies,
and their political opponents, and it is a key driver of political events in
many countries. In sub-Saharan Africa's recent past, attempts to either force or
avoid leadership changes have led to social mobilization and violence in more
states than just Madagascar, including Guinea, Uganda, Zimbabwe, and Malawi. In
nearly every case, control of economic opportunities by the current political
network was a cause of popular anger, and opposition actors expected turnover to
improve economic conditions. Similarly, longer-term efforts by actors at the
domestic and international level have attempted to encourage turnover by
introducing term limits and designing incentives such as the Mo Ibrahim Prize
(for leaders in Africa who willingly leave power). A sharper understanding of
how turnover affects investment and which characteristics are important would
provide a basis for citizens, opposition groups, and international actors to
evaluate the importance of turnover and political decisions, including term
limits and power-sharing agreements, that shape the process of turnover
throughout a political system. To facilitate future research and transparency,
the findings from this dissertation research will be presented in three
settings: academic conferences and peer-reviewed journals; African universities
and research institutions beginning with the Universities of Toamasina and
Antananarivo; and the governance sector of the policymaking community.