* 1226895
* Advancing the research capability of the Wrigley Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Sergey Nuzhdin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2015
* USD 303,609.00

The University of Southern California is awarded funding to build a research-
oriented greenhouse at the Philip K. Wrigley Marine Science Center (WMSC), a
field laboratory located on Santa Catalina Island, CA, and part of the Wrigley
Institute for Environmental Studies (WIES). The WMSC has supported research and
education primarily in the marine realm but recent visitors have investigated
water cycling, atmospheric chemistry, geology and geography, photochemistry,
landscape architecture, archaeology, and terrestrial ecology. These interests
are coalescing to provide more integrated view of aquatic and terrestrial
systems that is timely given the challenges of climate change, the stresses
imposed by invasive species and the increasing use of natural resources, and the
vulnerabilities of coastal systems. This award will support construction of the
greenhouse to serve the growing research needs of the WMSC and fill an important
gap in environmental research capability. The greenhouse will have heating and
cooling facilities to provide excellent climate control for most temperate and
subtropical ecosystems under natural light conditions. The structure will be
plumbed with seawater and freshwater so both marine mesocosm and plant system
experiments can be accommodated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Researchers both within and outside of USC have expressed strong fundamental
research interests in terrestrial ecology, biodiversity, and invasive species
themes; land-sea interactions; comparative studies of coastal systems from
pristine-to-urban; and science underpinnings for sustainable shellfish
aquaculture. A greenhouse at the WMSC will serve existing strengths in marine
science, accelerate the growing interest in plant-genome interactions and
invasive species research, and facilitate collaboration across the terrestrial-
marine divide, in a compelling natural setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The Wrigley Marine Science Center serves researchers, post docs,
graduate students, and undergraduate students both nationally and
internationally. The Institute also has 8 staff dedicated to the development of
programs that promote scientific knowledge, and convey the scientific
experience, to teachers and learners at all stages in life. Collectively, these
education and outreach programs have brought thousands of students, educators
and the general public to the WMSC over the last five years. The WIES faculty
and educators are committed to integration of research and education activities,
and to incorporation of greenhouse-based science activities at WIES into our
active education and outreach portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more
information about the Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies please go to:
http://dornsife.usc.edu/wrigley/home/