* 1226853
* UV Sterilization of Seawater Effluent for Containment of Non-indigenous Marine Species and Pathogens
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Gary Cherr, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2014
* USD 293,442.00

The University of California Davis has been awarded funds to establish a micro-
filtration/ultraviolet light (UV) sterilization system at Bodega Marine
Laboratory (BML) for select seawater effluent streams exiting the research
facility. The project will also renovate an existing building and coupled with
the new sterilization system space efficiency and research capability will be
maximized. The system is a state-of-the-art disinfection system for seawater
discharge, the only model currently allowed by the State of California and
replaces a dated chlorination system representing a potential risk to the
adjacent State Marine Protected Area and two National Marine Sanctuaries. It
features a much smaller footprint and technological advances that will enable
other efficiencies to be realized at BML, including increased treatment capacity
and holding facilities. Recent national report cards on the state of ocean
ecosystems call for research on the effects of climate change, invasive species,
and emerging diseases on marine environments. This award is a timely leverage of
an existing NSF-funded state-of-the-art climate change facility designed for
research with marine, estuarine, and freshwater species, including non-native
and larval organisms. Thus BML will become a highly unique facility for
researchers to utilize for the new era of environmental research on non-
indigenous/invasive species and emerging marine pathogens.

The intellectual merit of this award will be the innovative and diverse research
of the visiting scientists and graduate and undergraduate students who will be
supported by the increased ability to investigate introduced/invasive species
and pathogens that are the basis for emerging diseases and changing biodiversity
in general. BML is internationally known for its research on introduced and
invasive species in estuaries and marine environments. Since its construction in
1966, the UC Davis Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML; http://www.bml.ucdavis.edu/)
has served as a gateway for research and educational activities from San
Francisco Bay to Point Arena. Located 60 miles north of San Francisco, the
facility provides logistic support and services to researchers and classes that
come from all over the world to explore the unique coastal environments. The
ability to study non-indigenous/invasive species and pathogens in order to
understand mechanisms of adaptation and transmission is key to solving the
complex environmental challenge before us. The broader impact of the project
will be the benefits of the resulting research on national health, prosperity
and welfare. Specifically the facilities will attract new interdisciplinary
collaborations, increase facility capacity to address invasive species and
disease issues, enhance training of new scientists, and advance marine
laboratory facility design and performance. The results from such studies will
have implications for national environmental health, welfare, and security.