* 1226930
* Deflecting Ingroup Members' Stereotype-Confirming Behavior: Factors that Facilitate High Performance and Positive Interracial Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Valerie Taylor, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 228,814.00

Though a diverse society increases the likelihood of positive interracial
interaction, it also increases the likelihood that people will apply stereotypes
to group members with whom they are less familiar during such interactions.
Thus, in interracial interactions, which are already characterized by subtle
levels of anxiety, witnessing or interacting with racial group members who
behave stereotypically (i.e., commit "stereotype-confirming" acts) may
exacerbate the strain often experienced in diverse contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has shown that such experiences may
increase people's motivation to behave counterstereotypically to disprove
negative group stereotypes, but also may undermine performance and discourage
future interracial contact. This previous work, however, leaves us at an
impasse: What then contributes to people's ability to thrive in diverse settings
following racial group members' stereotype-confirming behavior and how do people
cope in such situations? This research sets out to answer these important
questions first by investigating the factors that contribute to the divergent
behavioral and social outcomes experienced by racial group members who witness
the stereotype-confirming behaviors of ingroup members in interracial (vs.
intraracial) interactions. It also examines the burden that racial group members
may carry to represent their group positively in these interpersonal
interactions and the possible psychological and social consequences of this
burden. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four experimental laboratory studies examine
various conditions that may improve performance and facilitate a positive
(rather than a negative) interpersonal interaction for ethnic minorities who
witness racial group members behaving stereotypically in diverse settings. These
studies assess the extent to which: 1) the frequency of positive interracial
contact, 2) high vs. low interpersonal closeness with an interaction partner,
and 3) interactions with a high vs. a low prejudice partner can improve
performance and interpersonal contact in such interactions. Four experimental
survey studies then build on this work to explore how majority and minority
group members who strategically behave counterstereotypically following ingroup
members' stereotype-confirming acts may incur social costs. Ironically, those
attempting to rectify the situation may be viewed negatively by same-race
members but positively by different-race members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
has the potential to transform how we understand people's behavior in novel
interracial contexts -- particularly those laden with negative group stereotypes
or stereotype-confirming group members -- by providing clear strategies for
improving individuals' outcomes and highlighting factors that stand to undermine
these positive outcomes. Namely, when individuals of all racial and ethnic
backgrounds engage in positive interracial interactions more frequently and
actively cultivate cross-race friendships - even with those who may seem to lack
egalitarian values - they are likely to thrive emotionally, cognitively, and
socially in interracial interactions. Furthermore, these strategies may reduce
the burden felt by those who are motivated to maintain positive relationships
with both same-race and different-race associates when attempting to counteract
racial group members' stereotype-confirming behavior. Thus, this research will
assist in the larger goal of working to create and maintain positive intergroup
interactions and relationships so that all individuals can thrive in diverse
academic and social settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this research meets
the goals of NSF to integrate research and education and to include historically
underrepresented populations in all stages of the research process. It will be
conducted sprimarily at Spelman College, the nation's first historically Black
women's Liberal Arts College, and will expose undergraduates to graduate-level
research in social psychology. Students will be involved in the creation of the
research materials and its implementation, as well as the dissemination of
findings at professional conferences, on Spelman's campus, and at other
institutions.