* 1227144
* Meaning in Context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Christopher Kennedy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/29/2016
* USD 303,914.00

A significant portion of the information conveyed by a typical linguistic
utterance is not directly encoded in the words and that comprise it and the way
they are articulated, but is rather "added on" via reasoning about how the
utterance relates to information that is already present in the context. This
feature of language gives rise to ambiguity, vagueness, and other kinds of
"interpretive uncertainty", and has often been viewed as a design flaw that must
be eradicated from rigorous discourse. In practice, however, humans are
exceptionally good at arriving at the right meanings of utterances in the right
contexts. The goal of this research project is to investigate exactly how this
is accomplished, by examining how the cognitive systems devoted primarily to
language interface with more general cognitive systems involved in representing
knowledge about the world in the online construction of
meaning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research conducted by Dr. Kennedy and his
colleagues will use experimental techniques to identify and compare the
processing signatures of two varieties of context-dependent meaning. The first
variety is based primarily in features of the linguistic system, and involves
the use of linguistic expressions that are underspecified for content (such as
pronouns). The second builds on more general knowledge of the world and the
nature of communication, and involves reasoning about speakers' intentions in
using particular expressions as opposed to others in a context to achieve a
communicative goal. The main experimental method to be employed in the research
is known as the Visual World Paradigm, in which experimental subjects' eye-
movements are monitored as they follow spoken instructions to manipulate objects
in a display. Eye-movements directed at objects in the display are precisely
time-locked to information about those objects arriving in the speech signal,
and so provide insight on the dynamic construction of meaning down to a
granularity of milliseconds. This interdisciplinary research will deepen our
understanding of how listeners use both contextual and linguistic clues to build
up meanings, and provide resources for researchers in other fields developing
tools and techniques for facilitating linguistic communication.