* 1227184
* NRI-Large: Collaborative Research: Multilateral Manipulation by Human-Robot Collaborative Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Jacob Rosen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 03/31/2015
* USD 616,670.00

This project addresses a large space of manipulation problems that are
repetitive, injury-causing, or dangerous for humans to perform, yet are
currently impossible to reliably achieve with purely autonomous robots. These
problems generally require dexterity, complex perception, and complex physical
interaction. Yet, many such problems can be reliably addressed with human/robot
collaborative (HRC) systems, where one or more humans provide needed perception
and adaptability, working with one or more robot systems that provide speed,
precision, accuracy, and dexterity at an appropriate scale, combining these
complementary capabilities.

The project focuses on multilateral manipulation, which arises when a human
controls one or more robot manipulators in partnership with one or more
additional controllers (humans or autonomous agents). Complex operations in
surgery and manufacturing can benefit from the extra degrees of freedom provided
by more than two hands, and training often depends on hands-on interaction
between expert and apprentice. Example applications include surgical operations,
which typically involve several physicians and assistants, and other medical
tasks such as turning a patient in bed and wrapping a cast to constrain a hand.
Multilateral manipulation also applies in manufacturing, for example for
threading wires or cables, aligning gaskets to obtain a tight seal, and in many
household situations, such as folding tablecloths, wrapping packages, and
zipping overfilled suitcases so they will fit inside diabolically-designed
overhead airline compartments. Multilateral manipulation often arises with
deformable materials or multi-jointed objects with more than six degrees of
freedom (DOF). The extra DOFs in materials introduce challenges such as
computational complexity, but they also can accommodate minor inconsistencies
through redundancy and provide system damping. This project advances the
fundamental science of multilateral manipulation guided by specific applications
from surgery and manufacturing.

Broader Impacts: Multilateral manipulation systems have the potential to improve
healthcare, improve American competitiveness and product quality in
manufacturing, and open the door to new service robot applications in the home.
The project will be guided by an Advisory Board of experts from industry and
medical practice. Project results will be disseminated through yearly conference
workshops, open-source software tools integrated into common robotics software
environments such as Robot Operating System (ROS), and the investigators'
research and course webpages, to encourage integration of our approach into
research projects and courses at many institutions. Outreach programs, public
lab tours, and mentoring of minority students will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering. These activities will encourage
participation in STEM activities and provide student and postdoctoral
researchers with mentoring experience.