* 1227992
* MRI: Development of an Innovative EPR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Sandra Eaton, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 999,199.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Sandra Eaton from University of Denver and colleague Gareth Eaton will develop
an innovative digital electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer that
can operate at any frequency up to 9 to 10 GHz using an AWG (arbitrary waveform
generator) source and digital detection. A single digital spectrometer will be
capable of performing a wide range of pulse, rapid-scan, and continuous-
excitation EPR experiments at variable frequencies, instead of requiring
multiple instruments for different frequencies as is currently the case. Users
will be able to implement new experiments in user-friendly software without
requiring costly new hardware. Digital detection improves signal-to-noise and
decreases data acquisition time. Individual resonators (probeheads) will be
narrow-banded to maximize sensitivity. The spectrometer will have a series of
readily interchangeable resonator modules for experiments at frequencies that
are currently widely used (such as 9.5 GHz) and ones (such as 4 GHz) where
spectrometers are not currently available, but which theory predicts will be
very valuable. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research training and
education at all levels. Projects include the frequency dependence of nitroxyl
electron spin relaxation, spin trapping of the reactive oxygen species
superoxide, and characterization of defect centers in diamonds with potential
applications in quantum computing.

EPR is the method of choice for studying molecules with unpaired electrons.
Applications range from organic radicals and transition metal complexes, to
materials for nanotechnology and solar energy conversion, characterization of
metal sites in proteins, and measurement of long distances in polymers,
proteins, and nucleic acids. The much greater flexibility of a digital EPR
spectrometer will make it more useful in a wider range of applications. The
detailed design of the new digital EPR spectrometer will be published to make it
available to other research laboratories and to commercial vendors, which will
open up new vistas for EPR spectroscopy. In addition, the project will
contribute to workforce development by providing a cutting-edge
interdisciplinary learning environment. Students will have the opportunity to
interact with engineers, physicists, and chemists. Furthermore, students from
nearby Regis University, with a high proportion of first-generation college
students, will use the EPR laboratory on a regular basis.