* 1227074
* Doctoral dissertation research:   Infants' ability to discriminate statements and questions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Toben Mintz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,108.00

In English and many other languages, questions and statements differ
structurally. For example, in English, questions often begin with wh-words (e.g.
who, what, where, etc.) and auxiliary verbs switch positions with subjects
(compare "I can see Jim" with "Can I see Jim?"). In addition, statements and
questions differ in their prosody (the melody and rhythmic qualities of speech):
Statements generally end with a final pitch drop and questions with a final
pitch rise. As infants acquire a language, it is important for them to be able
to differentiate statements and questions, otherwise they would not be able to
learn the distinct grammatical rules and patterns associated with each type.
Although many language acquisition theories assume that learners can
differentiate these sentence types in the early stages of language acquisition,
there is little evidence of when and how they do so. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
series of four experiments, this project explores when infants develop
sensitivity to the differences between statements and questions, and the types
of information they use to distinguish between them. The project tests the
hypothesis that infants initially differentiate statements and questions using
prosodic information, then learn to distinguish sentence types by attending to
the initial words (e.g., "Can I ... ?" vs. "I can ...
.").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide critical evidence about when
and how infants begin to distinguish between statements and questions. The
findings will have implications for speech processing in infants, as well as
theories of grammatical acquisition. This project could add significant new
knowledge to the types of distinctions pre-verbal infants can make about
grammatically different sentence types, which could have broader impacts in
theories of child language acquisition. By mapping out these abilities in
typically developing children, these experiments could also translate to
assessment and intervention of children at risk for language impairments.