* 1227020
* Network for Computational Nanotechnology - NEEDS Node
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Mark Lundstrom, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,000,000.00

Within the next decade or so, integrated circuits are likely to reach their long
forecasted scaling limits, with billions of transistors on a chip available at
commodity prices. At the same time, nanotechnology is creating new materials,
devices and computing paradigms, some of which address the challenges of billion
transistor chips (e.g. photonic/electronic systems), while others address
exciting new opportunities (e.g. conformal electronics, and self powered,
biomimetic, sensor/electronic systems). These developments promise a new era of
electronics one that harnesses the capabilities of novel nanoengineered
materials and devices either alone or in conjunction with powerful silicon
platforms to address society's challenges in energy, the environment, security,
and health. This vision can only be achieved if new standardized models of
nanodevices and tools to integrate them are first created and then embedded in a
versatile design framework that gives designers the ability to explore and
develop these innovative circuits and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed research will develop the critical missing link needed to transform
nanoelectronic science into electronics for a new era accurate, robust, and fast
compact models for nanodevices with diverse functionalities that are suitable
for immediate use by designers in SPICE-based, design environment. The team will
develop a suite of compact models, but, equally important, it will create a
complete model development and simulation platform. This NEEDS-SPICE platform
will allow experts in materials and devices to develop these new compact models
on their own, and will enable designers to immediately use them in
open/commercial SPICE-like simulators. The work will be motivated by innovative
system designs that illustrate the potential of new-era electronics enabled by
nanotechnology. The development&lt;br/&gt;of compact model will be firmly
grounded in fundamental materials science and device physics, and will be
experimentally validated. In the process of this research, the team will define
a "language" and create a set of tools through which system designers and device
and materials nanoscientists will work together as a community to realize the
promise of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
development of compact models that accurately capture the essential physics of
novel nanodevices is the first intellectual challenge. The requirements for a
compact model to simulate accurately, robustly, and efficiently make such model
development challenging and intellectually compelling, but also profoundly
useful. Developing a compact model is a process of discovering the essential
physical principles of a device and distilling them into an analytically compact
form that satisfies crucial requirements for robust and efficient simulation.
The result is models suitable for use by designers, but beyond this, the models
also define the way device physicists and technologists understand and think
about devices. The second intellectual challenge is the creation of a modular,
model development and simulation platform that engages a broad community -
allowing model developers to focus on device physics, rather than on simulation
algorithms and giving designers access to high-quality models for nanodevices
that run robustly on open/commercial platforms. The proposed research will
develop this NEEDS-SPICE platform based on a clear understanding of the physics
of nanodevices and of the underlying mathematical requirements and software
structure of SPICE-like simulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
development and dissemination of open content educational resources and
opensource software will give this research significant impact. Unique
educational resources will prepare a new generation of students, researchers,
and engineers who will be inspired and trained to realize the promise of
nanotechnology. Open-source software tools will enable compact model development
by a broad community, and the NEEDS-SPICE platform operating inside nanoHUB.org
will serve a broad community of model developers and nanosystem designers giving
this project impact long-beyond its five-year duration. The models, software
platform, and intellectual framework to be developed will lead to a new era of
low-cost, distributed, variation-tolerant, manufacturable, integrated
nanosystems that address society's challenges in energy, the environment,
security, and health.