* 1227018
* Establishing a Chronology of Late Quaternary Glacial Advances in the Tropical American Cordillera
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 04/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The role of the tropics in past and future climate change has garnered
significant attention in recent decades, but debate still exists over climatic
linkages between the tropics and the middle and high latitudes. Glaciers in
tropical mountains are highly sensitive indicators of climate, and the glacial
landforms left behind by past glacier fluctuations provide key evidence of
paleoclimate trends and their forcing mechanisms. Traditionally, it has been
difficult to date glacial landforms, so accurately assigning ages to the climate
stages and events they record has been less than successful. The recent
development of cosmogenic nuclide dating has revolutionized geomorphic
investigation of past glacial dynamics and now provides a reliable means to
constrain the formation ages of glacial moraines and other features. In this
project, investigators will develop a long-term glacial chronology for the
Cordillera de Talamanca of southern Central America, in the isthmian portion of
the American Cordillera. The chronology will be established using 36Cl surface
exposure dating of representative moraines and bedrock outcrops from three
moraine complexes in each of two valleys of the Chirrip√≥ massif in Costa Rica,
using 60 samples already collected for this purpose. The chronology to be
developed will reveal whether glacial advances in the isthmian portion of the
American Cordillera, which is more strongly influenced by the Pacific Ocean and
Caribbean Sea than areas to the north or south, were synchronous with glacial
advances elsewhere. Previous work reconstructing glacier extents from moraine
complexes at the study site revealed that Late Quaternary glacial advances were
characterized by distinctly different temperature and moisture conditions, but
the glacial stages were only dated relative to each other. By anchoring these
reconstructions in time, the cosmogenic dating will allow the researchers to
compare paleoclimate trends in the Cordillera de Talamanca with those recorded
by glacial landforms, pollen assemblages, isotope records, and other climate
proxies elsewhere in the neotropics and beyond.

As the highest and largest mountain range in the isthmian portion of Central
America, the Cordillera de Talamanca of Costa Rica preserves glacial records
important to understanding paleoclimate and the timing of glacial advances in
the Americas. This project will fill a knowledge gap in glacial chronologies
along the transect of the American Cordillera. Results will contribute to
understanding of the past dynamics of the neotropical marine troposphere, and of
Pleistocene climates in southern Central America. By improving scientific
understanding of past climate dynamics in this region, the research can assist
in modeling and anticipating future global climate change. Knowledge of glacial-
age climates is also relevant to understanding biogeographic patterns and the
origin and maintenance of high species diversity in neotropical ecosystems. The
research will provide educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students at the University of Tennessee, and for grades 6-12 students in local
schools in whose classrooms faculty and graduate students will conduct
scientific outreach. Through international outreach efforts, the project will
also help educate park guards, guides, and tourists on glacial and climate
history in the Cordillera de Talamanca.