* 1227334
* Collaborative Research: Worker Adjustment to International Trade: Evidence from Administrative Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Autor, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,348.00

Worker Adjustment to International Trade: Evidence from Administrative
Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David H. Autor, MIT and NBER&lt;br/&gt;Gordon H.
Hanson, UCSD and NBER&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract. Economic theory suggest
that by allowing countries to specialize according to their comparative
advantage international trade gives consumers access to a greater variety of
products, raising their real incomes. Realizing these gains often brings about
substantial changes in national industry structure, as workers move out of
import-competing sectors and into other activities. The public debate about
globalization tends to center less on the long-run benefits of trade and more on
the short-run costs of workers, firms, and industries from adjusting to import
competition. Characterizing the adjustment costs associated with trade is
therefore important for framing the policy discussion about global economic
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the impact of exposure
to import competition on the employment and earnings trajectories of U.S.
workers over the long term. The focus is on growth in U.S. imports from China,
though imports from other low-wage countries are also considered. To measure
worker outcomes, the project makes use of individual-level data from the Social
Security Administration (SSA) over the period 1978 to 2007. The SSA data contain
a complete history of a worker's annual earnings by employer and by industry, as
well as information on receipts of Social Security benefits. These data make it
possible to estimate how exposure to import competition affects worker
employment, earnings, and benefits uptake by firm and by sector and how these
outcomes vary according to a worker's demographic characteristics (age, gender,
race, ethnicity, foreign-born status), skill level, and employer
characteristics. Administrative data have been used extensively in the analysis
of the impact of job loss on worker incomes, but they have been underutilized in
considering the consequences of U.S. trade. The project will thus provide
evidence on long-run adjustment to trade among U.S. workers than is missing in
the literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivating the focus on China is the
country's spectacular economic growth, particularly in manufacturing. Since the
early 1990s, Chinas has accounted for nearly three quarters of the growth in
manufacturing value added by low and middle income countries. For the United
States, China's impact is compounded by a profound imbalance in the two
countries' aggregate exports and imports. China runs a large trade surplus,
whereas the U.S. runs a large trade deficit. U.S. industries exposed to the
increase in China's trade capacity have consequently faced a major expansion in
global competition on the supply side, without an offsetting expansion in
consumer spending for their products on the demand side. China's export growth
appears to be largely attributable to its remarkable improvements in domestic
industrial productivity arising from the dismantling of state control and the
liberalization of restrictions on trade and investment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project unites two disparate bodies of knowledge. One,
on how international trade affects labor markets, examines how changes in import
competition alter wages and employment in the short or medium run by studying
these changes in impacted firms, industries, or regions. While this approach
uncovers the temporary effects of greater import competition, it misses impacts
on workers that persist after an individual leaves his firm, abandons his
industry, or relocates to another city or state. By utilizing long-run data on
individual workers available in the SSA data, the project captures how increased
trade with China changes earnings and uptake of Social Security benefits that
workers experience while employed at their initial firm, after they move to a
new firm in the same industry, after they shift to a new industry altogether,
and after they exit from employment entirely. Decomposing the long-run change in
earnings into these four components shows where in the transition process
workers face the most significant adjustment costs, results that will help guide
future theoretical work on trade and labor markets. The second body of related
literature tracks the earnings of workers who are displaced from their jobs.
Because job loss that is involuntary is difficult to identify in available data,
much research uses administrative records to isolate extreme cases of
displacement, such as mass layoffs associated with plant closures or substantial
downsizings. The literature shows that job loss due to mass layoffs has
significant negative long-run effects on worker earnings. By using
administrative data, the project, like the earlier displaced-worker literature,
captures the long-run effects of changes in labor-market conditions. By focusing
on a specific type of change, namely one related to greater import competition
from China, the project examines all types of job loss related to trade and not
just those associated with mass layoffs.