* 1227226
* Confocal microscopy at Hopkins Marine Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* William Gilly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 344,376.00

Stanford University has been awarded a grant to purchase a confocal scanning
laser microscope and establish a related multi-user facility at Hopkins Marine
Station (HMS) to serve multiple marine laboratories in the Monterey Bay
Peninsula, California. High-resolution imaging is now an essential part of the
contemporary tool kit of cell and developmental biological processes. Confocal
microscopy, along with advances in fluorescent labeling of protein and nucleic
acids, has resulted in unprecedented insights into the 3D architecture and
function of cells and tissues of many marine organisms. An important application
of this technology is visualization of cellular elements and processes related
to early development, physiology, and neurobiology. This technical ability also
has broader implications for elucidating the interactions of marine animals with
their environment. Ultimately, the environment acts on organisms through its
effects on cells and tissues. Ocean acidification, deoxygenation and other
processes will alter ecosystems and fisheries through effects on individual
organisms. This microscope will help address how the various facets of climate
change are impacting critical aspects of the cell/developmental biology and
physiology of a variety of marine species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This piece of
equipment will directly benefit 5 research labs at HMS with an immediate
potential benefit to 10 graduate students, and provide outstanding undergraduate
training opportunities during research training apprenticeships. The microscope
will be housed at HMS but be available to researchers and their students at
other research institutions in the local area, including the Monterey Bay
Aquarium, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute at Moss Landing and
California State University Monterey Bay (CSUMB). There are many faculty at
these institutions with a wide range of research interests who plan to use this
microscope upon availability. HMS will partner with CSUMB Bay to create training
opportunities on this microscope for the McNair Scholars program for gifted
minority students to prepare them for doctoral studies. The image data generated
from this equipment will be highlighted in the regular public lectures and open
houses at HMS, and on a web-based resource dedicated to early embryogenesis and
larval development of marine invertebrates. An imaging collaboration between HMS
and the Monterey Bay Aquarium (MBA) will develop a greater public awareness of
the diversity of embryos and larvae of marine invertebrates by spotlighting
image data using the extensive established outreach mechanisms of the MBA both
in formal public exhibits and Facebook postings. For more information about
Hopkins Marine Station, visit the website at http://www-marine.stanford.edu/.