* 1227215
* Structure and Reactivity at the Mineral-Water Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Barry Bickmore, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 215,489.00

Technical Summary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Progress in low-temperature
geochemistry will largely depend on our ability to characterize reaction
mechanisms and energetics at the mineral-water interface. But these systems are
usually so complex that it is difficult or impossible to obtain either precise
experimental characterizations or accurate calculations of reaction energetics.
We suggest that more rapid progress could be made if we better understood the
relationship between molecular structure and reactivity at the
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our proposed research will address this problem
by attempting to create a fairly comprehensive structure-energy model based on
the bond-valence model (BVM), which is a standard tool in crystallography and
inorganic chemistry. Model development will proceed via optimization of some
novel potential energy terms based on BVM-based structural descriptors. We will
optimize the model parameters on known crystal structures, and test it on
calculated structures of simple aqueous systems, crystals, and interfaces, with
the calculations performed at a high level of theory. Such a model would be
unique, in that it would be based on only a few potential energy terms that very
simply take into account complex, multi-body interactions. This would allow us
to more profitably interpret structural information regarding interfaces gleaned
from advanced experimental and computational studies of these systems, and it
may also prove to be an excellent foundation for advanced force fields for use
in further computational studies. To this end, we also propose to implement our
model within a standard molecular modeling code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Significance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk analysis and mitigation strategies for
many environmental problems, including groundwater contamination and nuclear
waste disposal, rely on computer models of processes that include reactions at
mineral-water interfaces. And yet, these reactions are notoriously difficult to
study. Our proposed research will make it easier for scientists to interpret
results from experimental and advanced computational studies of these reactions,
and may also prove useful for making the computational studies more accurate and
broadly applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In fact, the results of our proposed
work are likely to be applicable far beyond the discipline of low-temperature
geochemistry, since we will be taking an empirical model of molecular geometry
that is already a mainstay among a very broad community of scientists and
developing it in a more comprehensive way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore,
the research will be pursued in the context of an innovative mentoring
environment already established at Brigham Young University (BYU) -the
Interdisciplinary Mentoring Program in Analysis, Computation, and Theory
(IMPACT). Students, both graduates and undergraduates, in this program are given
intensive training in applied mathematics and computation, and assigned to work
with faculty from various disciplines to solve problems or develop mathematical
models of important processes. In the context of this project, they will also be
given intensive training in basic mathematical crystallography, basic
computational chemistry, and the BVM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be
recruited from both the Mathematics and Geological Sciences departments at BYU,
with the aim of using this mentoring experience to develop human capital in the
Earth Sciences. These disciplines deal with very complex systems that can
usually be effectively simulated only on the basis of exceptionally complex
numerical models, and both the public and governmental agencies are increasingly
turning to the results of such models to make critical decisions. Yet, students
in the Earth Sciences are typically not required to take many classes in
mathematics, and often graduate without really understanding how the mathematics
they were required to take can be applied to their discipline. IMPACT is
designed to cut through differences in jargon and help participating students
see how a simple toolbox of numerical techniques can be applied across many
disciplines. This allows students to develop the ability to think fluently in
this critically important language.