* 1227198
* Developing a Regional Research Vision for Enhancing Field Station Resources: A Plan for Connecting the Dots
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Amy Whipple, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 24,571.00

Northern Arizona University is awarded a grant to conduct a planning process to
integrate field stations and related resources in Northern Arizona. The planning
process will be centered on the development of a research vision for the region.
Internationally recognized experts and a strong group of local and regional
scientists will be enlisted to participate in developing a suite of research
questions that address growing concerns and issues regarding the science and
policy implications of climate change. The ensuing research vision will guide
the subsequent planning workshop, through which steps for efficiently
administering and managing our integrated resources will be constructed. These
resources include: the Merriam-Powell Research Station (Northern Arizona
University), The Arboretum at Flagstaff (independent, non-profit), the Southwest
Experimental Garden Array (SEGA: common garden field facility under development
through a NSF MRI award to NAU), and the Walnut Creek Center for Education and
Research (a partnership of Prescott College and NAU on the Prescott National
Forest). Participants will include federal and private land managers across
Northern Arizona. As a culmination to these planning workshops, the awardee will
construct a five-year strategic plan that will be developed with continued
consultation from the outside experts who were involved in the workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focused planning process will enable key institutions
to better match expenditures to future needs, enhancing their sustainability and
their ability to foster research for the common good. Inclusion of managers and
Native Americans in the planning process will help tie research more closely to
benefits to the general public and to disadvantaged populations facing
significant additional threats from climate change. During the planning process,
explicit ties between research and outreach, K-12 education, undergraduate and
graduate education, and communication with managers will be cultured.