* 1227274
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Cognitive Link between Micronutrient Deficiency in Utero and Schooling Attainment in Tanzania
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Erica Field, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 12/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Large estimated market returns to education in developing countries have
stimulated policy interest in improving investments in schooling. Though many
factors influence individual schooling decisions, an important and unstudied
alternative mechanism influences learning and educational attainment -- poor in
utero environment biologically constrains cognitive development, learning
capacity and therefore subsequent demand for
schooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a field experiment, this project examines
(1) the causal impact of micronutrient deficiency (specifically for folic acid,
B6 and B12) in utero on cognition and children's schooling, and (2) whether
parents allocate resources so as to compensate for or to reinforce inequalities
in initial endowments across children. To address these two questions, the
research team will collect follow-up data on an individual-level randomized
trial of nutritional supplements offered to HIV-pregnant women in Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania initially conducted between 2001 and
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscientists have identified that deficiency in
four micronutrients -- B6, B9 and B12, and iodine -- results in irreversible and
continuous damage to individuals' cognitive capacity. This project focuses on
these nutrients because only they exert persistent and continuous effect on
learning over the lifespan of individuals. Individual level randomization and a
large sample size enable the research team to detect causal effects vis-à-vis
previous studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use biomarker data
and will conduct cognitive tests with children to proxy respectively
individuals' health status and cognitive development. Of particular interest is
the possible role of micronutrient deficiency in explaining gender differences
in schooling outcomes in Tanzania. The study aims to promote training, teaching
and scientific collaborations across disciplines and academic institutions. A
team comprising of economists, epidemiologists, nutrition scientists, and
statisticians from Harvard's Economics Department, The Harvard Medical School
and the Tanzania-based Muhimbili Medical School are conducting this project.
Upon study completion, the principal investigators will present results in
interdisciplinary conferences and will publish findings in economics, social
science and medical journals.