* 1227061
* The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope Final Design Phase
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* William Smith, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2015
* USD 17,290,229.00

AST-1227061, PI: William S. Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope (LSST) is a large-aperture, wide-field, ground-based telescope that
will survey the visible sky in six photometric bands. The images, alerts, and
resulting catalogs will be made available to the United States and Chilean
communities with no proprietary period. The LSST project was selected as the
highest priority ground-based project by the 2010 astronomy and astrophysics
decadal survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The survey is currently planned to last for
ten years and will produce a database suitable for answering a wide range of
pressing questions in astrophysics, cosmology, and fundamental physics. The same
data set can be used to characterize the properties of dark energy and dark
matter; produce nearly instant alerts of detected optical transients such as
exploding stars in distant galaxies; discover and provide orbits for potentially
hazardous near-Earth objects; and catalog billions of objects with both high
astrometric precision and unprecedented photometric depth. No other facility in
operation or planned will have the simultaneous wide area and rapid temporal
sampling to address these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has already
met the requirements of a Preliminary Design Review (PDR) of the full
construction project. The present award, supplemented by contributions from LSST
member institutions, will allow the LSST Project to build on their existing
efforts to meet the requirements of a Final Design Review (FDR) and to be ready
for construction. The priorities for this support are: 1) Moving the project to
become construction-ready by completing the specifications and the bidding
process for the major components of the telescope and support facility; 2)
Developing improved algorithms for data processing with emphasis on those that
drive the sizing model for computing hardware; 3) Implementing the PDR
recommendations, which provide important guidelines for moving the project
toward construction readiness; 4) Implementing an Earned Value Management System
and updating costing and other documentation required for FDR; 5) Completing
staffing of the senior management team that will carry out the construction
phase; and 6) Continuing risk reduction through hardware and software
prototyping and system simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSST data
management system needs innovative, large-scale database techniques. To meet the
science requirements, the project will need to use supercomputing technologies
and create a general-purpose data and algorithm-parallel framework that will be
available as open source software reusable on any high-performance, parallel
scientific application. Continued development of these plans will yield much
broader benefits beyond the astronomical community. This award also supports the
project's Outreach Advisory Board and the continued development of educational
and public outreach activities intimately connected with the planned scientific
program.