* 1227606
* Economics of Internet Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Liran Einav, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 253,191.00

This award funds research investigating basic questions in the study of markets.
How do buyers respond to changes in prices and sales mechanisms? How do selling
mechanisms evolve over time? How does the volume of trade respond to changes in
sales taxes? The researchers address these questions in the context of a large
internet marketplace using rich data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last decade has
seen a dramatic rise in the scale and importance of internet markets and
platforms. Increasingly, retail commerce, advertising, social activity, job
search and financial transactions take place online. What features of these new
online markets are novel? What can we learn about individual behavior,
competition and market forces from the vast and detailed data being collected by
internet companies? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies a range of
questions related to online commerce, and online behavior more generally. The
team addresses three specific questions: (1) how to use the frequent
experimentation that occurs in online markets to learn about consumer behavior
and market outcomes; (2) what types of sales mechanisms are effective in online
markets and how has that evolved over the last decade; (3) what are the
implications of tax policy for online commerce and the geographic distribution
of online trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional goal for this project is to
develop and illustrate some research strategies that may be broadly applicable
for economists using 'big data' from internet companies to study individual
behavior and market interactions. We suspect that the use of this type of data
is likely to become widespread in economics and social science research, and
will require new tools and methods. The strategies described include ways of
incorporating clickstream and listing data into economic analyses, and dealing
effectively with the scale and heterogeneity inherent in large internet markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will yield broader impact by developing new
answers to several problems of substantive policy interest. The effects of
internet sales tax policy currently are subject to active debate at both the
state and federal level. We also examine questions about the degree of
competition in retail markets, and the types of frictions in these markets,
which are often of interest for competition policy. Finally, we provide a range
of evidence on consumer behavior in a marketplace with tens of millions of
participants in the United States alone, a setting that has been one of the most
active for studying hypotheses about consumer psychology and sophistication.
This type of evidence has taken on increased importance with the growing
influence of behavioral economics on public policy.