* 1227110
* Network for Computational Nanotechnology Cyber Platform
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2023
* Gerhard Klimeck, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mehdi Ferdowsi
* 11/30/2023
* USD 30,792,392.00

Network for Computational Nanotechnology (NCN) was founded in 2002 to advance
nanoscience toward nanotechnology via online simulations on nanoHUB.org. Not
only has nanoHUB become the first broadly successful, scientific end-to-end
cloud computing environment, but it also has evolved well beyond online
simulation. Annually, nanoHUB provides a library of 3,000 learning resources to
195,000 users worldwide. Its 232 simulation tools, free from the limitations of
running software locally, are used in the cloud by over 10,800 annually. Its
impact is demonstrated by 720+ citations to nanoHUB in the scientific literature
with over 4,807 secondary citations, yielding an h-index of 31, and by a median
time from publication of a research simulation program to classroom use of less
than 6 months. Cumulatively, over 14,000 students in over 760 formal classes in
over 100 institutions have used nanoHUB simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a decade of transformational success for a broad
nanotechnology research and education community, significant gaps remain as work
is still performed by isolated individuals and small groups. This fragmentation
by specialty hinders tool and data sharing across knowledge domains. Nano areas
such as bio, photonics, and materials are only beginning to use nanoHUB while
manufacturing, informatics, environmental-health-and-safety are to date not even
represented on nanoHUB. The NCN Cyber Platform proposes to address these gaps
through efforts in three strategic goals to: 1) accelerate research by
transforming nanoscience to nanotechnology through the integration of simulation
with experimentation; 2) inspire and educate the next-generation nanoscience and
nanotechnology workforce; and 3) grow the nanoHUB society that uses and shares
nanoHUB content. Five cross-cutting thrust areas focus on the
cyberinfrastructure (CI) and social dynamics of the nanoHUB virtual society: CI
innovation; content stewardship and node engagement; education research and
precollege/college and lifelong learning; outreach, diversity, and marketing;
and CI operations. The 10-year NCN nanoHUB Cyber Platform vision is that nanoHUB
will be the online nano society that researchers, practitioners, educators and
students depend on day-to-day while simultaneously immersed in professional
practice and computational resources for a multidisciplinary culture of
innovation grounded in cloud services-enabled
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The NCN nanoHUB strategic
plan will answer two fundamental challenges to the next-generation nanoHUB
experience: 1) development of technologies that enable simple management and
publication of scientific data (experimental and simulation) without additional
complex steps: and 2) the establishment of a value system that fosters
publication of data, tools, and lectures similar to today's rewards for journal
publications. CI innovation, developed through the leading HUBzero platform as
well as in cooperation with other CI efforts, will enable new connection points
for research, education, and commercialization, expanded platform tool features
to help users exchange and publish data; combined data and tools for
verification, validation, and engineering activities; and increase immersive and
pervasive features. Through partnerships with professional societies and
commercial publishers, nanoHUB will change how researchers publish their
simulation results through novel interactive journals that reflect a user's
workflow, link directly back to their data, and make the work reproducible. This
value system will drive new content toward nanoHUB, obviating the need for
content generation to be monetarily supported by NCN. Through partnerships with
the three new NCN content nodes and other NSF-funded nano efforts, NCN will
continue to foster content creation to demonstrate value to the authors and will
prototype, test, and host the proposed new technologies for broad
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: NCN has developed processes that
enabled researchers to rapidly deploy their research codes and innovative
tutorials and classes on nanoHUB. To date, these processes harvested research
and educational results from 890 contributors world-wide. Expansion into new
areas of nano research and education, including pre-college education, represent
a huge growth potential for nanoHUB that goes beyond simulation to embracing
data management, search, and exploration. Focus on diversity will continue to be
an integral part of NCN's outreach program, in particular through focused
workshops and new initiatives such as EPICS High. The NCN-pioneered HUBzero
already powers 40 HUBs at 12 institutions, serving a broad range of science and
engineering disciplines and commercialization. Through impact assessment and
continual contributions to HUBzero software stack releases, nanoHUB will
continue to drive impact beyond its nano society into other disciplines and
institutions.