* 1227001
* FSML:  Acquisition of a CTD/Rosette Sampling System for the R/V Gulf Challenger Serving the Marine Laboratories at the University of New Hampshire
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Pennock, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 103,892.00

The University of New Hampshire (UNH) is awarded a grant to purchase a modern
conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) instrument, sampling rosette, and winch
system for the R/V Gulf Challenger. This system will provide a new and essential
capacity in support of research and education at three of its marine
laboratories, including: (a) the Jackson Estuarine Laboratory on the shores of
the Great Bay/Little Bay estuarine system; (b) the Gregg Marine Science Complex,
in New Castle, New Hampshire at the confluence of the Piscataqua River and the
Gulf of Maine; and (c) the Shoals Marine Laboratory, located on the Isles of
Shoals in the Gulf of Maine. The high resolution vertical profiling of
hydrographic properties (conductivity, salinity, temperature), physiochemical
properties (photosynthetically active radiation (PAR)), and surrogates for
biological and geological processes (dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll-a
fluorescence and beam transmittance) that this CTD system will provide is an
essential component of oceanographic field work and will immediately impact
numerous ongoing studies at UNH. These include research on ocean carbonate
chemistry, climate linkages to coastal productivity in the Gulf of Maine,
nutrient over-enrichment within the Great Bay Estuary, coastal and ocean
mapping, and ocean color satellite remote sensing, as well as support of
visiting investigator and student research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of this project include: (a) supporting the education of over 200 undergraduate
and graduate students per year in courses that use the R/V Gulf Challenger; (b)
improving the advanced scientific instrumentation available to graduate students
pursuing research in the Western Gulf of Maine; (c) enhancing training of
undergraduate and high school students undertaking summer courses at the Shoals
Marine Laboratory; (d) supporting the training of the 170 UNH Marine Docents and
the "K to Gray" educational programs that they provide to hundreds of students
annually through New Hampshire Sea Grant; and (e) enhancing public education
through experiential "Discovery Cruises" and through the UNH Marine Program's
"Know the Coast Day" that impact hundreds of the general public each year.