* 1227192
* A compound-specific isotopic approach to quantifying the source of terrestrial organic matter transported by a large river
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Sarah Feakins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2015
* USD 273,088.00

The erosion of organic matter from the land surface and its transport by rivers
reflects a central link between Earth's biological and geological systems.
Pinpointing the sources of organic material within large river systems has been
difficult but is crucial for understanding and quantifying the carbon cycle,
which is an important aspect of the climate system. The goal of this project is
to contribute valuable new information about the sources of organic matter in
rivers by identifying the isotopic composition of specific organic molecules,
namely the waxy molecules from plant leaves, and by tracing these molecules
through their transport downstream. These same molecules are also used for past
climate reconstruction, and this work will gather information about their
sourcing, integration and preservation that will be important for understanding
climate signals. The research will be based in the Kosñipata-Madre de Dios river
system, in the Andean headwaters of the Amazon River in Peru. The Amazon is one
of the planet's largest rivers and most important biogeochemical systems, and
yet the source and fate of organic material eroded from the Andes remains
unclear. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isotopic analysis of carbon in particulate
organic matter (POM) transported by rivers has already found wide application
and contributed to our understanding of the carbon cycle. Previous efforts have
particularly focused on analyses of bulk carbon (e.g., stable carbon isotopic
and radiocarbon composition of bulk POM), representing the average composition
of a complex mixture. This new project will look at the isotopic composition of
specific organic molecules within river POM, particularly the plant leaf waxes,
as well as the plants from which they are derived, and soils in which they are
stored. Leaf wax compounds are useful as they are derived only from terrestrial
biomass, with no complicating input from aquatic organisms. The main focus will
be on the stable hydrogen isotope composition (delta D) of leaf wax, which
reflects the isotopic composition of the source water used by plants. This will
be complemented by radiocarbon analyses through collaboration with Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. Sampling will occur across a gradient in elevations
within the Kosñipata-Madre de Dios. Because there is an elevation gradient in
the delta D of precipitation in the Kosnipata-Madre de Dios, as in many other
mountainous environments, investigators hypothesize that the leaf wax
composition can act as a source fingerprint, to identify where POM is derived,
and to assess how this varies spatially, from high to low elevation, and across
the foreland floodplain, as well as temporally, during storm events. This
information will be vital to constraining the use of biomarker isotopic
composition for paleo-climate reconstruction, and for quantifying and tracing
Andean organic carbon in the Amazon system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program will facilitate a wide-ranging international and inter-disciplinary
collaboration, with research and education activities in three countries (US,
Peru, and UK). The Peruvian fieldwork is supported by collaborations with
colleagues at the field stations and university in Peru, and in turn the PIs
will work with colleagues in Peru to provide research-based educational
materials at the field stations for a range of undergraduate and public visitors
as well as lecture material for undergraduate and graduate degree courses in the
US and in Peru. Student teaching and learning will be a vital component of the
project, with research opportunities for 1 PhD and 4 undergraduate students at
the University of Southern California to be involved in field and laboratory
research on important questions about the carbon cycle and the climate system.