* 1227324
* Combining Prescriptive and Descriptive Decision Theory for Counter-terrorism Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Jason Merrick, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 11/30/2015
* USD 264,403.00

In this project, the Principal Investigator will develop decision analytic
methods for multiple decision makers that prescribe one decision maker's
decisions while descriptively modeling the decisions of the other decision
makers. Decision analysis and game theory have been used extensively to assist
in making counter-terrorism decisions. Recently, methods have been proposed to
allow treatment of defender decisions, attacker decisions, and uncertainties in
one decision model. However, these combined approaches assume that both the
attacker and defender are rational decision makers. The rationality assumption
is appropriate for the defender as the decision analyst is working in a
prescriptive mode to help the defender make a rational and optimal decision.
Descriptive decision theory focuses on how real people actually think and
behave. Such models are judged by their validity in predicting the actual
choices people make and capture many of the ways in which people deviate from
the rational, prescriptive ideal. These theories are more appropriate for
modeling the attacker's decision. This research will require the development of
algorithms that can solve complex influence diagrams with multiple decision
makers using prescriptive theories for the defender and descriptive theories for
the attacker. We will also develop descriptive decision models for multi-
attribute decisions and incorporate them in the prescriptive/descriptive
approach.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research will
benefit the field of homeland security by incorporating more realistic models of
attacker behavior while still providing the optimal, rational prescribed action
of the defender. It will also benefit general decision theory. The approach is
applicable to all decision situations where there are multiple decision makers
and an analyst is attempting to prescriptively help one of them make better
decisions under uncertainty while modeling the decisions made by the other
decision makers. Such situations occur in competitive bargaining and
negotiation, marketing and strategy, as well as other general business
decisions. Furthermore, while the focus of this research is to prescriptively
help one side make better decisions faced with a descriptive model of the other
side, there is the potential for this approach to be used in a descriptive
science such as economics or political science, where the researcher believes
one player in a game is best modeled as rational while the other is best modeled
as boundedly rational. The results of this research will be disseminated to both
prescriptive and descriptive decision researchers to show that the true power of
these methods is found when they are brought together. We will develop iPad
software to construct and analyze such models graphically through an intuitive
touch interface. This could significantly increase the number of people exposed
to this research and the methodologies it integrates.