* 1227550
* DIP: Sustaining ecological communities through citizen science and online collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,206,384.00

This project team is investigating the interaction among citizen scientists
working both with each other and with professionals, along several dimensions.
The cyberlearning environment in which these interactions takes place is built
on an existing cyberinfrastructure, the International Biological Information
System, that the PI team is enhancing to support collaborative ecosystem
modeling. The resultant online, collaborative model-based learning system
enables citizen scientists to make field observations, discuss and represent
data, and collaboratively generate models and recommendations for land use
resource management. Research questions center on how citizen scientists engage
in scientific practice, use models to share understandings, work with
professionals, and use representational tools to interpret their observations.
Additional questions address the use of these tools in the context of land use
management and the nature of collective and individual knowledge that results
from participation in this collaborative model-based learning community. The
project features collaboration among learning scientists, ecologists, and
computer/information scientists, and merges citizen science with cyberlearning
and social networking. Further contributing to its intellectual merit is its
position as one of the first citizen science projects to encourage modeling
practices on a regional scale. The broader impacts of this project are being
felt by its promotion of a better understanding of how cyber-enabled tools can
contribute to learning disciplinary knowledge and scientific practices in
informal settings with adult learners. The project is also enabling citizens to
play a role in locally based environmental management; and it is working with a
statewide master naturalist program through which the participation of
underserved groups in science learning and resource management is encouraged.
Finally, as the project continues, it offers the opportunity to serve as a model
for other statewide master naturalist programs that exist across the country.