* 1227183
* FSML:  Pacific Ocean marine lab technology and research space optimization
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Michael Hadfield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2014
* USD 277,003.00

The University of Hawaii is awarded a grant to advance marine genomics and light
microscopy imaging facilities at the Kewalo Marine Laboratory. Marine labs are
ideally suited to study interactions of organisms at the interface of
terrestrial and marine environments. This proposal requests funds to update
molecular and optical imaging resources leveraging existing strengths to
facilitate cutting edge research and training in broad areas of marine biology
and biotechnology. These instruments will allow students/trainees to exploit the
most modern techniques in DNA sequencing and live cell imaging to address
fundamental problems in cellular, developmental, evolutionary, and environmental
biology of our local marine biodiversity. KML is uniquely situated for the study
of marine life in the sub-tropical northern Pacific environment. Marine habitats
on O`ahu, easily accessed from the Laboratory, include coral reefs, sandy
beaches, soft sediments, estuaries, and the deep sea and open ocean zones. The
marine fauna of Hawai`i reflects a rich tropical diversity: local habitats boast
over 2000 species. Due to the relative isolation of the archipelago, the marine
fauna and flora provide unique opportunities for the study of speciation,
biogeographic distribution and population genetics of coastal marine
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will not only facilitate research
on local fauna of the highly productive NSF-funded marine laboratory (and their
diverse undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral fellow trainees), but
will also bolster the active Visiting Scientist program. Kewalo Marine
Laboratory has a strong record of placing trainees in academic and professional
positions. KML hosts several NSF supported programs (Undergraduate Research
Mentoring, Advanced Technological Education, and Centers for Ocean Science
Education Excellence) that train under-represented Pacific Islander students and
high school teachers. Faculty and students disseminate research results locally
and internationally at scientific meetings, and hold outreach programs for K-12
field trips. The instruments acquired with this award will be used for both
research and teaching, allowing a diverse group of students to gain a better
understanding of key biological processes that will help preserve and appreciate
the unique local environment. For further information about Kewalo Marine
Laboratory, please see the website at: http://www.kewalo.hawaii.edu/