* 1227337
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Does participation in project decision-making affect how intended beneficiaries report project outcomes?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Malgosia Madajewicz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 38,680.00

Improving access to social services such as safe water and sanitation, education
and health care depends on being able to learn what approaches work better than
others, when and why. Household surveys of intended beneficiaries are an
essential source of information about program effectiveness. Recent evidence,
however, suggests that these survey data may be unreliable because program
beneficiaries may change the way they report their behavior as a result of the
program. For example, if a program expands access to safe drinking water, people
living in areas covered by the program may become more likely to report that
they are drinking safe water, even if they are not. Such reporting bias could
distort estimates of the impact of social programs, or comparisons between
different programs, resulting in misleading policy recommendations. This
research measures the size and prevalence of reporting bias in the context of a
recent experiment that investigates whether participation by intended
beneficiaries in decisions made during program implementation improves program
outcomes. A recent randomized controlled trial in Bangladesh has provided the
first experimental evidence that documents how beneficiary participation in
decision making affects outcomes of a social program to provide access to safe
drinking water. Preliminary results, based on reported changes in behavior,
suggest that involving beneficiaries in decision making results in improved
access to safe drinking water, but only when the decision-making structure
incorporates protective measures to avoid the capture of program benefits by
influential individuals or groups. Participation in decision making, however,
may influence not only program outcomes, but also the way in which program
beneficiaries report outcomes in household surveys. The researchers directly
observe the behvior and characteristics of users of the water sources installed,
and compare these observations to water use reported in household surveys in
order to determine the size and extent of reporting bias. In particular, the
researchers measure how reporting bias varies depending on the degree of
community participation in the decision-making process. Because the original
project randomly assigned the decision-making structure, communities that
implemented the program under different decision-making structures were
comparable in terms of all other characteristics. This enables the researchers
to measure the direct effect of community participation in program decision
making on the size and extent of reporting bias. The study will further
understanding of the limitations of using self-reported survey data to measure
the effectiveness of social programs. It will also make two further
contributions: the first direct, experimental evidence on the connection between
community participation in decision making and the likelihood of capture of
program benefits by elite or influential community members. The research will
provide experimental evidence on whether community participation in decision
making improves project sustainability, as measured by maintenance of the
installed water sources.