* 1227143
* FSML: Laboratory Equipment Upgrade for Centre ValBio Rainforest Field Madagascar, Madagascar
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

Centre ValBio is the only modern field station in all of Madagascar. Increasing
research capacity and training through upgrades to technology and research
equipment will in turn dramatically increase the amount and types of research,
the number of researchers, and improve the efficiency, quality, and integration
of research projects. The micro CT scanner alone will enable a path breaking
method of looking at morphology of small vertebrates in three dimensions and
enhancing capabilities to exchange data via high speed internet and directly
connect to the international community through audiovisual updates will also
increase the scientific impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This acquisition of modern
laboratory equipment and GIS capabilities will greatly add to Centre ValBio's
ability to increase the quantity and quality of research conducted at the center
and allows sharing the biodiversity, ecological, and mapping data with other
scientists which broadens both scope and influence. The long term monitoring
possible will have a substantial impact on our understanding of changes in
Madagascar's tropical rainforest ecosystem over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Centre ValBio engages people from a variety of
backgrounds and experience including international researchers, professors and
students. The equipment improvements will allow more researchers to work on more
varied topics pertaining to biology and conservation, such as training programs
being able to incorporate laboratory processing to their field protocols so that
students can get a complete training of the application and integration of
research projects. Bridging field and laboratory based research in the same
location will be attractive for both students and researchers from a diversity
of subdisciplines thus increasing and integrating research will ultimately
produce higher quality projects. For example, undergraduates participating in
Stony Brook University's Study Abroad in Madagascar program will be able to
conduct research in the field, understand the process of going from raw field
data, to laboratory data, to analysis, to publication, and be inspired to
undertake and accomplish scientific research. Malagasy graduate students are
also integral participants in Centre ValBio research and training and 27 years
of capacity building has inspired many Malagasy to follow biodiversity careers,
and these facility improvements will increase the number of Malagasy involved in
modern research and assure their contribution to the international scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more information about Centre ValBio Field
Station please visit: http://www.stonybrook.edu/commcms/centre-valbio/