* 1227812
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Calculated, Constrained, and Co-Opted Decisions: Explaining Agricultural Behavior of Malawian Farmers in Times of Uncertainty
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Bram Tucker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 22,597.00

University of Georgia doctoral student Joseph W. Lanning, under the guidance of
Dr. Bram Tucker, will conduct research that addresses a classic but important
debate about how individuals make decisions. Are they rational, economic
decision makers who, given certain constraints, carefully calculate costs and
benefits or do they make decisions as social actors who are embedded in networks
and structures that share low-cost, but potentially flawed, strategies? The
research will be conducted among farmers in Malawi who are challenged by
persistent hunger, uncertain prices for agricultural inputs, and decreasing soil
fertility. Farmers are faced with decisions to invest in hybrid seeds and
chemical fertilizer or to use alternatives, like planting legumes, to increase
soil fertility and maintain yields.

The researcher asks how variation in agricultural behavior among Malawian
farmers is explained by (1) economic and environmental constraints, (2) ethno-
agricultural knowledge of cause and effect, (3) attitude towards risk, or by (4)
a farmer's use of decision-making short cuts such as just imitating what other
farmers in their social networks do. The project will begin with a census
recording basic demographics and the slope (flat, gentle, steep) of a farmer's
primary maize field. A sample of farmers from the census, capturing variation in
field slope, will participate in field mapping and semi-structured interviews,
focused on economic and environmental constraints. An historical matrix exercise
will explore perceptions of agricultural cause and effect relationships, while a
small-stakes choice experiment will measure attitudes towards risk. Social
network analysis will be used to examine the interactions with and influence of
prestigious and successful farmers in each network.

This project contributes to the development of decision-making models that
unravel the degree to which ecological/economic variables versus social
variables influence behavior. Revealing the determinants to investment in
agriculture may be instrumental in the design of strategies that promote
behaviors that maintain yields while preventing environmental decay or
exacerbation of social and economic inequality.