* 1227306
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:Cross-national differences in vaccination as unselfish behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Gretchen Chapman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2015
* USD 128,042.00

Concern for others may play a significant role in decision making. This research
examines cross-national differences in the role that concern for others plays in
vaccination decisions using surveys and psychological experiments. The research
also examines the influence of this concern on predicted cross-national
influenza vaccination rates through mathematical modeling. This
interdisciplinary research integrates concepts, tools, and objectives from
economics, psychology, mathematics, and epidemiology. The research involves an
age-structured mathematical model of infectious-disease transmission. The model
uses game theory to incorporate age-dependent vaccination decisions and
statistical methods to estimate the probability that individuals will choose to
vaccinate against influenza, based on responses to survey items on concern for
others and perceptions of infection risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on the
USA, Japan, France, and China, this research assesses how contact patterns and
influenza vaccination decision making vary across cultures and how they can
inform nation-specific strategies to promote vaccination. The interface of
biological systems, indivduals' decision making, and social and cultural
influences illuminates the dynamic interplay between an infectious disease and
social decision making. The research is likely to discover novel ways to
increase vaccination coverage against influenza, as well as other diseases, by
understanding pro-social tendencies.