* 1227979
* BRIGE: Thermal Transport in Single-Domain Three-Dimensional Colloidal Nanocrystal Superlattices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1227979&lt;br/&gt;Wang,
Robert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal nanocrystals are inorganic nanoparticles
with organic ligand molecules bonded to their surface. These nanocrystals can
self-assemble into periodic arrays due to the van der Waals interactions between
their ligand molecules. In analogy to the atomic lattice of a crystal, these
nanocrystal assemblies are termed nanocrystal superlattices. These superlattices
are best known for their optical and electronic transport properties, however
their thermal transport properties remain unexplored. I hypothesize that these
superlattices should have an extremely low thermal conductivity because of: (i)
a large interfacial density, (ii) a large acoustic impedance mismatch between
the inorganic nanoparticle cores and organic ligand matrix, and (iii) filtering
of lattice vibrations (i.e. phonons) resulting from its microstructure. A phonon
is a quantum of crystal vibrational energy and is analogous to the photon, which
is a quantum of electromagnetic energy. In non-metallic solids, phonons are the
dominant mode of heat conduction. Do to the exquisite periodicity of these self-
assembled nanocrystals, these superlattices should behave as phononic crystals.
Phononic crystals are artificially structured materials with periodic variations
in acoustic impedance. This periodicity results in a phononic band gap, which
forbids the propagation of phonons in a particular energy range. The phononic
crystal is analogous to the well-known photonic crystal, which uses periodic
variations in refractive index to create a photonic band gap. Phononic crystals
can be used for phonon filters, waveguides, resonators, and
superlenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate these thermal transport
hypotheses, I will (1) Synthesize monodisperse nanocrystals and assemble them
into single-domain three-dimensional nanocrystal superlattices, (2)
Experimentally measure their thermal conductivity as a function of nanocrystal
size, (3) Numerically determine their phonon band structure, and thereby
identify their potential as phononic crystals, and (4) Create a phonon
spectroscopy apparatus to be used in future proposals to experimentally measure
the phonon band gap of these superlattices as a function of nanocrystal
size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposal takes significant
steps forward by investigating thermal transport in nanocrystal superlattices,
which are an unexplored class of materials. It also numerically explores the
phononic crystal properties of these superlattices and motivates future
proposals to experimentally study this topic. Due to the small ~10 nm
superlattice periodicity, their phononic band gap should be in the 100 GHz ? 1
THz range, which is 100x higher than the best-reported 3-dimensional phononic
crystal. Due to their frequency-dependent phonon transport properties, these
materials should have drastically different heat conduction properties than
conventional solids. Furthermore, this type of phonon transport engineering
could lead to significant advances in thermoelectricity and electronics thermal
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: To enhance diversity as well
as integrate research and education, I have developed a comprehensive outreach
plan that addresses instruction at all education levels. This plan includes: (1)
Engaging K-12 students via interactive presentations on-site in their classrooms
that focus on thermal energy and related topics. Included in this presentation
will be hands-on demonstrations that integrate research topics on thermal
transport and thermoelectricity. (2) Designing a laboratory module on colloidal
nanocrystal synthesis and characterization for incorporation into curriculum at
the community college level. The integration of research tools such as
transmission electron microscopy is included. (3) Recruiting individuals from
underrepresented groups into my research and mentoring them toward their
respective career goals. My plan for these initiatives includes metrics to gauge
their effectiveness. For example, the K-12 initiative will be assessed using
concept knowledge questions from the AAAS Science Assessment database. The
questions in this database meet rigorous psychometric standards and have a large
data set with which to compare the answers of the service recipients.