* 1227052
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Experimenting with methods that will cut the costs of attrition
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Duncan Thomas, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 90,297.00

Attrition is the Achilles heel of longitudinal surveys. This award funds
research that will evaluate different methods of tracking and interviewing a
group of individuals who are respondents who have attrited from the third wave
of the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS), an on-going population-representative
longitudinal survey of Mexicans. A unique feature of the MxFLS is that Mexican
migrants to the U.S. are followed; the survey includes data on these migrants.
In this research project, the coPI will choose a sub-sample of these migrants
who are no longer participating in the survey effort. She will locate these
participants (using information from their original Mexican communities to
locate them) and will interview them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information from the
interviews will be combined with the survey data from other respondents who
continued to participate in the survey. The result will be a uniquely rich
analytical sample that fully represents the population of international migrants
from Mexico to the US since 2002. The data will be publicly available. The co PI
will use the data to test whether attrition can be predicted by personal
characteristics, and , importantly, whether attrition can be explained by
changes in the lives of respondents that occurred after the baseline survey
interview. These results will allow her to evaluate the accuracy of standard
post survey adjustments that are widely used to correct for the effects of
attrition, including reweighting and multiple imputation methods. Because the
impact of attrition on estimation and inference will be model-specific, the
comparisons can be conducted in the context of widely-used empirical models of
economic behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Survey methods are widely used by
governments to collect information to inform policy. Therefore the broader
impacts of this research include possible improvements in the methods used to
conduct and analyse these surveys. The research will identify cost-effective
ways to find and interview the hardest to find respondents.