* 1227034
* Network for Computational Nanotechnology - NanoBIO Node
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Umberto Ravaioli, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,777,990.00

This proposal aims to establish the nanoBIO node of the reconfigured Network for
Computational Nanotechnology (NCN) at Illinois. The proposed node will create
extensive online resources with the purpose to position the NCN Cyber Platform
as the focal point for collaborative interactions of a diverse computational and
experimental nanoBIO community. Although the proposal covers a comprehensive
range of activities, the overriding goal is to organize the node as the first
step towards a nanoBIO eco-system, by completing a set of four high-priority
technical objectives: 1) development of critical online computational tools as
essential building blocks for nanoBIO device simulation and experimental
validation; 2) development of workflows linking simulations at different scales
and leading to an extensible online environment for nanoBIO device design; 3)
creation of transformative educational resources for biology, infusing modern
nanoscience concepts via interactive simulation and visualization; 4)
demonstration of a new paradigm for information sharing and knowledge discovery,
with innovative scalable databases for searchable collections of computational
and experimental nanoBIO datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To optimize the
available resources, the nanoBIO node planning strategy has been to organize a
network within the network, reaching out to key bioengineering and life science
groups on campus, followed by forging partnerships with related IGERT programs,
multi-university centers, and industrial collaborations to create a national
fabric of interactions. A key partnership has also been established with the
University of California-Merced to capitalize on existing collaborations in
research and education and to leverage their computational biology based
undergraduate programs. A cooperative effort to design engaging material between
UC-Merced and the School of Molecular and Cellular Biology at UIUC will drive
the NCN to become a revolutionary biology classroom environment that integrates
research with education and stimulates undergraduates to develop
interdisciplinary thinking, mirroring the IGERT mission. These rich online
resources will also facilitate the access and understanding of nanoBIO concepts
in K-12 education. To address the focus on devices and systems, the nanoBIO node
will engage laboratories at UIUC with cutting-edge expertise in computational
biology, bio-device fabrication and information technology, these laboratories
include: the Beckman Institute, the Micro &amp; Nanotechnology Laboratory, the
Institute for Genomic Biology, and the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications. UC Merced will also play an important role in creating and
directing qualified underrepresented students towards pursuing careers in
nanoBIO disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: An immense
challenge faced by designers and manufacturers of nanoBIO devices and systems is
the lack of integrated computational and training tools addressing the multiple
length scales and the physical complexity needed to bridge biology with
engineering. The establishment of a dedicated nanoBIO node of NCN provides an
exciting opportunity to address this and formulates a comprehensive plan with
nation-wide reach to support nanoBIO research and education. The vision for this
NCN nanoBIO node is to form an active community that accelerates the creation of
multidisciplinary computational tools and transformative training materials in
nanoscience and nanoengineering for the design of novel nanoBIO devices and
systems that will have a positive influence on our quality of life and
environment. This effort will have a major impact on the development of human
resources by facilitating training. The availability of online tools will also
benefit industry, particularly small businesses and nanoBIO start-ups needing
access to specialized resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
urgency to contain health care costs and improve services, the imperatives to
provide safe and plentiful food supplies, and the need for efficient bio-fuel
production as part of a sustainable energy strategy all point to biology as the
pivotal science of the future, and nanotechnology as the enabler. The ultimate
goal of the nanoBIO node is to create resources for the discovery of devices
suitable for nanoBIO applications, and to train the next generation of leaders
who will translate nanoBIO technologies from research to the marketplace. These
are crucial steps toward sustained transformation and revitalization of the
health care industry, with broad potential impact on the creation of new high-
tech jobs in an important manufacturing sector in the US. A new breed of
scientists and engineers, with expertise across multiple physical and life
science disciplines, is needed to sustain this vision. The node aspires to be
the catalysts for truly innovative interdisciplinary education opportunities,
putting forward an exciting educational plan which lays the foundations for a
multi-faceted and integrated K-to-PhD pathway.