* 1227098
* Laboratory Planning at Mountain Lake Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Edmund Brodie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,998.00

The University of Virginia is awarded a grant to develop a renovation program
and concept plan for updating and repurposing Lewis Hall, the primary research,
teaching, and outreach building at the Mountain Lake Biological Station (MLBS).
MLBS was founded in 1929 by the University as an inland biological field station
for research and teaching in the Southern Appalachians
(http://www.mlbs.virginia.edu/). In the last 40 years the Station's scientific
research has focused on field based population studies with emphases in
evolution, genetics, ecological genetics, population and community ecology,
behavioral physiology, and conservation. MLBS is a full service residential
facility that offers the complete range of scientific, instructional, and
logistical support expected at a modern field station. Lewis Hall was
constructed in 1939 and has not been renovated since. While the building is
structurally sound and worth preserving for historical and aesthetic reasons,
its basic internal layout, utility infrastructure, and technical facilities
supporting the Station's core missions have degraded and are out of date. The
one-year planning project will produce a program document outlining function and
faculty needs in a refurbished Lewis Hall. The project has four phases: Phase
#1. Collecting input from all field station stakeholders (MLBS current and
potential future researches, instructors and outreach populations); Phase #2.
Engaging the national field station directors' community (eg. Organization of
Biological Field Stations) in a professionally lead workshop, and visiting
sister field stations; Phase #3. Working with planning professionals on campus
to generate a professional planning document.

Twenty-nine biological research programs from across the country and around the
world call Mountain Lake home. Fifty-one graduate students currently rely on
MLBS for their doctoral work. Twenty summer courses have been offered in the
past five years. Conference and group use of the Station has doubled to over
1,000 user-days in the past year. This project will represent a huge step
forward in providing new research, instructional, and outreach services. Central
to the planning effort will be the creation of public outreach facilities. MLBS
will soon be able to provide resources and services to the general public, K-12,
community college, and other regional populations. The teaching and research
missions of the Station will also be enhanced, benefiting university-based
research programs, faculty from small colleges and other research groups,
graduate and undergraduate training programs, UVA Summer Session courses, and
our increasing number of external visiting groups, fieldtrips, and conferences.
We are confident the improvements resulting from this planning project will
increase use and diversity at Mountain Lake.