* 1227985
* Justice During Civil Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Cyanne Loyle, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2015
* USD 74,575.00

Justice and rule-of-law measures have often been touted as a solution to prevent
the resumption&lt;br/&gt;of violence following conflict; yet little work has
been undertaken to understand the prevalence&lt;br/&gt;of these practices while
conflict remains ongoing. These measures include trials,
truth&lt;br/&gt;commissions, reparations, as well as alternative accountability
processes such as amnesties,&lt;br/&gt;purges, and exiles. While existing
research has focused on the implementation of justice&lt;br/&gt;processes once
conflict has ended, pilot data by the PIs suggests that these same practices
are&lt;br/&gt;often implemented during violence. The current state of the
literature provides little theoretical&lt;br/&gt;understanding as to when and
why during-conflict justice processes are implemented and their&lt;br/&gt;likely
effect on the duration of conflict and durability of
peace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the implementation of
during-conflict justice to understand which&lt;br/&gt;processes, if any, a
government implements during internal armed conflicts and in
which&lt;br/&gt;contexts such processes are pursued. Through the collection of a
new cross-national dataset&lt;br/&gt;covering the implementation of justice
measures during all civil wars since the Second World&lt;br/&gt;War, this
research greatly improves our understanding of the presence of during-conflict
justice&lt;br/&gt;and expands the current state of research on both the
implementation of justice processes and the&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of conflict more
broadly. This project provides an evidentiary basis to determine
the&lt;br/&gt;conditions under which implementation is more likely, to
facilitate the development of these&lt;br/&gt;conditions in countries that may
benefit from justice measures and to prevent the development
of&lt;br/&gt;circumstances detracting from these goals. Furthermore, the results
of this research will be used&lt;br/&gt;to understand the potential misuses of
justice measures for goals not related to conflict resolution&lt;br/&gt;and
promotion of the rule-of-law, leading to more effective conflict termination
strategies and&lt;br/&gt;shortening the duration of civil conflict.