* 1227168
* DIP: 'Hard Fun' Learning Mathematics: Stimulating Number Sense
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Justin Halberda, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,350,000.00

This project focuses on development of number sense in 7 to 11 year old students
through a 3D action game that will train the brain. The project tests a
hypothesis that playing a number-sense action game can help children learn
beyond the game, making them better overall at number-line sense, precision of
numerosity, speed of numerical judgments, and ability to multitask numerical
tasks. The innovation is twofold: a game, adapted from first-person shooter
games, to train number sense, and a platform that makes it easy to vary aspects
of the game (e.g., repetition, speed, number of possibilities) to be able to
analyze what is it that is making a difference with respect to learning.
Research is identifying the qualities of computer games that will train the
brain to be automatic in its judgments and at qualities of experiences that
promote such automaticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to promote
fundamental mathematical competence in a way that makes the mathematics learning
feel effortless and genuinely fun. In particular, the aim is to help children
develop number sense, an ability to very quickly make estimates and numerical
judgments. Such capability is key to keeping up in mathematics; children without
that sense tend to lose interest in mathematics because mathematical computation
becomes too frustrating. Training number sense, and, in turn, fostering
mathematical performance, should allow more learners to think of themselves as
"good at math." Cultivating a child's interest in mathematics from a young age
has been identified as key to feeding STEM career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vehicle for promoting such mathematics learning
is a new type of video game with foundations in first-person shooter games.
Rather than shooting, players cast spells that require quick numerical
estimates. There is reason to believe that such a game will be as engaging as
first-person shooter games are. First-person shooter games have been shown to
increase attention and executive control in adults, the kinds of cognitive
skills known to foster academic achievement. Because engaging video games will
reach and be played by a wide range of children; such a game has potential to
reach at-risk populations who most need to better develop their number sense and
those important skills. The intent is for the game to be used in informal
settings, providing a complementary tool for educators to foster mathematics
skills. Research that is done in the context of this game will identify the
characteristics of game play that promote skill automation, foundational
knowledge that is needed to provide a road map for creating child-friendly
consumer video games to improve other important aspects of core cognition beyond
number sense.