* 1227548
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Improving Drinking Water Quality amongst Poor Households
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Robert Mendelsohn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2014
* USD 30,904.00

Inadequate drinking water access is one of the most significant and persistent
environmental health problems in developing countries, affecting more than a
billion people and extinguishing the lives of millions of children. The site
chosen for this study, Karachi (Pakistan), like many large cities in the
developing world, has poor water quality and high child mortality due to
diarrheal disease (11% of under-five deaths). Numerous interventions have found
that chlorinating drinking water is an effective solution. However, most
interventions find a significant drop in post-intervention
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will help to answer the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;Is the lack of long-term usage and demand because
households conclude that the technology does not benefit them?&lt;br/&gt;Or, is
it that households are unable to observe any real gain (a problem in recording
and observing information? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this, a yearlong
field experiment will be undertaken that attempts to determine why households'
long run use of cheap, easily accessible and easy-to-use decontamination
technologies (like chlorine tablets) declines over time after project
interventions that provide the technology for free. Specifically, it will tested
whether households are able to observe the short-term health benefits of
improved drinking water quality by having households use an easy-to-understand
information tool that records both the incidence/prevalence of diarrhea amongst
household members and the use of chlorine tablets. By explicitly recording and
observing the prevalence of diarrhea and the use of chlorine, the marginal
household should choose to use chlorine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is different to other studies for the following reasons. Policy can
influence behavior by impacting price and information. In terms of price, the
impact of free provision on household health and drinking water quality has been
extensively studied and the results are clear: uptake is high, diarrheal
morbidity is drastically reduced and drinking water quality is improved.
However, despite high uptake and apparent effectiveness during the intervention
phase of such projects, post-project demand and use for treatment technologies
tends to be low (even with low/zero prices post-intervention). Information
interventions have a mixed record: they suggest minor adjustments in behavior,
while the problem of long term behavioral change is left unaddressed. No study
that uses information is able to clearly trace the particular mechanism through
which information changes drinking water treatment behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, no study has yet looked at the idea of
getting households to generate and use their own information. Jalan and
Somanathan (2008) and Madajewicz (2007) provide third-party/authority
information, while Kremer et al. (2009) and Dupas (2010) look at the impact of
peers, all "outside" information channels. Moreover, most studies assume that
the link between intervention and impacts is fully observed by households but it
is worth questioning this assumption. Finally, Dupas (2010) and Kremer et al.
(2009) suggest that more vulnerable households are not more likely to use and
sustain usage of a health technology. This implies that there is a gap between
households' information-set and the "true" information-set.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will attempt to bridge this gap by making the
impacts of water chlorination apparent to households.