* 1227788
* Thermal Transport in Diamond Thin Films: Roles of the Nanostructure and Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Raj Singh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2015
* USD 320,000.00

PI: Raj N. Singh, Univ. of Cincinnati&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1227788&lt;br/&gt; Heat
dissipation in high performance microprocessors and power semiconductor devices
is a critical challenge facing the microelectronics industry. One of the most
effective ways to remove heat from integrated circuits (ICs) is to use materials
with high thermal conductivity in contact with ICs. In this context, a high
thermal conductivity material, especially diamond with the highest thermal
conductivity of any known materials, is promising for thermal management of ICs.
In particular, the objective of this research is to synthesize layered thin
films of diamond in which one layer (nanocrystalline diamond-NCD) will provide
smooth surfaces for lower interface resistance and the second layer
(microcrystalline diamond-MCD) will result in high thermal conductivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will involve the synthesis of NCD and MCD
films individually and as layered NCD/MCD films using an in-house microwave
plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition system and measuring the thermal
properties using a custom-built modulated photothermal reflectance system. A
novel approach of nanoseeding will be employed to reduce roughness and interface
thermal resistance. Advanced materials characterization techniques will be used
to identify defects in the films and relate to mean free path for phonon
scattering for identifying the dominant defect controlling thermal transport in
layered diamond thin films. The proposed research is significant and
transformative because the results will be, to the best of our knowledge, the
first comprehensive study on the effect of processing on the nanostructure,
defects, and thermal transport mechanisms in NCD and layered NCD/MCD films with
improved thermal properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has
potentials for enormous payoffs because thermal management plays a critical role
in several high-technology areas including optoelectronics, microelectronics,
power electronics and microelectromechanical systems. In addition, with the
current emphasis on conserving our limited natural resources for energy
production, efficient thermal management strategies will result in direct
savings in cooling costs leading to lower energy consumption and a significant
positive environmental impact. An essential component of this research will be
training and education of students and post docs, and dissemination of the
results through publications in journals and presentations at conferences. The
minority/women and high school students will be mentored and exposed to research
through several programs at our university. A significant outreach to high
schools is proposed through camps for teachers and students.