* 1227514
* SAA Scholarships Program
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Chip Colwell, Society For American Archaeology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 95,425.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Society for American Archaeology
will fund training for Native American students and heritage professionals in
order to increase the number of qualified Native American and Native Hawaiian
individuals participating in science and archaeology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1998, the SAA has administered the NSF Scholarship
for Archaeological Training grant, which funds three Native Americans or Native
Hawaiians each year, who are high school seniors, undergraduate students,
graduate students, or tribal or Native Hawaiian cultural preservation program
personnel, to pursue training in archaeological methods. The NSF support helps
champion the SAA's own grants, which include the Arthur C. Parker Scholarship,
Undergraduate Archaeology Scholarship, and Graduate Archaeology
Scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the NSF grants to the SAA scholarship
program have directly supported 37 Native Americans and Native Hawaiians,
representing many communities throughout North America, who would not otherwise
have been able to obtain training in archaeological methods and theory, and to
carry that understanding back to their Native communities. The NSF award
provides meaningful training experiences and complements the SAA's Board-
directed efforts to make the archaeological profession more inclusive and
diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding remains vitally important to support
training for the growing number of Native American and Native Hawaiian
individuals and communities interested in archaeology. Native peoples constitute
a fraction of the discipline's professional class- by most accounts less than 1%
of the profession. This percentage is woefully inadequate for a discipline that
takes as its major focus, and values the participation of, Native peoples.
Recognizing this program, the SAA has taken a leadership role in creating this
program to provide financial support for Native peoples with an interest in
archaeology. This program substantially fulfills the SAA's efforts to build a
diverse profession and build bridges between the archaeological and Native
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program's impacts include the new
opportunities for Native Americans and Native Hawaiians to bring to their
communities a better understanding of archaeology and valuable skills to support
community initiatives in heritage research and preservation. As these students
become professionals, they expand the discipline's diversity. The scholarship
recipients also contribute to breaking down the false dichotomy between
"archaeologists" on one hand and "Native people" on the other. Such training
provides to tribes an archaeological science foundation for directing
preservation and cultural resource programs in accordance with their own goals
and values.