* 1227784
* Deltaic Resilience and the Genesis of Mesopotamian Cities (Iraq)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Jennifer Smith, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 176,946.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Jennifer Pournelle, Carrie Hritz
and Jennifer Smith will undertake a three year program of archaeological,
geoarchaeological and geomorphological research in southern Iraq. The focus is
on wetland regions which the investigators believe may have played a major role
in the rise of Mesopotamian civilization. These marshlands were originally
difficult to survey but draining in recent years has provided a unique
opportunity - a window which likely will soon be closed - as the region is
restored to its prior state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tigris-Euphrates delta of
southern Iraq has been the locus of a continuous urban presence for over five
millennia. The height of early Sumerian civilization there at the onset of the
4th millennium BC marked a degree of economic differentiation, socio-political
complexity and urbanization theretofore unseen anywhere in the world. While the
Sumerians made use of irrigable plains and pasture lands in the surrounding
regions, it is also postulated that the society drew significant wealth and
transportation advantage from their situation in a deltaic system that provided
varied and abundant resources even through cycles of dramatic climatic
fluctuation. The investigators believe that this "deltaic resiliency" sustained
the urbanizing processes through multiple systemic changes involving both social
and environmental change. Compared with adjacent environments relatively little
is known about this deltaic component and the investigators will collect
relevant archaeological, geological and paleoenvironmental data. They will both
reconstruct past environmental patterns and examine human responses within this
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One important practical result of this project
will be the strengthening of archaeological ties between the US and Iraq and the
opportunity this research may provide for future archaeological projects in the
country. The results of the work may also guide projects to restore
environmental resources to Iraq's southern cities, promote resilient
environmental management strategies, and support sustainable lifeways for the
future. Both American and Iraqi students will be involved in the research.