* 1227103
* Development of In Vivo Marine Magnetic Spectral Resonance Imaging (MMSRI) Capabilities
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,03/31/2014
* David Eggleston, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2014
* USD 332,590.00

North Carolina State University's Center for Marine Sciences and Technology
(CMAST) is awarded a grant to construct dedicated space to accommodate operation
of a wide bore research Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy (MRI/S)
magnet upgraded with advanced gradient coils and shims. This type of resource is
currently unavailable in the U.S. so this will be the only large bore high field
magnet dedicated to the study of marine organisms in the country. The coastal
location of the wide bore instrument, supported by a cross-disciplinary team of
marine scientists, MRI and biochemical engineers, biologists and biochemists,
will make it possible to apply advanced MMR/IS methods to new areas of basic and
applied marine biology research at higher trophic levels than previously
feasible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new facility will enable the use of complex
MRI/S techniques, including inter-leave 13C/31P CSI, to quantify normal
biochemical function in living marine organisms and to study the effects of
environmental stressors at a biochemical level to better understand impacts of
climate change and ocean acidification on marine organisms. The large bore
instrument will facilitate studies of metabolic flux, allowing evaluation of the
impact of multiple stressors on physiological responses of marine organisms, and
prediction of impacts at population, community and ecosystem levels. The
capabilities of the new facility to investigate biochemical adaptations to
extreme marine environments also offers an opportunity to identify novel
physiological adaptations and key pathways in evolution in addition to
elucidating the chemical basis of seafood quality and optimal utilization to
contribute to the conservation of marine resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
advanced magnetic resonance facility at CMAST will improve access to MRI/S tools
for a diverse workforce of scientists, engineers, and graduate and undergraduate
students focused on coastal and marine questions, leveraging the teaching and
research resources of CMAST to enable broad cross disciplinary studies. The new
facility will be easily accessible to scientists at four major nearby marine
laboratories operated by NCSU, UNC, Duke University, and NOAA, and available for
guest scientists domestically and internationally. Undergraduate science
students will have opportunities to join research teams using the instrument
through and the CMAST summer intern program, the Merial Summer Research Scholars
Program, and programs supported by the NCSU Office of Undergraduate Research
Programs through their university wide initiatives to mentor undergraduate men
and women in science research. More information about CMAST can be found at:
www.cmast.ncsu.edu.