* 1227329
* Developing and Testing New Geospatial Approaches in Paleoanthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Charles Emerson, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/28/2014
* USD 180,459.00

Paleontologists search for fossils today in very nearly the same ways that our
predecessors have since the beginnings of the discipline in the nineteenth
century. They study geological and topographic maps in order to locate places
where fossils of a certain age may be found, and then they walk long distances
with their eyes scouring the ground for hints of eroding fossils. As a result,
many important paleontological sites are literally stumbled upon, and chance and
luck continue to play a large role in the success or failure of many
paleontological expeditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
research utilizes state-of-the-art imaging methods and analytical techniques
from remote sensing and the spatial sciences to develop and test new predictive
models for determining where paleontologists should concentrate their efforts in
the field in order to maximize their effectiveness at finding productive fossil-
bearing localities. The investigators will use Landsat imagery as well as high-
resolution, commercially available satellite imagery to determine the spectral
characteristics of known productive localities in the Eocene deposits of
Wyoming's Great Divide Basin. A number of analytical approaches will be tested
for their ability to identify the spectral signatures of productive localities,
including artificial neural network analysis and geographic object-based image
analysis. The research team will spend two summer field seasons searching those
areas on the ground that are predicted to have a high potential to be fossil-
bearing, in order to statistically evaluate the success of the predictive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international research team includes
specialists from vertebrate paleontology, paleoanthropology, geology and
geography, and their aim is to stimulate the application of new approaches from
the geographic and spatial sciences to the sciences of paleoanthropology and
paleontology. Broader impacts include the training of undergraduate and graduate
students in this cross-disciplinary approach to field-based anthropological
science, and development of web-based tools for education and outreach.