* 1227964
* Collaborative Research: Paleobiogeography, paleoecology, and continued investigation of a diverse, terminal Miocene, primate-bearing fauna from southern China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Denise Su, Cleveland Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 118,947.00

The early and middle Miocene (ca. 23 to 11 million years ago) witnessed an
expansion of the world's tropical and subtropical forests, and an increase in
the diversity and distribution of mammals that thrived in forests with low
seasonality and high productivity. Apes flourished under these conditions in the
Old World. The contraction of subtropical forests in the late Miocene in Eurasia
resulted in a decline in the diversity and abundance of apes, and the rise of
monkeys and other mammals able to survive in more open and seasonal habitats.
Several fossil sites in southern China provide evidence of this critical
transition. In this project, the fossil site of Shuitangba, Yunnan Province,
China, will be investigated because it has yielded the abundant and well-
preserved remains of many mammal species of terminal Miocene age (~6.1 mya).
Among them are an ape and a monkey, the first such co-occurrence in the Miocene
of Eurasia. Recovery and detailed study of the fossils by an international team
of American and Chinese investigators will make possible the characterization of
the paleoenvironment of Shuitangba and the nature and adaptations of the site's
many species, especially its primates and carnivores. Direct comparison of the
Shuitangba biota with others of similar age in eastern Asia will provide a
clearer idea of the nature and pace of environmental evolution in the region.

Shuitangba captures a unique snapshot of the transition from the widespread
evergreen forests of the Miocene to the more heterogeneous and seasonal habitats
that followed. This project thus promotes the understanding of an ecosystem
poised at the tipping point of a major change. The Shuitangba fauna and
environment provide an unusually clear picture of a distinctive regional
ecosystem that contained long-established species alongside new arrivals. A
better understanding of the adaptations of species within such ecosystems may
shed light on the dynamics of modern unstable environments.

This project fosters strong international collaboration with Chinese scholars,
including advanced training for Chinese paleoanthropologists, paleobiologists,
and fossil preparators, and promotes public science education in China through
media coverage and development of museum displays. A junior US scientist will be
integrally involved in the research, and US undergraduate students also will
receive substantial participatory research training.