* 1227867
* BRIGE: Reprogramming tumor associated macrophages: Engineering polymer surface properties to discriminately deliver drugs
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kaitlin Bratlie, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,998.00

PI: Bratlie, Kaitlin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1227867&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Macrophages can be
activated classically or alternatively to produce pro-inflammatory or pro-
angiogenic molecules, respectively. Tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) are
alternatively activated cells that promote tumor growth. TAMs can be
reprogrammed through drug delivery to classically activated macrophages, which
kill neoplastic cells. Discriminatory drug delivery to TAMs presents a very
attractive cancer therapeutic in which alternatively activated macrophages could
be reconditioned to destroy malignant cells. Therefore, our long term goal is to
deliver drugs discriminately to TAMs that will promote tumor regression. The
objective of this proposal, which is the out next step in pursuit of that goal,
is to determine what surface properties allow for selective targeting to
alternatively activated macrophages. This proposal theorizes that discriminatory
targeting to TAMs can be achieved through engineering microparticle compositions
such that phagocytosis is preferentially enhanced in alternatively activated
macrophages. The rationale for the proposed research is that, once it is known
what material parameters influence selective phagocytosis in alternatively
activated macrophages, new and innovative strategies for designing anti-cancer
therapeutics will be uncovered. This hypothesis will be tested through the
following aims: 1) Determine what microparticle properties result in the
facilitation of selective&lt;br/&gt;phagocytosis in vivo; 2) Engineer polymeric
systems to determine the best conditions for selectively delivering
reprogramming drugs to TAMs. The proposed research is expected to contribute in-
depth understanding of how best to engineer the drug delivery vehicle such that
TAMs are reprogrammed to destroy cancerous cells. This work will generate
information on what polymer parameters and particle configurations augment drug
delivery to macrophages. This contribution is significant, because it is
expected to revolutionize anti-cancer drug delivery through exploiting polymer
properties and particle compositions to discriminately target TAMs, such that
they produce molecules that are toxic to tumors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Developing novel anti-cancer therapeutics will have a
tremendous impact on cancer patients. In addition, this research is expected to
be able to improve knowledge pertaining to how to best engineer a drug delivery
vehicle to target alternatively activated macrophages. This has the potential to
positively impact people stricken with cardiovascular disease, people on
antiretroviral therapy, and patients with autoimmune diseases. This research and
the goals contained within are ideal for actively involving students - from high
school to graduate students - in the lab. Through collaboration with the Program
for Women in Science and Engineering (PWSE), high school girls will be
introduced to this research. In addition, an undergraduate currently working on
this project has been recruited through the PWSE program. We live in a wireless
world in which large amount of communications are digital. To take full
advantage of this modern world, the research done in this proposal, along with
the knowledge obtained from the literature, will be combined to form an
iPad/iPhone app. This app will disseminate the knowledge gleaned through this
study to all types of students, and may be particularly impactful for students
in areas of the country/world in which these sorts of classes and professionals
are not readily available.