* 1227122
* Facilities to enhance collaborative research at UGA Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Quint Newcomer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2015
* USD 104,019.00

The University of Georgia Research Foundation is awarded a grant to renovate a
wet laboratory, add a back-up power generator, and improve network
infrastructure at their UGA Costa Rica field station in San Luis, Costa Rica.
UGA Costa Rica is rapidly becoming a premier study-abroad location, hosting over
1600 students, faculty, and other leaders from more than 57 educational
institutions and NGOs in 2011. These enhanced facilities will improve continuity
of operations, connectivity, and scientific research collaboration capabilities
at the station. Located at the Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve the station has
built a unique relationship with the nearby farming community of San Luis
enabling unprecedented integration of training, outreach, service learning, and
social and ecological research opportunities. Research opportunities range from
focal studies in traditional disciplines to broad socio- ecological studies
addressing conservation challenges throughout the Bellbird Biological Corridor
(BBC), connecting the cloud forest to the Pacific coast. BBC research needs
include addressing important problems facing ecosystems and human communities as
a result of historic deforestation and current land use conflicts. UGA offers
rich study abroad experiences at the field station and the renovation of the wet
laboratory will increase utility and productivity in conducting scientific
research. The back-up generator will eliminate frequent power interruptions
affecting communications, sample processing and storage, and computational work.
Finally, a new server and network switch will enhance network access and data
sharing applications, allowing UGA Costa Rica to host a much needed web mapping
service to share data with researchers and stakeholders.

Through the tight integration of research, education and community service at
UGA Costa Rica, enhanced facilities will not only improve research capacity but
will also enhance the training of more than a thousand students each year and
improve environmental literacy in the surrounding communities. Providing a
foundation for reliable connectivity and effective data-sharing will enhance
collaborations between disciplines and institutions, among U.S. and Costa Rican
academies, industry and government, and also with other international partners
through individual research projects. As there is currently no other reliable
hub for geo-spatial information-sharing in the Bellbird Biological Corridor,
that aspect alone will serve many partners and researchers alike. This project
directly addresses the broader impacts of our science by reaching out to current
and future scientists in the U.S. and in Costa Rica, as well as addressing local
and regional needs for information to inform conservation decision- making.

For more information about UGA Costa Rica please visit:
http://www.externalaffairs.uga.edu/costa_rica/index.php/front_desk/overview