* 1227877
* Collaborative Research: A Neurodynamic Programming Approach for the Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Nanoscale Neuromorphic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Silvia Ferrari, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop new neurodynamic programming (NDP)
learning algorithm for controlling neuron-level activity (spiking) and synaptic-
level plasticity in CMOS/memristor devices, such that the subsequent system-
level response achieves desired sensorimotor behavioral goals. The approach is
to uses a radically new training paradigm that induces functional plasticity by
controlling the neural activity of selected input neurons via programming
voltages, rather than by directly manipulating the synaptic weights, as do
virtually all existing training algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop a model of the closures required
to translate synaptic-level plasticity into functional-level plasticity that
results into high-level behavioral goals and problem solving abilities. The same
critical challenge has been identified in neuroscience research aimed at reverse
engineering the brain, and in the regulation of deep-brain stimulation (DBS).
Due to this knowledge gap, even when a measure of adequate or desired behavior
is available, it may not be easily utilized to stimulate a neural network at the
cell level in order to produce the appropriate macroscopic
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;The learning model
developed in this research will be used toward the development of nanoscale
neuromorphic systems that mimic neuro-biological architectures in the nervous
system. Thanks to their abilities to recreate the synaptic plasticity, device
density, scalability, and fault-tolerance of biological neuronal networks, these
neuromorphic systems can enable a wide range of technological advancements, such
as intelligent robots with highly-sophisticated sensorimotor skills, and
neuroprosthetic devices capable of adapting to changing conditions and
environments.