* 1227296
* Preparing New Instructors to Deliver the I-Corps Curriculum to Scientists and Engineers: A Pilot Training Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 03/31/2013
* USD 29,945.00

LEAD INSTITUTION: National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
(NCIIA)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;The NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) program helps NSF-funded scientists and engineers develop skills
in evaluating their research for potential practical, economically scalable
applications. The National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance (NCIIA)
is conducting a "train-the-trainer" workshop to help develop a scalable model
that can support the planned expansion of the I-Corps program. The associated
I-Corps training activity involves an eight-week course that exposes I-Corps
teams to the Lean Launchpad business model design and customer development
process (developed by Steve Blank). NCIIA, in cooperation with the founding
members of the I-Corps teaching team, is providing a workshop to train six new
instructors; while also conducting a formative evaluation of the instructor-
training program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE&lt;br/&gt;Workshop
participants are leaving with an expanded set of skills that give them the tools
necessary to evaluate and translate research into applications that can benefit
society. As a result of the training, participants are able to determine the
commercial feasibility of technology derived from NSF-funded research. Feedback
from the evaluation process is informing improvements in both the instructor-
training program and the I-Corps curriculum, in an effort to help guide the
future program expansion to greater numbers of teams in different regions across
the nation. The workshop is training an initial a network of instructors who can
improve and adapt the program model as it is disseminated to new institutions
and regions.