* 1227579
* Photochemistry in Organic Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Sergey Nizkorodov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 563,433.00

Secondary Organic Aerosols (SOA) contribute to radiative forcing on climate both
directly and indirectly and also affect urban air quality. The main goals of
this award are: (1) To investigate the mechanism and significance of direct and
indirect photolysis processes occurring in SOA and (2) to investigate aqueous
photochemistry involving water-soluble SOA during cloud-processing. Model SOA
will be generated in a smog chamber and exposed to simulated solar radiation in
various states: Dry SOA at low relative humidity (RH), hydrated SOA at high RH,
SOA dissolved in water at concentrations relevant to clouds and fogs, and SOA in
frozen aqueous extracts. The molecular composition of SOA will characterized by
high-resolution mass spectrometry and other analytical methods before and after
exposure to the simulated solar radiation. In a parallel set of experiments,
photodissociation action spectra of SOA will be measured using unique
spectroscopic and mass-spectrometric tools developed in the PI's laboratory. The
absolute photodissociation quantum yields and detailed mechanisms of photolysis
will be determined for several representative carbonyl compounds embedded in
SOA-like materials. This information will be used to estimate rates of
photochemical reactions occurring inside atmospheric SOA particles and inside
cloud droplets containing dissolved SOA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide molecular-level understanding of photochemical reactions in SOA and in
aqueous solutions of SOA material. Results will also contribute to related
disciplines investigating (1) health effects of aged organic matter in air and
(2) processes involving interactions between solar radiation and complex organic
mixtures in other media (e.g., photodegradation of organic polymers and
coatings, photochemistry of soil organics, photodegradation of dissolved organic
matter, and water purification). The project will support two graduate students
and findings will be widely disseminated through presentations at major
conferences and peer-reviewed publications. The principal investigator and
student will also communicating the importance and excitement of fundamental
research to the general public through ongoing educational and outreach
activities including a two-week long summer workshop that provides hands-on
laboratory training for high school science teachers and presentations, lab
tours, and educational seminars for the general public.