* 1227297
* PESO: Breast Cancer Invasion in Crowded and Locally Stiff Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Laura Kaufman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 485,001.00

This PESO award to Columbia University by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research is cofunded by the Materials and Surface
Engineering program (ENG/CMMI); and the Office of Physical Sciences-Oncology
(OPSO) of the National Cancer Institute. With this award, in vitro approaches
will be pursued to elucidate early events in breast cancer invasion, and will
develop an understanding the role of collagen I in this process. Experiments
will be designed to test the hypothesis that breast cancer's invasive success
correlates more strongly with cell ability to change shape than with cell
ability to dissolve structural proteins. Many women and men die of breast cancer
every year in the United States, and these deaths are attributed to a
progression of the disease that includes invasion of the tumor followed
ultimately by distant metastasis. Experiments will be designed to test the
hypothesis that breast cancer invasive success correlates more strongly with
cell ability to change shape than with cell ability to dissolve structural
proteins. Also will be studied the relative importance of cell shape change and
protein dissolution during the breast cancer cell invasion in collagen I
environments with variably stiff pores of given size. The planned in vitro
experiments on breast cancer invasion in environments that recapitulate key
aspects of the biochemistry, topology, and mechanical properties of the breast
cancer environment hold promise for providing detailed understanding of early
invasive events in breast cancer. As part of the educational and outreach
activities, undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists
will be trained in interdisciplinary biophysical sciences with a focus on modern
imaging techniques. Moreover, the PI will develop lectures for elementary school
students that will be presented by the PI at a local elementary school, and by
teachers at distant schools through the use of web-based
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant improvements in the treatment
of breast cancer over the past decades, many people die from this disease every
year. In almost all cases, these deaths are preceded by metastasis of the tumor
to distant sites. Before this metastasis occurs, the tumor invades locally,
setting the stage for spreading to distant organs. In this proposed research,
the PI will study early invasive events in breast cancer with an in vitro model
that captures and allows control of key aspects of the biochemistry, topology,
and mechanical properties of the breast cancer environment in vivo. Findings
from the proposed research will ultimately be used to develop new strategies in
breast cancer treatment. The proposed work will also have substantial
educational outreach impacts. The PI is strongly committed to educating young
scientists and potential scientists. In addition to training undergraduate and
graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists, the PI will work towards
increasing research opportunities for additional undergraduate students at
Columbia University though service on the Rabi Scholar Faculty Committee. The PI
will extend her already substantial interaction with younger students by
developing lectures on microscopy and cell migration that are appropriate for
elementary school students. These lectures will be presented at a local charter
elementary school primarily serving students underrepresented in the STEM
fields. The lectures will also be converted to web-based learning modules, with
downloadable slides, lecture guides, and demonstration videos for use in
classrooms.