* 1227222
* Synchrony of EEG and Action In Real-Time Toddler-Parent Social Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Gedeon Deak, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 195,000.00

Researchers, parents, and teachers all assume that infants and children learn
from their social experiences. However, little is known about how social
learning happens in infants and children. For example, even in a simple turn-
taking game, how do toddlers and adults adapt to one another? How do they fall
into a "rhythm," or affect one another's next turn? When and why do toddlers and
parents show enjoyment of the game and of one another? We know almost nothing
about how toddler's brains produce these social actions and emotions. The
proposed research will measure moment-by-moment changes in the behaviors of
toddlers and parents playing a turn-taking game, while also recording their
electroencephalograms (EEG): changes in electricity on the scalp, partly caused
by the brain's neocortex, which controls actions and communication. Two-year-old
toddlers and parents play turn-taking games on a touch-screen table. They
produce many unscripted social actions, and are sometimes rewarded for their
cooperative actions. The positions of toddlers' and parents' hands and heads are
motion-captured, so that their EEG can be precisely synchronized with their
actions. State-of-the art analyses will derive the most meaningful information
from the EEG of both toddler and parent, synchronized with their own actions and
with their observation of the other's actions. Advanced statistics will be used
to analyze patterns of actions and EEG events throughout the
game.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This paradigm will be used to investigate two major
topics: First, how do toddlers' brains register not only their own actions but
also other people's actions? Toddlers' brain networks for processing people's
actions are virtually unknown, and have not been studied during ongoing social
interactions. The results will document toddlers' brain responses to perceiving
a parent's actions. This might help researchers understand how parents promote
children's engagement and learning during face-to-face activities. It might also
indicate why some toddlers are more socially responsive than others. Second, the
rewards obtained during face-to-face interactions are crucial for children's
learning, but almost nothing is known about how their brains respond to rewards
during social interactions. The results will document toddlers' and adults'
behavior and brain responses to rewards, especially rewards for cooperation.
This will help researchers understand how toddlers develop social skills for
learning in social contexts. These skills are critical when children begin
school. In sum, a new paradigm for measuring time-locked brain signals and
actions of turn-taking toddlers and parents will shed light on the development
of skills for social connection and cooperation. The project will also provide
training for undergraduate and graduate students, and interns from a charter
high school for non-traditional students. The participating laboratories will
also host field trips for high school seniors from underserved neighborhoods to
learn about neuroscience.