* 1227962
* BRIGE: Reliability Assessment of Real-Time Hybrid Simulation Results for Performance Evaluation of Structures under Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Cheng Chen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 171,825.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant (BRIDGE) project
develops a novel approach to assessing the reliability of experimental results
using the real-time hybrid simulation technique for replicating actual
structural responses during earthquakes. Real-time hybrid simulation is widely
viewed as the most advanced tool for investigating the rate-dependent behaviors
of structures. However, its application has been severely limited by the servo-
hydraulic actuator delay induced tracking errors which accumulate and propagate
in laboratory to study the behavior of large-scale structures under earthquakes.
Building on previous research into the cumulative effect of actuator delay, this
project will determine the effects of structural nonlinearity, substructure
partitions, and variations in ground motion inputs and intensities. Data will be
analyzed using numerical simulation of delay differential equations and
correlation analysis between actuator delay and simulation accuracy. The project
will result in the development of a probability-based energy error and tracking
indicator which will enable the engineering community to assess the reliability
of experimental results and to validate these results, especially when the
actual structural responses under earthquakes are not available for an immediate
comparison. The research will fill a significant knowledge gap in the earthquake
engineering community by resolving a problem that currently limits the
application of real-time hybrid simulation technique. It will lead to an
efficient and effective assessment tool that will enable the real-time hybrid
simulation technique to be applied in the laboratory to its full potential. The
project will help to build international collaborations and enhance the research
infrastructure at the School of Engineering at San Francisco State University,
one of the nation?s most ethnically and culturally diverse universities. It will
be integrated with the servo-hydraulic equipment acquired through a recent NSF-
MRI grant at SFSU and will engage undergraduate and graduate researchers in
current aspects of earthquake engineering research. The project will also reach
out to students from Ca√±ada College, a premier Hispanic-serving institution, to
extend the impact of existing NASA CiPair and DoE CalSTEP programs and provide
these students with unparalleled opportunities in earthquake engineering
research.