* 1227924
* BRIGE: Hierarchical Design of Membrane-Based Mechanotransduction Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Bryan Berger, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 02/28/2015
* USD 174,994.00

PI: Berger, Bryan W.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1227924&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cell surface exists in a remarkably complex mixture of proteins, hormones and
other solutes that communicate signals through binding specific cell surface
receptors. In mechanotransduction, ligand binding to a cell surface receptor
drives interactions with specific transmembrane and intracellular proteins,
which results in a change in membrane curvature and cell shape. One such example
are BAR domains, which are a family of dimerization, membrane binding, and
curvature sensing modules that play diverse roles in mechanotransduction through
modulating membrane structure in response to extracellular ligand binding. A
unique feature of BAR domains is their ability to bind phospholipids with high
affinity upon dimerization, thereby imparting a high degree of positive or
negative membrane curvature. Thus, there is an intricate link between the
biological signal input (ligand binding) and biomechanical signal output
(membrane curvature) that we will use to design a membrane-based biosensor to
detect the small molecule toxin bisphenol-A (BPA) from complex, biological
mixtures. In our design, ligand induced dimerization of FBAR domains will drive
changes in membrane structure that can be quantified by birefringence as well
membrane conductance. Our approach can be described in terms of the following
Specific Aims:&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1 - Biological Signal Input (Ligand Binding): Using
an integrated computational and genetic selection approach, we will redesign the
human estrogen receptor á (hERá) ligand binding domain (LBD) to bind BPA with
high affinity and selectivity. Our initial docking studies indicate BPA is
capable of binding hERá LBD, which will guide our initial choice of residues to
modify using a yeast-based transcriptional assay for hERá
activation.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2 - Biological Signal Output (Membrane Binding): Using
structure-guided design, we will develop a series of "molecular rulers" to link
our designed hERá LBDs to FBAR domains. The helical linkers will enable
conformational changes that occur upon ligand binding to propagate to FBAR
monomers, driving dimerization and subsequent membrane binding. We will use a
series of membrane binding (birefringence) and oligomerization (PFO-PAGE) to
assess the effects of linker structure and length on
mechanotransduction.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 3 - Quantification of Membrane Structure: We
will a series of complementary spectroscopic techniques to determine the phase
transitions that underlie our designed mechanotransduction receptor. Linear
infrared dichroism (LID) and cyclic voltammetry will be used to measure the
structure and kinetics of receptor-induced membrane phase transitions, and
electron microscopy (EM) will be used to image the resultant membrane
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A major advantage of our integrated
approach to designing a membrane based biosensor is the low-cost,
straightforward fabrication of a biocompatible, label-free system that can be
adapted to a wide range of toxins. Furthermore, the results of our design will
provide detailed, molecular insight into the structural basis that underlies
membrane-mediated mechanotransduction. The use of a lipidic cubic phase (LCP) as
the membrane environment allows label-free detection under continuous flow
conditions through changes in membrane conductance or birefringence. LCPs can be
prepared through simple mixing and incubation, are robust to a wide range of
temperatures and solutes and provide a biocompatible matrix that can be used for
in situ biosensor applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: BPA is an important
environmental toxin linked to increased risk for numerous neurological disorders
as well as cancers, yet a quantitative link between exposure levels in the
environment and their biological effects remains an area of active research. Our
proposed design will enable a detailed understanding of this linkage and
contribute to improved methods for monitoring toxins in the environment. Through
developing teaching modules in partnership with Northampton County Community
College, out work will also contribute to a greater understanding of
nanotechnology applications in biotechnology, and broaden participation of
students in engineering research and education through internships at Lehigh
University.