* 1227495
* NRI-Large: Collaborative Research: Purposeful Prediction: Co-robot Interaction via Understanding Intent and Goals
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Martial Hebert, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,175,468.00

In order for robots to collaborate with humans, they need to be able to
accurately forecast human intent and action. People act with purpose: that is,
they make sequences of decisions to achieve long-term objectives. For instance,
in driving from home to a store, people carefully plan a sequence of roads that
will get them there efficiently. In predicting a person's next decision,
algorithms must be developed that reflect these purposeful actions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, robots are unable to anticipate human needs and
goals, and this represents a fundamental barrier to their large-scale deployment
in the home and workplace. The aim of this project is to develop a new science
of purposeful prediction that can be applied to human-robot interaction across a
wide variety of domains. The work draws on recent techniques based on Inverse
Optimal Control and Inverse Equilibria Theory that enable statistically sound
reasoning about observed deliberate behavior. These new methods provide the
foundations of a theoretical framework that integrates traditional decision
making techniques like optimal control, search and planning with probabilistic
methods that reason about uncertainty and hidden information, particularly about
goals, utility and intent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project
will provide a general framework that allows robots to anticipate and adapt to
the activities of their human co-workers based on perceptual cues. The
investigators will develop the theory, a computational toolbox, and, in
collaboration with industrial partners, prototype deployments of these new
methods for the prediction of peoples' behavior in a diverse set of robotics
domains from computer vision to motor control. The project is transformative in
that it combines a novel theoretical/algorithmic framework with extensive
support in terms of volume of data and validation infrastructure in the context
of many applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: A revolution in
personal robotics in both the home and workplace depends on the ability to
forecast human activities and intents; small- and medium- scale manufacturing
will make a leap forward through agile robotic systems intelligent enough to
understand and assist their co-workers in flexible assembly tasks; and robust
models of pedestrian and vehicular traffic flow will enable more effective
driver warning systems and safer autonomous mobile robots. Purposeful prediction
technology is an important step towards enabling such understanding of actions
and intents in these arenas. The research work will involve the training and
mentoring of undergraduate, masters and doctoral students as well as post-
doctoral fellows in this emerging multi-disciplinary research area at the
intersection of computer and cognitive sciences and robotics.