* 1227230
* Privacy Protection and Genetic Testing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Catherine Tucker, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 115,700.00

This research will study how state regulation protecting the privacy of genetic
information affects the market for genetic tests. It will exploit variation in
the timing of different state laws as a natural experiment and compare changes
in genetic testing outcomes over time between states that adopt privacy
protections and states that do not. The outcomes of interest are the
availability of genetic testing and use of genetic tests by adults. The research
will also study the effects of genetic privacy protection on public health
through preventive care, such as cancer screening and surgical interventions, as
well as health outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research can
provide empirical evidence on the impact of different privacy rules on
technology diffusion in general, and on genetic privacy in particular. As
medical science advances, the uses of genetic information will increase, in ways
that could be both beneficial and harmful to individuals. Clinical applications
of genetic information may improve public health by targeting preventive care
and interventions where they will be more effective. At the same time, as more
links are uncovered between genes and personality traits and future health
risks, individuals may suffer from discrimination based on their genetic
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Privacy protection is the main policy tool
available to limit those harms and optimal policy will balance the risks and
benefits. This research will provide the first empirical evidence on the effect
of different types of privacy safeguards. Since the question of privacy
protection is not a binary, all-or-nothing, choice, it is important to
understand what features of privacy rules are most beneficial from the view of
consumers and which are most costly to producers. The study will therefore
explore the separate and joint effects of different provisions within privacy
laws to identify policies that are most favorable to technology diffusion.