* 1227231
* FSML:  Improving the Detection, Enumeration and Visualization of Aquatic Microorganisms at the Romberg Tiburon Center, SFSU
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Newell Garfield, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 173,288.00

San Francisco State University (SFSU) has been awarded a grant to significantly
increase their capabilities to visualize, characterize and enumerate marine
microorganisms in their research and educational efforts at the Romberg Tiburon
Center for Environmental Studies (RTC), an off-campus marine research and
teaching facility. The grant will increase RTC's analytical capabilities for
microbial research by the purchase of two major instruments: 1) a state-of-the-
art inverted, epifluorescence microscope (Olympus model IX81) equipped with
differential interference contrast (Nomarski) prisms and a high-definition
digital imaging and analysis system, and 2) a user-friendly and easy-to-maintain
flow cytometer (BD Biosciences Accuri C-6). The requested microscope will
replace older, joint-use and private microscopes that are of lesser optical
performance, and lack the capability for image capture and interpretation. The
flow cytometer will permit timely quantification and characterization of both
natural and cultured phytoplankton and bacteria, and microbial assemblages. Due
to its relative simplicity and compact design, the instrument will be employed
in both laboratory and at-sea research investigations.

The broader impacts of the new instrumentation are through contributions that
bridge interdisciplinary and institutional boundaries. Collaborative RTC
research efforts involving investigators from other universities, and both
federal and state agencies will benefit from the improvements and increased
functionality provided by these instruments in quantifying and characterizing
planktonic systems currently under study, including multi-disciplinary studies
in San Francisco Bay, the tropical Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Northwest.
Digital video and imagery from the microscope platform will be available for use
by RTC's Outreach Coordinator to share research content with the general public,
and for use in local educational efforts. The RTC investigators expected to
utilize the two instruments are actively engaged in graduate and undergraduate
instruction, and although the microscope and flow cytometer will be used
primarily for research purposes it is expected that that both instruments will
be utilized in the training of SFSU graduate and undergraduate students. For
further information about the center please visit its website at
http://rtc.sfsu.edu/.