* 1227107
* Coupled biogeochemical cycling of water, silicon and cations in a temperate forest-shale system.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Louis Derry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 201,156.00

This project is focused on understanding the linkages between water acquisition
by temperate forest trees (maples, oaks) and their strategies to acquire mineral
nutrients, especially calcium and silica. Trees act as powerful "pumps" to bring
up soil water and groundwater, and as the soil wets and dries through the
season, trees shift their water sources as needed. The investigation will employ
isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen to trace those shifts in a heavily instrumented
biogeochemistry study site in central Pennsylvania, part of the NSF Critical
Zone Observatory network. At the same time as they acquire water, trees acquire
nutrients from the soil. Investigators will test ideas about how mineral
nutrient sources may change as water sources change. Trees take up nutrients
they need, and when leaf drop occurs, recycle them to the soil. One question is
how important is the "mining" of nutrients from deep levels in the nutrient
budget. If trees cannot mine nutrients, then they are limited to the store that
is in shallow soil and in standing vegetation. Some evidence suggests that in
some species tree roots leak water to shallow soils - one possible explanation
is that they do this to make nutrients available from otherwise dry, shallow
soils during times of water stress. Strontium isotopes and the ratios of
germanium to silicon and strontium to calcium will be used to test these
hypotheses more explicitly. This builds on previous work on mineral nutrient
cycles the investigators have carried out in tropical systems.

The response of forests and of biogeochemical cycles to climate change is an
important consideration because of the possible feedbacks on the carbon and
water cycles. A prediction of most climate models is for more variable
precipitation patterns, with increased periods of drought even under overall
wetter conditions. Water and nutrient acquisition strategies for species that
are better suited to these variable conditions may predict success patterns
among species in adapting to climate change in temperate forests. Such species
may also be able to increase their utilization of CO2 under increased CO2 levels
if they are better able to acquire nutrients even under conditions of low soil
water availability. It is critical to improve our understanding of the coupling
between water and nutrient cycles in order to better predict the response of
these important ecosystems to climate change, and their future impacts on the
carbon and water cycles.