* 1227245
* DIP: Using dynamic formative assessment models to enhance learning of the experimental process in biology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Joel Abraham, SimBiotic Software
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,333,395.00

This project seeks to develop a dynamic formative assessment method for use with
virtual labs. The research focuses on how to constrain a virtual lab experience
to be amenable to automated feedback on relatively open-ended responses students
are generating while still giving students an appropriate exploratory
experience. The technology innovation question is how to do that with validity
and reliability. The team is focusing on how to use available artificial
intelligence technologies to make it possible to provide good feedback, both to
learners working in these environments and to their teachers. PIs are adding
dynamic formative assessment capabilities to virtual lab experiences that are
already extensively used in undergraduate and high-school biology
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an automated assessment project, focusing
on assessing learner understanding and capabilities in situations where learners
are exploring, having, and using ideas as they are learning STEM content and
practices. There are several ways one could approach automated assessment for
situations where learners are acting in a fairly unconstrained way -- design
algorithms that can interpret and make inferences from free text, or find ways
to design the environment in such a way that learners can explore, develop, and
record as needed for deep learning but where they have a more constrained way of
expressing themselves or limitations in what they can do that don't constrain
the learning or engagement. This project seeks to find a sweet spot -- a happy
medium where learners can explore, try things out, have ideas, refine ideas, and
use ideas with significant freedom but just enough constraint for already-
existing artificial intelligence algorithms to interpret what learners are
doing, why they are doing it, and what they mean to express. Learning how to do
this is essential to designing the learning environments of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is broad acknowledgement that more attention
must be given in STEM fields to the teaching of higher-order thinking skills,
including experimental design, data interpretation and evidence-based judgment.
Timely formative assessment is a crucial component of such learning, but
formative assessment is impossible for a teacher to do for a whole class of
individuals at the time when it will have the most effect (when students are
engaging in or have just finished engaging in such activities) and too labor
intensive to be done regularly in large high school and introductory-level
college classes. This project is therefore developing techniques for
automatically providing immediate formative assessment as students are
conducting simulation-based experiments and reasoning about their results. The
investigation focuses on helping students learn to conduct experiments and
interpret results within the discipline of biology; lessons learned will be
applicable across STEM domains at the high-school and college levels.