* 1227186
* Institutional Interactions:   The Impacts of Bicameralism and Presidential Powers on Legislative Structure
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Brian Crisp, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 236,118.00

Bicameral legislatures tend to promote policy stability, can represent two
distinct characterizations of the populace, and can ameliorate the shortcomings
of majoritarianism. However, many studies of policy making in democratic regimes
ignore the existence of a second chamber, either to simplify the modeling task
or to minimize data collection. Both formal theoretical and empirical
literatures have made clear that carefully accounting for the existence of a
second chamber can dramatically alter expectations about how policy outcomes are
achieved. This project will advance theorizing on the strategic dynamics of
bicameralism and collect data to systematically test the observable implications
derived from that theorizing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is connected to its combination of formal modeling and empirical
analysis to better understand the effects of bicameralism. Scholars have defined
two features for characterizing the variation in bicameral systems. One key
element is whether both chambers have equal constitutional powers (symmetry) or
if the upper chamber is subordinated to the lower chamber (asymmetry). Another
key element is how the upper chamber is elected relative to the lower chamber.
This design component will determine whether the preferences of members are
likely to be congruent or incongruent. Recent scholarship has suggested that
where one chamber lacks proposal power (an example of asymmetry), the majority
in that chamber has an incentive to delegate gatekeeping power to an
unrepresentative agent, heightening incongruence. We extend this thinking to
deduce observable implications for legislative committee systems. The project
will develop formal theoretical models of interbranch and intrabranch relations
based on proposal rights and agenda-setting power with implications for
legislative institutions and policy stability. Testing these models requires the
collection of data on the relative powers of chambers (symmetry/asymmetry) and
the distribution of preferences across pivotal players
(congruence/incongruence). Like the U.S., the democratic regimes of Latin
America are presidential systems and half of the countries in the region have
bicameral legislatures; they are the focus of data collection efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project are related to the
importance of institutional design for policy-making and democratization. Better
understanding institutions and their effects is important to establishing stable
democratic institutions. The project will make available data on upper chambers,
allowing scholars and practitioners to evaluate how institutional design affects
outcomes.