* 1227179
* Time-Sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS): Proposal for Renewed Support, 2012-2015
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Jeremy Freese, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,787,617.00

Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS) is a platform for
conducting social science survey experiments fielded on probability-based
samples of United States adults. TESS was established in 2001 and capitalizes on
economies of scale to enable scholars from across the social sciences, on a
competitive basis, to conduct ground-breaking research on issues of broad
theoretical and practical importance. The intellectual merit of TESS is closely
connected to its successes in enabling social scientists to collect original
population-based experimental data in a timely manner; promoting better
understanding of fundamental social, political and economic questions;
maximizing financial efficiency by pooling expenses for otherwise separate
studies; and offering mentoring and educational resources. The new initiatives
extend educational aspects of TESS, broaden TESS' population of proposers,
enable TESS to contribute to assessing the value of probability sampling for
experimental inference, and enhance the review process to ensure the highest
quality studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of TESS are wide-
ranging. Since its inception, TESS has provided more than 400 social,
behavioral, and economic researchers with the opportunity to conduct original
experiments, testing a broad range of innovative hypotheses. Proposals are
solicited on a continuous basis, undergo rigorous peer review, and involve
Internet-based data collection with a representative national sample. The
project provides an enormous gain in efficiency since costs of sampling, data
collection, and data management are distributed across studies. To date, TESS
has conducted over 270 population-based experiments, across disciplines
including sociology, psychology, political science, communication, economics,
judgment and decision making, law, public health, communication, psychiatry, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing a common platform for population based
experiments, TESS efficiently enables innovative scholars to identify causal
dynamics that advance knowledge on topics such as investment behavior, judicial
legitimacy, voting turnout, trust, and many more. TESS also facilitates
methodological advances to topics such as the effects of web-tracking on survey
response and the optimal ways to measure sensitive
attitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TESS promotes teaching, training, and learning
at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Students regularly submit proposals,
many of which are funded. Even when not funded, however, students receive
detailed feedback on their research at the critical design stage. TESS broadens
the participation of underrepresented groups, both as investigators and research
participants. At the heart of TESS' mission is the democratization of access to
high quality, original experimental data, thereby putting the power of
population-based experiments in the hands of researchers from all backgrounds,
all academic institutions, and all career stages. And because the TESS data
collection platform involves a representative sample, the results of TESS
projects reflect the broad diversity of the United States.