* 1227093
* Enhancement of Wet Lab Capabilities for Coral Reef Stress Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Carrie Manfrino, Central Caribbean Marine Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2014
* USD 203,911.00

The Central Caribbean Marine Institute (CCMI) is awarded a grant to build and
equip a new Coral Reef Stress Wet Lab at its field station, the Little Cayman
Research Centre (LCRC). The lab will be equipped with three primary wet lab work
areas including a covered screened area, a climate controlled area, and a shaded
screened area for experiments with a specific emphasis on climate change, ocean
acidification, and fisheries management (lionfish and grouper). The new wet lab
will enable LCRC to (1) enhance their capabilities and capacity for simultaneous
research and education activities; (2) improve the quality, quantity, and
accessibility of information produced and available at LCRC; and (3) enable them
to better serve U.S. scientists and further develop collaborative partnerships
with U.S. institutions and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2006, LCRC has
been providing oceanographic facilities that have enabled students and
scientists to conduct field studies at a remote site where marine protection has
been effective and where local human and development impacts are minimal. They
have hosted over 90 visiting researchers and five major U.S. universities
include a LCRC visit as a permanent part of their curriculum. CCMI also offers
rich educational and conservation outreach activities for local K-12 Cayman
Island schools which include underrepresented groups. Research at LCRC has led
to major breakthroughs, including the discovery of new marine meiofauna species,
an improved understanding of deep reefs, and new models for predicting coral
bleaching and diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
infrastructure enhancement include producing new, high quality results on topics
that are of the highest concern for society; providing a training ground for
young scientists, who are the future of scientific discovery; attracting the
best scientific minds and increasing the capacity of the station by establishing
new partnerships and collaborations. Alongside existing long-term ecological and
environmental data monitoring capabilities in partnership with NOAA- Coral Reef
Early Warning System, the new facility will enhance the frontiers of science by
collecting, publishing, and communicating results to the greater scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information about the Central
Caribbean Marine Institute please visit:
http://www.reefresearch.org/ccmi_website/home.htm