* 1227462
* Decisions from Experience and the Role of Feedback in Environmental Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Elke Weber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,968.00

Despite frequent and vivid reminders of the destruction that natural disasters
can leave in their wake, compliance rates with evacuation orders and support for
mitigation efforts remain troublingly low. One possible contributing factor to
this apparent under-weighting of the risk from environmental hazards is the fact
that when making decisions between uncertain outcomes in laboratory studies,
people appear to treat rare events differently if their probabilities are
learned through sampling and feedback (experience), as opposed to summary
statistics (descriptions). Despite a recent surge in laboratory research on this
topic, it is not yet clear how, or whether, this effect applies in the far more
complex environment of real-world decisions about hazard preparedness. The
current research project systematically investigates how learning about
environmental hazards through personal experience affects people's perceptions
of (and therefore their actions in response to) such dangers. The results
provide a framework for scientists and policymakers to better understand how the
public's personal experience with those natural hazards might interact with --
or override -- the descriptive warning information they disseminate.
Appreciation of the psychological hurdles to the understanding or use of such
information can improve the influence of hazard forecasts, increasing compliance
with warnings and protective measures.

The Description-Experience (DE) Gap in risky choice describes the shift from
Prospect Theory's predicted over-weighting of rare events when probabilities are
learned through summary statistics (description), to an apparent under-weighting
of small probabilities when learning occurs through repeated feedback
(experience). This research program develops methods to extend existing findings
about the DE gap into laboratory paradigms that more closely address the
complexities inherent to real-world environmental decisions such as how to
prepare for potential hazards. The research then validates existing findings
through field studies that examine decisions from real-world experiences and
assess the validity of prior results. Field studies integrate choice problems
used in the laboratory studies into realistic paradigms, and test the boundaries
of the type, timing, and valence of feedback typically used in DE gap studies.
By converging evidence from well-controlled laboratory tasks and the richer,
more complex set of real-world choices that people face every day, this program
of research addresses current theory more thoroughly and effectively than either
approach could alone. Insight into how provision of probability and outcome
information in different ways affects real-world decisions illuminates ways of
communicating information about environmental hazards to increase the likelihood
that people will take protective action.