* 1227397
* Modeling the Evolution of Agents' Beliefs and Uncertainty in General Equilibrium Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Francesco Bianchi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,535.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Modeling the Evolution of Agents' Beliefs and
Uncertainty in General Equilibrium Models (Proposal Number: SES -
1227397)&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Bianchi, Francesco
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research agenda is to study the
evolution of private sector beliefs and uncertainty in general equilibrium
models. The central insight is that the evolution of agents' beliefs can be
captured by defining a set of regimes that are characterized by the degree of
agents' pessimism, optimism, and uncertainty about future equilibrium outcomes.
Once this type of structure is imposed, it is possible to create a mapping
between the evolution of agents' beliefs and observable outcomes. The proposed
approach goes beyond the assumption of anticipated utility, as agents know that
they do not know and form expectations taking into account that their beliefs
will evolve according to what they will observe.&lt;br/&gt; The research agenda
will deliver methods to solve, simulate, and estimate structural models in which
forward-looking and fully rational agents are subject to waves of pessimism,
optimism, and uncertainty that turn out to critically affect macroeconomic
outcomes. Such outbursts of pessimism, optimism, and uncertainty may happen
abruptly or may gradually unfold over a long period of time in response to the
behavior of other agents, the realizations of economic outcomes, public signals,
or policy announcements. The technical details are described in the first
research project, Modeling the Evolution of Public Expectations and Uncertainty.
The evolution of agents' beliefs is modeled assuming the existence of different
states of the world that differ according to the statistical properties of the
exogenous shocks or based on the behavior of some of the agents in the model.
Such regimes follow a Markov switching process, which may be correlated with
other aspects of the model. Agents are assumed to observe economic outcomes, but
not the regimes themselves. Instead, they have to adopt Bayesian learning to
infer the regime in place. This determines a progressive evolution of agents'
beliefs that translates into a drift of economic outcomes, macroeconomic
volatility, and agents' uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt; In the second project, Dormant
Shocks and Fiscal Virtue, these new methods are employed to characterize an
economy in which market participants try to assess the sustainability of public
debt. It is highly unlikely that the private sector knows with certainty how
policy-makers will behave in the future. Different governments have different
preferences about the size of the public sector and fiscal policy making is a
process whose outcome is highly unpredictable. In the model, the standard policy
mix consists of a virtuous fiscal authority that moves taxes in response to debt
and a central bank that has full control over inflation. When policy-makers
deviate from this virtuous policy mix, agents conduct Bayesian learning to infer
the likely duration of the deviation. As agents observe more and more
deviations, they become increasingly pessimistic about a prompt return to the
Virtuous Regime and inflation starts moving to keep debt on a stable path.
Shocks which were dormant under the virtuous policy mix now start manifesting
themselves. These changes are initially imperceptible, can unfold over decades,
and accelerate as agents become convinced that the fiscal authority will not
raise taxes. &lt;br/&gt; The new modeling framework allows for gradual changes
in agents' beliefs about government's willingness to repay its debt. Therefore,
the standard distinction between Ricardian and non-Ricardian regimes typical of
the Fiscal Theory of Price Level breaks down. In its stead, a continuum of
regimes reflecting agents' beliefs about the future behavior of policy-makers
arises. How quickly agents? beliefs evolve depends on the country's Fiscal
Virtue, captured by the frequency with which the country engages in long lasting
deviations from the Virtuos Regime. Thus, the model is able to explain why the
relation between fiscal discipline and the macroeconomy is not stable across
countries and over time. When a Virtuous regime prevails or agents are confident
that it will prevail in the future, the level of debt is substantially
irrelevant. However, if agents become convinced that the economy entered a long
lasting deviation, then interest rate and inflation differentials open up. A
larger difference in Fiscal Virtue across countries leads to a larger difference
in the speed of learning, which in turn speeds up the opening of the inflation
and interest rate differentials.&lt;br/&gt; The sluggish adjustment of public
expectations to policy actions described above is hard to reproduce through
rational expectations models in which the functioning of the whole model economy
is common knowledge among private agents. For instance, despite the dramatic
widening of the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve Bank, public expectations
about long-run inflation expectations have hardly moved in the last five years.
In the third project, Inflationary Sentiments and Monetary Policy Communication,
it is shown that this can be the result of the central bank's reputation built
up over the years. In the model, monetary policy alternates periods of active
inflation stabilization (Active Regime) and periods during which the emphasis is
mainly on output stabilization (Passive Regime). When the central bank engages
in only short lasting deviations from the Active Regime, inflation expectations
always remain anchored and the model captures the monetary approach described by
the Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke as constrained discretion. However, if the central
bank deviates for a prolonged period of time, inflationary sentiments
progressively spread among agents. The model is fit to U.S. data to show that
increasing the transparency of the Federal Reserve improves welfare by anchoring
inflationary sentiments. Gains from transparency are even more sizeable for
countries whose central bank has failed to establish a strong reputation for
inflation stability.