* 1227977
* BRIGE: Energy-Efficient and High-Bandwidth Reconfigurable Mobile Memory Interface for Heterogeneous Mobile Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gyungsu Byun, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,102.00

PI: Gyungsu Byun&lt;br/&gt;Insitution: West Virginia
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Current mobile interface
signaling technologies such as baseband-only and multi-level signaling have
critical technological limitations, particularly non-reconfigurable data access,
limited bandwidth and super-linear energy consumption. The objective of this
BRIGE project is to analyze, design, fabricate and verify an energy-efficient
and high bandwidth reconfigurable mobile memory interface for heterogeneous
mobile computing by using novel simultaneous bidirectional and reconfigurable
multiple data access-capable interconnect between multi-core processors and
memory subsystem. This proposed interconnect can significantly reduce the
multiple concurrent task loads of heterogeneous multi-core systems that consist
of different processing units such as image (or bio) sensor interface units and
general-purpose multi-core, graphics (or image) and digital signal processors.
At the completion of this project, it is our expectation that we will have
developed an innovative mobile interface that will allow future mobile
interfaces to provide significant advances of energy efficiency and bandwidth in
mobile devices such as smart phones (or tablets) and ultraportable computing
systems. Furthermore, the proposed prototype chip fabrication and testing of
critical MBI circuits and systems will play key roles in providing novel
computer architecture-level innovations, resulting in new insights and potential
solutions for future mobile interfaces between mobile chips which need both much
better energy efficiency and much higher bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed mobile reconfigurable interface between heterogeneous
multi-core processor and memory system can be expected to improve simultaneously
both energy efficiency and bandwidth of mobile devices by using continuous
improvement of silicon technologies and to provide new opportunities to
industrial and consumer electronics for nonvolatile (or volatile) memory and
system on chip applications. The project will also help develop a globally
competitive engineering workforce by training students capable of integrating
knowledge and insights from the proposed microelectronic and integrated circuit
designs, improve collaborative research between academia and industry, help
broaden participation of women and minorities in engineering fields, and improve
undergraduate engineering education through extensive outreach activities.
Specifically, women and underrepresented undergraduate students who will be
recruited by the Lane Experienced in Applied Design (LEAD) program, which has
been successful in recruiting women and under-represented groups into the
graduation program in the PI?s department for many years, will become actively
involved in the proposed research project as part of their capstone design
experience.