* 1227766
* BRIGE: In Vitro Cellular Model of Amyloid Plaque Formation Using Combinatorial Libraries of Micro-nano-hybrid Topographies with Tunable Elasticity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Yong Yang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,953.00

PI: Yang, Yong&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1227766&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop combinatorial libraries of highly
defined micro-nanohybrid topographies with tunable elasticity to build an in
vitro model of amyloid plaque formation from neural cells for understanding and
alleviating Alzheimer's disease (AD). The overall goal is to delineate the
molecular mechanism by which transgenic neural cells generate amyloid plaques in
a biomimetic microenvironment and discover pharmaceutical targets against AD.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Amyloid plaque formation is a
neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) which is the most
prominent cause of dementia in the elderly. It is caused by the extracellular
deposition of aggregated amyloid-beta (A-beta) peptides in the brain. In vivo
studies reveal that the amyloid plaque's formation changes the local
microenvironment, subsequently leading to neuronal alterations, eventually
neurodegeneration. Inhibition of amyloid plaque formation represents a feasible
therapeutic target against AD. The current lack of in vitro models of amyloid
plaques formed from neural cells greatly limits the progress in seeking
strategies to inhibit amyloid plaque formationand identifying therapeutic
targets. There is, therefore, a critical need for the development of cell
culture technologies in a biomimetic manner that can be reproducibly applied to
regulate neural cell behavior to facilitate formation of amyloid plaques for AD
research and therapeutic development. Because neural cells as well as A-beta
aggregation are highly sensitive to surface properties of the substrate, it is
hypothesized that the amyloid plaque formation can be recapitulated by culturing
neural cells on highly defined micro-nano-hybrid topographies with tunable
elasticity. To test this hypothesis, the PI following specific tasks are
proposed: 1) Produce highly defined micro-nano-hybrid topography; 2) Precisely
tune the level of elasticity of hydrogels at nanoscale; 3) Engineer
combinatorial libraries of micro-nano-hybrid topographies with tunable
elasticity to build an in vitro cellular model of amyloid plaque
formation.&lt;br/&gt;At the completion of this project, the PI expects to have
developed the technologies necessary to produce well-defined micro-nano-hybrid
topography and to fine tune substrate elasticity at the nanoscale. With these
enabling technologies, combinatorial libraries of micro-/nano hybrid
topographies with tunable elasticity is engineered to facilitate the
establishment of in vitro cellular model of amyloid plaque formation, which is
not only crucial to the elucidation of the fundamental of amyloid plaque
formation, but will also contribute to understand and alleviate AD.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As an indispensable part of this
proposal, extensive Education and Outreach activities have been planned to
broaden the participation of individuals from underrepresented groups. Graduate
and undergraduate students, especially women and minority students will be
involved into every aspect of the multidisciplinary research. Graduate students
will work on both&lt;br/&gt;Engineering and Health Science campuses at WVU, will
be taught polymer nanoscience and nanoengineering, and appreciate cell culture
and characterization skills at the molecular and cellular levels. Undergraduate
students will obtain hands-on research experience to deepen their understanding
of scientific principles and to relate classroom knowledge to phenomena they
observe in the real world. Moreover, projects comprising teaching modules and
lab demonstrations will be developed and integrated into existing outreach
events at WVU, especially the weeklong Engineers of Tomorrow summer camp
designed to encourage Appalachian area G9-12 students, in particular young women
and minorities, to participate in a science or engineering field.
Nanobiotechnology will be publicized on Nano Days in Children's Discovery Museum
of West Virginia to excite the children and increase public awareness of
nanobiotechnology. This project will further collaborative research with health
science researchers and foster collaborations with local industries.