* 1227869
* BRIGE: Patterned Microtexture to Create Fluid Film Lubrication at Low Sliding Velocities in Prosthetic Knee Joints
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Bart Raeymaekers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2016
* USD 174,605.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
grant provides funding for the design of prosthetic knee implant bearing
surfaces with a patterned microtexture. The primary goal of this research is to
extend implant durability compared to state-of-the-art smooth implants by
creating hydrodynamic lubrication at low joint sliding velocities to reduce
friction and wear. A model of the sliding components of a prosthetic knee joint
with patterned microtexture will be implemented using a finite difference
formulation. The defining parameters of the microtexture will be optimized to
maximize the bearing load carrying capacity and the separation between the
bearing surfaces. The model will account for the non-Newtonian nature of the
lubricant (synovial fluid) and the variable spacing between the bearing surfaces
during gait. Laser surface texturing will be used to fabricate the patterned
microtexture. A prototype prosthetic knee implant with an optimized, patterned
microtexture design will be built to validate the model and experimentally
compare friction and wear of microtextured and smooth prosthetic knee bearing
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide critical insight on the
effect of microtexture for the transition from boundary lubrication to
hydrodynamic lubrication at low, variable sliding velocities in the presence of
a non-Newtonian lubricant. Specifically, the results of this research will
contribute to improving the durability of bearing surfaces of prosthetic knee
implants by drastically reducing friction and wear. This could mark the
beginning of a new generation of prosthetic implants with much improved
durability, to serve an aging population and reduce health care costs. By
extension, this research will also apply to reducing friction and wear in other
implants, such as hip and shoulder implants. During this project, participation
of students from underrepresented groups will be promoted through K-12 outreach
and undergraduate research. An interactive module and curriculum related to
friction will be contributed to the annual Hi-GEAR camp at the University of
Utah for female high school students. Additionally, a demo-kit will be part of
the Discover Engineering Display, which visits high schools in the Salt Lake
City metro area.