* 1227608
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Essays on the determinants of healthcare differences in US hospitals
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Douglas Almond, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,432.00

Healthcare differences are pervasive in United States hospitals. This proposal
aims to understand why patients with the same underlying health conditions
receive different treatments, incur different costs, and experience different
outcomes. There are conceivably many factors that affect patient care, but one
factor may be the quality of the patient's attending physician, and another
factor may be the patient's health insurance category. The first project in this
proposal asks whether physician characteristics explain differences in patient
treatments, costs, and outcomes. It focuses on patients who visit Florida
emergency rooms (ER) from 2005-2009 and who are assigned to ER physicians. It
aims to answer questions previously unaddressed in the literature, such as
whether physician experience and medical school explain differences in patient
care. ERs are meaningful laboratories for analysis, as ER visits have increased
over time and ERs provide healthcare to underserved populations. This project
has the ability to advance the field of knowledge on physicians, while also
generating implications for how healthcare services are delivered to a large
subset of the population.

The second project asks how changes in federal funding affect Medicaid program
enrollment, spending, and hospital care. In 2011, Federal Medical Assistance
Percentages (FMAPs) decreased for all states as the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act expired. In response, states tried to reduce Medicaid spending
by adjusting provider payments. This project uses data from California, Florida,
and New York to determine how Medicaid enrollment, spending, and hospital
utilization changed in response to changes in federal funding. It is important
to determine how federal funding affects the quality of healthcare Medicaid
patients receive. Understanding the consequences of the FMAP will give policy-
makers more information about how counties and hospitals might respond to
changes going forward.