* 1227639
* DIP: V-ICED Visually-Integrated Cyber Exploratorium for Design
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2015
* USD 750,000.00

The PIs are designing, deploying, and studying learning in the context of a
visually-integrated cyber exploratorium for design -- an infrastructure for
collaborative visual design activities. The project is being carried out in the
context of an undergraduate innovative design course, and the investigative
focus is on design of and learner capabilities when using interfaces and
environments for expressing ideas in visual forms that capture explicit and
tacit knowledge and that can be shared and the affordances for promoting
learning of ideation and collaboration around such shared representations of
knowledge. The technological innovation is a cyber-infrastructure hardware
framework that includes touch tablets, walls, and a wiki combined with software
for sketching and diagramming and the socio-technical system around it that
enables the kinds of high-end collaborative "play" needed for innovative
ideation. Research centers on promoting learning in design; promoting the
cognition of ideation in a social learning environment; relationships between
visual thinking, imagination, and externalization; and how such a technological
framework transforms creation of design knowledge and learning. Foundations are
in the constructivist theory of learning, the social constructivist view of
social construction of knowledge, the design of natural user interfaces (NUIs),
and the view that cognition is embodied in the artifacts and affordances of the
environment. The PIs are taking an ecological approach to examining the
environment to understand how its combination of factors influence design
learning, specifically integrative visual thinking, collaboration, and
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has established the important role of
exploratory "play" in the development of creativity and cognition and the
central role of such exploration in ideation, especially in ideation of
innovative solutions to problems and design challenges. This project leverages
the possibilities inherent in natural user interfaces (NUIs) for promoting the
kinds of collaborative exploration of ideas that is essential for collaborative
learning, problem solving, and design. The hardware infrastructure being
designed enables groups to articulate ideas visually, share them, and refine
them together around a large collaborative multi-touch interface, to access
those visualizations from afar and annotate them textually, and to share those
ideas broadly with classmates, team-mates, and others. Such an infrastructure
provides a foundation for supporting project-based and design-based learning
activities in formal learning environments in ways that give all team members
chances to contribute appropriately, record the contributions of team-mates for
teachers and other mentors to examine, allow sharing and advice from peers,
mentors, and experts, and eventually allow automatical assessment, help,and
advice. The proposed infrastructure has potential to be used across all ages, in
formal and informal learning environments, and in the workplace.