* 1227434
* Mechanism design with costly verification
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Eddie Dekel, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 275,308.00

This award funds three projects in economic theory. The first part of the
research studies optimal mechanisms when the principal has the opportunity to
verify the types of the agents at a cost. For example, consider the problem
faced by the head of an organization who must decide which of several divisions
in the organization will be allowed a new hire. The head wants to allocate this
job slot to the division that would fill the position in the way that best
promotes the organization as a whole. However, each division has more
information than the leader about its own job applicants. The head may want to
consider investing some money in verifying the statements made by each division
about the job applicants; by doing this the head can promote the organization's
overall interests. But at the same time the head must remember that the
resources spent to verify information are not available to meet the
organization's other goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The second project considers
a particular class of matching models. In this class of models, participants in
the match will make decisions in advance of the match about individual career
choice. Each person must weigh both the satisfaction and pay that each career
provides. However, people also understand that they will participate in the
match and may find a partner. Partners share income; therefore someone who
anticipates matching to a high-income partner has an incentive to choose a
highly satisfying but low paying job.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project
looks at the incentives that affect a firm's choice of certain product
characteristics. Recently economists have developed a number of models of
"temptation", in which consumers make decisions today while perhaps under-
estimating their ability to control their actions tomorrow. In these models, the
characteristics of the products available to consumers are taken as given.
However, in reality firms often must choose the degree to which a specific
product is "tempting"; eg, the nicotine level in a cigarette, the alcohol level
in liquor, etc. This project will consider how firms make these choices, and how
government policies such as "sin taxes" affect these
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects are each applicable to the design
of policies and incentive plans to address a variety of social problems.