* 1227729
* Valuing Lives You Can Save: Understanding and Combatting Value Collapse  as Numbers Increase
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,998.00

In a rational world, as threats to life increase in scale, potential efforts to
protect those lives should increase proportionally. Unfortunately, in many
circumstances, the opposite occurs. Compassion and societal concerns decrease
rather than increase in the face of larger threats. The studies proposed here
aim to examine the psychological underpinnings of this perverse phenomenon and
examine its importance for theoretical models of valuation and, more broadly,
for the welfare of society. The research uses a web panel to conduct eight
studies that, with comoponent substudies, total around sixteen
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prospect theory is arguably the most important
descriptive theoretical framework in the field of decision making. According to
this theory, valuation of human life follows an ever-increasing function that
places greater overall importance on the threat as the number of lives at risk
increases. Researchers have found empirical support for this function, but some
believe that valuation of lives takes other forms besides that depicted in
prospect theory. This research tests the hypothesis that, in some instances,
"the more who die, the less we care," a form of valuation that is inconsistent
with prospect theory. In some contexts, valuation may follow an inverse-U
trajectory, rising with increasing numbers of lives at stake up to a threshold,
but then collapsing as the number continues to increase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to this theoretical extension of prospect theory, the research has
important practical implications. Devaluation of life in the face of large-scale
crises may help us understand failures to respond aggressively to mass threats
posed by poverty, disease, famine, natural disasters, violence, and species
extinction. We hope, as well, that this understanding will point the way toward
better decisions through improved processes of analysis and deliberation and the
creation of laws and institutions designed to overcome value collapse.