* 1227141
* Understanding the Process of Social Labeling and Stigma and Health Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amy Kroska, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,986.00

Social Labeling and Stigma and Health
Outcomes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The proposed
project examines the stigma and status consequences of psychiatric labels and
the effectiveness of education campaigns designed to reduce those consequences.
Past research suggests that psychiatric labels negatively affect individuals in
two ways. First, the labels increase vulnerability to negative evaluation and
social rejection (stigma outcomes). Second, the labels reduce others'confidence
in the labeled individual's competence and reduce others' willingness to defer
to the labeled individual during group decision making (status outcomes). The
proposed project extends both lines of research with two experiments that
address three questions: (1) How does a non-patient?s gender affect these
processes? Studies from the 1970s suggest that women behave in a more tolerant
way toward psychiatric patients than do men. However, few studies have examined
this gender difference since the 1970s despite dramatic changes in the position
of women; (2) How does a patient's diagnosis affect these processes? More
specifically, do patients with a schizophrenic diagnosis suffer more extreme
stigma or status outcomes than patients with a depression diagnosis; and (3) Can
information regarding the psychiatric patients? competence reduce these stigma
and status outcomes? In particular, are competence-based messages more effective
at reducing negative outcomes than information-based messages focused on the
causes of mental illness? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiment 1 is a laboratory
experiment which addresses the first two questions. It will be among the first
in decades to document the effect of psychiatric labels and gender on behavioral
measures of stigma and status, and no recent behavioral experiment has examined
the role of gender in these processes. Experiment 2 is a web-based experiment
which addresses the third set of questions. Although previous studies have
examined the effectiveness of education campaigns for reducing the stigma of
mental illness, no experimental study has examined the relative effectiveness of
different types of campaign messages. Together the proposed studies fill
important gaps in the research on the consequences of psychiatric labels and on
the avenues for ameliorating them. The findings will contribute to the expansion
and development of modified labeling theory, status characteristics theory, and
affect control theory and have practical implications for policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research offers additional broader impacts.
First, the findings from Experiment 2 will have direct implications for the
creation of education campaigns that can effectively reduce the stigma and
status consequences of psychiatric labels. Second, the project will promote the
education of graduate students in the experimental research process. Graduate
student research assistants from the Department of Sociology at the University
of Oklahoma will have previously unavailable opportunities to conduct or
collaborate on experimental research.Funding for this project will initiate a
program of experimental research in this department. Finally, these studies will
promote the integration of ideas across sub-areas within sociological social
psychology. With few exceptions, researchers in the areas of status
characteristics theory, affect control theory, and the modified labeling theory
do research independently. This research will contribute to the cross-
fertilization of their ideas.