* 1227210
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Performance and Transformation of Citizenship in Bosnia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Esra Ozyurek, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 22,844.00

Doctoral student Natasa Garic-Humphrey, supervised by Dr. Esra Ozyurek, will
research how alternative forms of citizenship and political subjectivities
emerge in moments of societal transition. This research will investigate how
young Bosnian activists adopt, reject, and/or re-interpret ideologies and models
of the future created by local and international elites, and will study what
kinds of strategies, subjectivities, and forms of alternative citizenship they
develop in the process. Specific objectives are: (1) to identify how young
activists engage in political debates permeating Bosnian society; (2) to
document the ways Bosnian activists perform resistance against the current
socio-political situation in the country, and to identify the stances they may
take vis-Ã -vis the state; and (3) to evaluate forms of moral alignments and
worldviews that are indexed by activists' performances in order to understand
their ideas of what constitutes a "good citizen."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will utilize social science research methods such as participant
observation and informal, semi-structured, and person-centered interviews in
order to gain an understanding of young activists' experiences of nationalism,
citizenship, and emerging political subjectivities. Video recording of public
discourse and activists' performances will be an important data collection
method as well, in order to enhance the study with subjective and experiential
depth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important, as its findings will
contribute to debates on post-conflict and transitional societies, and will
further elaborate the broader understandings of postsocialism. The focus on
individual experiences and performative strategies will add to larger
discussions about citizenship, nationalism, ethnic relations, and state-
building. Furthermore, this project will show that young people's experiences
are integral to the structural issues of peace- and state-building. In addition
to contributing to the training of a graduate student, the research will also
inform policymakers, international intervention programs, and NGOs about
everyday Bosnians' lived experiences, thereby further illuminating and perhaps
resolving region's the ethnic conflict.