* 1227800
* 2012 Physics Research &amp; Education GRC
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Charles Holbrow, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2013
* USD 41,600.00

This project is the organization of a major conference to inform, inspire, and
motivate teachers of undergraduate physics to develop and use astronomy based
materials for their teaching and thereby invigorate and enrich the undergraduate
physics syllabus. At this conference, astronomy and physics researchers will
give participants an overview of the remarkable discoveries and technologies of
modern astronomy and astrophysics, and in the course of their presentations
identify topics particularly suitable as contexts for effective and engaging
undergraduate physics instruction; other speakers will describe what astronomy
and physics education research have to say about how to successfully adapt
astronomy to the teaching of physics; and a third group of speakers will
describe current efforts to use astronomy to teach physics. One of the aims is
to inspire participants to produce high-quality materials for teaching in
undergraduate physics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;Achievement of the goals will bring before students the longstanding
interrelationship of physics and astronomy. By developing the physics that
underlies the discoveries and technologies of astronomy and astrophysics,
physics professors will help students better understand the basic principles of
physics. Students will also see how astronomy brings into view potentially new
physics such as dark matter and dark energy. Second, there is now a grand
generally accepted vision of the universe and its ongoing development. All
students should know this vision, and physics students should know the physics
that justifies it. This conference will suggest to physics professors new ways
to convey the vision in their courses. Third, the discoveries of astronomy and
space science depend on technologies that have grown out of basic research in
physics. Such research synergies are not unique to astronomy, but astronomy
provides a number of cases that clearly show how research discoveries lead to
advances in science and also to applications useful to the broader society.
Illustrating connections between basic research and practical consequences is an
intellectually valuable part of science teaching. This conference will show the
participants teachable examples of these connections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;There is potentially a broad
impact from the formation of a cadre of physics educators -- a cadre that will
include underrepresented minority faculty, women, post-docs, and graduate
students -- who will seek to generate a wide range of new teaching materials and
to bring new content into the undergraduate physics syllabus. Such a remarkable
change can lead to the education of more people who understand the reasoning
that supports our current view of the universe, and if these people become a
source of information and rational argument for the larger part of the
population who accept modern cosmology on authority, the result can be to give
modern science a credibility with broad social impact.