* 1227557
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics and Geography: Rectangular Grids and the Urban Economy: The Causes and Consequences of Spatial Land Patterns in American Cities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Gary Libecap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 16,554.00

This research project examines the use of the rectangular street grids, an
institution for partitioning and demarcating urban land as exemplified, for
example, by Manhattan. Rectangular grids are pervasive in urban economies
throughout the world and are implemented by governments and private developers
alike. This geographic phenomenon has attracted interest from scholars in a
variety of disciplines, yet little rigorous evidence exists on the causes and
consequences of urban grids. The current project investigates the determinants
that lead a city to adopt a rectangular grid, the process through which the grid
coordinates economic behavior, and the effect the grid has on the economic value
of urban land relative to alternative systems.&lt;br/&gt;As American cities grew
in the 19th and 20th centuries, they did so predominantly through rectangular
grids. These were conscious, centralized land demarcation systems intended to
promote real estate development, delineate the location of activities such as
manufacturing and retail, and coordinate the delivery of public goods, such as
water, sewerage and electric utilities. It is hypothesized that the clear,
uniform structure of the grid facilitates land markets by creating a network of
similar blocks and lots that reduces the costs of acquiring information during
land purchases and enhances the certainty of property boundaries. The linear
alignment of the grid is also expected to reduce the cost of installing public
infrastructure along roads and help to coordinate the location decisions of
firms. Despite these benefits the grid also has drawbacks as its uniform
structure ignores potentially valuable adjustments to local geography and the
plan is often criticized as unimaginative.&lt;br/&gt;This research project
presents a novel analysis of the tradeoffs involved in urban land demarcation by
focusing on the street systems in US cities from 1860 to 1910, a time of
unprecedented urban growth. Historical spatial data on property and street
patterns across and within cities in the U.S. will be collected. Using
geographical information systems software, metrics are subsequently created
capture the shape, alignment, and uniformity of a city's demarcation system.
These metrics are linked to urban economic outcomes at a particular location,
such as land values, population growth, transaction frequency, industry
location, and public goods provision; that are collected from a variety of
archival sources. A simple analytical model documenting the net benefits of the
grid is used to explain the geographical conditions under which the grid is more
beneficial, and these conditions guide the empirical analysis as to where the
grid is more likely to be adopted. When exploring the causal effects of the
rectangular grid on outcomes, the analysis focuses on specific areas where grids
are adjacent to alternative demarcation systems to provide a natural experiment
in which to measure the economic impacts of the grid.&lt;br/&gt;The empirical
setting is a time of dramatic urbanization and significant variation in the
economic fate of cities, and this analysis identifies the effects of a key
institutional platform through which urban economies developed. This research is
motivated by recent work on agricultural land grids and builds on a growing
number of empirical studies that identify relationships between geography,
institutions, and economic outcomes. Such studies show the direct impacts of
geography on economic growth as well as the indirect impacts geography can have
through its shaping of institutions. This research addresses these larger issues
by specifying the interrelationships between geography and institutions and uses
spatial science to specify the mechanisms through which these institutions arise
and shape economic activity.