* 1227036
* Research Trailer Acquisition for Quail Ridge Reserve
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Shane Waddell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 165,301.00

The University of California-Davis is awarded a grant to acquire a self-
contained mobile laboratory for deployment at Quail Ridge Reserve, a 2000-acre
unit of the University of California-Davis Natural Reserve System located in
Napa County, California. The laboratory will be a three-room, general purpose
facility. The large central room will house work-height countertops, desk space,
a fume hood, sink and storage; two peripheral rooms will be available for use in
animal holding and for behavioral trials. Lighting and climate control will be
programmable; environmental conditions will be monitored by an automatic system
linked to the reserve?s wireless communication network, alerting reserve staff
immediately of any technical problems. The lab will be appropriate for
processing, anesthetizing, tagging, holding, and conducting behavioral
experiments on captured animals. A separate mobile generator unit will provide
power to the laboratory, while minimizing noise inside the laboratory that could
stress animals and disrupt natural behaviors. Water and waste water storage will
be integrated into the unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quail Ridge Reserve hosts
multiple active research initiatives in animal genetics and behavior, as well as
in plant physiology, that will directly and immediately benefit from the
facility. Other NSF-sponsored initiatives, like the Quail Ridge automated animal
tracking system (for which hardware is completed and software is in refinement),
will rely heavily on the laboratory as a site for tagging or harnessing animals,
or for performing surgical implants of transmitters for use with the system.
This unique automatic system is poised to transform understanding of small
animal movements, dispersal, and response to stressors by remotely tracking
their locations and physiological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
facility will promote novel uses of the existing cyber-infrastructure linking
research enabled by the lab to remote portals, such as classroom and private
computers via an ongoing 'virtual museum of the environment' initiative. Citizen
scientists and after-school programs will be able to watch behavioral trials and
eventually track the movement of animals from their computers in near real time.
The lab will also be used by instructors from institutions of higher education
that currently use the reserve and are largely minority-serving. On-going
collaborations with international investigators and interns will benefit as
well. Results from combined use of the lab facility and the animal tracking
system will enhance understanding of animal movement and habitat use, thus
informing habitat protection and conservation decisions.