* 1227212
* Collaborative Research: High-resolution, multi-proxy Miocene-Pleistocene climate and environmental record from the high-elevation Zhada basin, SW Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Xiaoming Wang, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2017
* USD 81,520.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: High-resolution, multi-proxy Miocene-Pleistocene climate
and environmental record from the high-elevation Zhada basin, SW Tibetan Plateau

By

Timothy Shanahan, EAR-1226984, Univ. Texas Austin Xiaoming Wang, EAR-1227212,
Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History

ABSTRACT The proposed work will investigate the causes and effects of
environmental change in the southern Tibetan Plateau. The Tibetan Plateau
figures prominently in models of Cenozoic tectonic, faunal, environmental, and
paleoclimate evolution. However, despite extensive research into these topics on
the margins of the Tibetan Plateau, little research has focused on the record of
environmental change on the plateau itself, and existing data from the plateau
is complex and appears contradictory. The extensive lacustrine deposits of high
elevation paleolake Zhada in the Zhada Basin of southwestern Tibet contain
abundant vertebrate, invertebrate, and plant fossils and preserves a valuable
record of environmental change and vertebrate evolution spanning the last 9 Ma.
The proposed work seeks to use a combination of carbonate stable isotopes (e.g.,
d18O, d13C, delta47), molecular geochemical and stable isotopic (e.g., MBT/CBT
index, d13Cwax) approaches to reconstruct the history of past climate and
environmental changes on the plateau from the Zhada Basin sediments and to link
these to the changes in the fossil record. Together, these data will provide the
most complete record of environmental and faunal change over this crucial period
of time available for this region.