* 1227613
* Systemic Risk in Financial Intermediation: An International Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Katheryn Russ, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 12/31/2013
* USD 46,316.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Systemic Risk in Financial Intermediation:
An international perspective&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES -
1227613&lt;br/&gt;Katheryn N. Russ&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Davis
and&lt;br/&gt;National Bureau of Economic
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent financial crisis
prompted intense policy debate over the appropriate role for regulation in the
growth and reach of large lending institutions in the U.S. and worldwide. The
policy debate has far outpaced economic theory, which still provides no models
featuring an array of banks that vary in size and strategically (Bertrand)
compete in the macroeconomy. The need to model a large number of heterogeneous
banks, each setting its own competitive markup over lending costs, has presented
a serious technical challenge. This project uses recent advances in the theory
of heterogeneous firms to fill the conceptual gap and present a new framework
for policy analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides a new theoretical
framework for evaluating the effects of increasing the market share of the
largest banks on the pricing of loans and on macroeconomic stability. Existing
models of the banking sector (1) require banks to be identical or exogenously
limit their number to two or three and (2) predict that increasing concentration
coincides with increasing market power when pricing loans. Empirical studies
find a weak link or no link at all between concentration and the markups that
banks charge borrowers over the cost of funds, a common measure of market power.
This project exploits cross-country data on individual bank balance sheets to
generate relevant stylized facts and uses them to construct a new modeling
framework that encompasses the very different circumstances of large versus
small and financially developed versus less developed countries. The goal is to
derive and quantify the macroeconomic implications of a top-heavy distribution
of banks, in particular the relationship between bank size and volatility in the
aggregate credit supply and the gross domestic product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the project is its guide for regulatory policy. The central
theme of the project is that one size does not fit all when it comes to
evaluating the role of large banks. Increasing capital requirements may have no
impact on the cost of loans and little impact on market concentration or
macroeconomic volatility in large or highly financially developed countries, yet
can increase both borrowing costs and macroeconomic volatility in small or less
financially developed countries. Innovation in the financial sector can increase
both access to credit and macroeconomic volatility, presenting a tradeoff for
policymakers. The new modeling and empirics in this study will quantify these
crucial nuances for more accurate cost-benefit analysis.