* 1227506
* Existence of Equilibria in Infinite Games
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Philip Reny, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 273,312.00

This award funds research in game theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Game theoretic
reasoning is critical to a vast array of problems in economics, from the design
of efficient auctions (e.g. to sell radio spectrum licenses), to the analysis of
markets for health insurance. A fundamental tool for the analysis of such
problems is Nash's 1950 concept of equilibrium, now called simply Nash
equilibrium. Nash's idea has proven immensely useful and covers a lot of ground.
However, applying it in contexts (such as auctions) where small changes in a
player's behavior can have dramatic effects on his and/or on others' payoffs has
been difficult. More precisely, the existence of a Nash equilibrium cannot
always be guaranteed in discontinuous games. The first project is a continuation
of the PI's previous work to identify discontinuous games that, despite the
presence of discontinuities, admit Nash equilibria. This has already opened up
large classes of games for analysis that were not previously covered by Nash's
1950 existence theorem. An important aspect of the new existence result for pure
strategy equilibria that sought by the project is that it is ordinal, a property
that most of the previous work in the area fails to satisfy. Ordinality means
that the new result is independent of the arbitrary numerical scale that is used
to define the players' payoffs in the game. Thus, the new result will not only
expand the class of strategic games that we are able to analyze, it will provide
a deeper foundation to our understanding of the question of existence of Nash
equilibrium as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While the first project focuses on
strategic form games and discontinuities, the second project concerns games in
extensive form, where information and dynamics are explicitly modeled. It has
been about 30 years since Kreps and Wilson (1982) introduced the idea of a
sequential equilibrium for finite extensive form games. Yet, we still do not
have a working definition of sequential equilibrium for games with infinite
action sets and arbitrary information structures. This is despite the fact that
many dynamic economic models are formulated with infinite action spaces.
Researchers analyzing such games must resort to using ad hoc solutions that do
not correspond to the definition used for finite games. The second project of
this proposal seeks to provide the missing definition of sequential equilibrium
for such infinite-action extensive form games. The goal is to define a notion of
sequential equilibrium that (i) permits an existence result whether or not the
game is continuous -- in payoffs or in information -- and (ii) such that the
definition coincides in a natural way with Kreps and Wilson's definition for
finite games and (iii) yields the "natural equilibria" in a class of canonical
examples. The ultimate goal is to provide a definition that is widely
applicable, useful, and sensible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because many areas of
social science and computer science use game theory as a modeling tool, the
research will have a significant interdisciplinary impact.