* 1227908
* The Typology of Handshape: Gesture, Homesign, and Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2020
* Marie Coppola, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2020
* USD 549,989.00

This research will answer two related questions concerning differences and
similaarities across signed languages. Both are addressed by analyzing the
patterns of the handshapes produced in gesture, homesign and sign languages.
First, are some language-specific differences in sign languages attributable to
typological class (rather than to random variation or historical relatedness)?
The typological distinction involves two types of iconicity used in handshape
(hand-as-object vs. hand-as-hand) and how they are distributed throughout the
grammar -- in nouns, verbs, and productive morphology. The study will include
signers from four countries: the United States, the United Kingdom, Hong Kong,
and Italy. Typology has been an important tool in predicting variation among
spoken languages, and typology is hypothesized to have the same explanatory
power in signed languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second question to be
addressed is: How do differences among sign languages emerge? Are the patterns
of iconicity in handshape shared by a particular sign language and the
surrounding culturally specific gestures used by hearing people? Or do handshape
patterns emerge only when gesture is used as the primary means of communication
(homesign and sign language)? Gesturers, homesigners, and signers from Nicaragua
will be involved in answering this question, along with a control group of
gesturers from each of the countries mentioned above. It is expected that
gesture systems will pattern differently with respect to sign languages and
homesign, which are expected to behave more similarly to one another. If
confirmed, this will be evidence that sign language patterns are not continuous
with those of the surrounding gestural patterns that hearing people use, but
rather stem from continued use of gesture as the sole means of communication.
This will shed light on the "nature" vs. "nurture" question. Since it is no
longer possible to trace the change from "non-language" to "language" in speech,
this work contributes to our understanding of the emergence of
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing a better understanding
of the properties of signed languages and the factors that influence variation
among them, this project will enable the development of improved methods for
assessing typical and atypical SL development. The project will also provide
valuable training opportunities for undergraduate students, and will enable the
creation of new, international scientific collaborations.