* 1227745
* Collaborative Research: Models and Methods for Nonstationary Behavioral Time Series
* SBE,SES
* 01/16/2012,08/31/2014
* Hernando Ombao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The study of behavioral and physiological data often is difficult because such
data typically consist of large-dimensional, high-resolution nonstationary time
series. Consequently, there is an increasing need for statistically principled
and computationally efficient approaches for complex time series data. This
research project focuses on the development of a coherent suite of novel
statistical models and related methodology for large-dimensional, high-
resolution multivariate time series. The statistical methods to be developed
will be used to link nonstationary features of physiological time series, such
as functional magnetic resonance image (fMRI), to behavioral and neurocognitive
assessment data. The project will develop two types of approaches for modeling
multi-dimensional time series. The first approach will model the set of
nonstationary time series via the locally stationary representation that
characterizes the spectral dynamics of the process in terms of a time-varying
spectral density matrix. The second approach consists of capturing dynamical
dependencies in the data via Bayesian state-space models that will be able to
estimate the coherency across the time series over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The statistical models and methods developed in this
research project will be used to study how physiological time series in healthy
individuals are related to neurocognitive scores. Data that will be studied
include measures derived from brain images as well as time series of various
regions of interest derived from fMRI. Behavioral and physiological signals
recorded to monitor cognitive fatigue and workload also will be studied. Even
though the focus of this project is on the analysis of physiological and
behavioral data, the models and methods that will be developed in this research
project are very general and have the potential of impacting other scientific
fields given that highly structured multivariate time series data often are
collected in the areas of econometrics, environmetrics, geosciences, and signal
processing.