* 1227083
* Landslide dynamics from seismic wave inversion, satellite remote sensing, and numerical modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2016
* USD 417,968.00

This project is focused on developing and applying new methods to investigate
the dynamics of catastrophic landslides. The dynamic motion of large and fast
landslides is poorly understood for two main reasons: (1) the physics of rock
sliding, breaking, and flowing as a granular mass is very complex, and (2) there
is a nearly complete lack of direct observations and measurements of the speed
and evolution of large landslides. The project will use a new method to
determine the movement of landslides through interpretation of the seismic waves
that are generated as the rock accelerates and slows down along its paths of
sliding. Such waves are routinely recorded on global and regional seismographic
networks as a consequence of large landslides and the signals can now be
interpreted using methods modified from those used to study large earthquakes.

The seismic analysis will be combined with interpretation and analysis of
before-and-after satellite imagery that provides complementary information on
the motion of the landslide, and numerical modeling of landslide motion over
realistic topography. The combined analysis will lead to detailed descriptions
of many recent catastrophic landslides, and new insights into the forces and
processes involved.

An outcome of the project is a tool to detect and quantify catastrophic
landslides remotely and in near-real time. Communities engaged in natural-
hazards mitigation and disaster management will find such a tool valuable,
notably in cases where massive slope failures strike in remote areas or under
conditions where communications are severely compromised. The collection of
detailed descriptions of historical landslides that will result from the project
will be of interest to a wide range of science and engineering communities
concerned with slope instability.