* 1227164
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tone and Variation in Idakho
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Kristopher Ebarb, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2014
* USD 11,969.00

The Luyia languages, like many Bantu languages, mark verbal distinctions with
melodic high tones. Different tenses target different positions of the stem in
assigning these melodic high tones, and some tonal rules will apply within verbs
in some tenses, but not others. The goal of this project is to assess the
usefulness of inter-varietal tonal evidence in positing historical
reconstructions. In probing this question, the project will comprehensively
describe and analyze the verbal and nominal tonology of six Kenyan varieties of
the Luyia language group: Idakho, Isukha, Nyore, Kisa, Marama, and Tsotso. The
verbal tonology will be probed through a questionnaire which varies features of
the verbal form. A questionnaire asking speakers to pronounce many nouns in a
variety of semantic and syntactic contexts will probe the nominal tonology.
These questionnaires will produce a rich dataset that will allow for the
historical reconstructions based on segmental evidence to be compared with those
suggested by tonal evidence.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The usefulness of tonal
evidence in positing historical reconstructions will be further assessed through
an investigation of the synchronic variation within the Idakho variety. The
speech of approximately 36 speakers subdivided into 6 groups will be compared,
with special attention paid to three indicators: (i) the number and type of
tense distinctions speakers maintain, (ii) grammatical properties of the tonal
melodies, and (iii) the phonetic aspects of tone production. The parameters
dividing the six groups are: (i) hometown (three rural Idakho communities) and
(ii) current residence (original hometown vs. Nairobi).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will shed light on the susceptibility of tonal systems
like those of the Luyia languages to change, especially in response to contact
with other languages. Furthermore, language learners, language teachers, and NGO
workers will gain access to hitherto unavailable dictionary materials,
descriptions of noun and verb formation, and an audio archive containing native-
speaker pronunciations of many words.