* 1227892
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Causal Representations in Children's Transitive Sentences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,999.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement grant will support the work of
doctoral student Melissa Kline under the direction of Dr. Edward
Gibson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structures of sentences contain clues to their
meanings. A nonsense sentence like "The dax gorped the blicket to the voom"
allows for some initial guesses: 'gorping' probably means something about
sending or transferring. The research carried out in this project will address
the issue of how children learn the rules that match sentence meanings with
sentence form. An important test for this question is a basic sentence type, the
transitive sentence (e.g. "Jane broke the lamp.") Across languages, transitive
sentences are reliably used to describe causal events, but some languages like
English also allow for other kinds of meanings (e.g. "Jane liked the lamp.")
Even so, adult speakers tend to expect new transitive verbs to refer to causal
events. Do children use a similar strategy to help them learn new verbs?
Depending on the learning biases children use and the input they hear from their
parents, children might make very different guesses than adults about new verb
meanings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these questions we will examine the
guesses that toddlers make about the meaning of a novel word like 'daxing.' Co-
PI Kline will also use conversation transcripts to compare these guesses to the
transitive sentences that parents actually say to their children. Currently, we
know that children have a broad preference for certain scenes to match with
transitive sentences: a girl pushing a boy in a wheelbarrow is a better guess
for "The girl daxed the boy" than a girl and a boy waving their arms separately.
In this research Ms. Kline will use what is known about causal perception to
create closely matched scene contrasts to discover the specific cues and
features that children associate with transitive verbs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to our understanding of how
children learn verbs and sentence structures and of how conceptual
representations are related to language. Funding this project also contributes
to the training of a graduate student.