* 1227635
* Gains from Economic Integration: Theory and Evidence from Agricultural Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Arnaud Costinot, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2018
* USD 375,144.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Gains from Economic Integration: Theory and
Evidence from Agricultural Markets&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES - 1227635
&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Dave Donaldson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How
large are the gains from economic integration? Since researchers never observe
markets that are both closed and open at the same time, the fundamental
challenge in answering this question lies in predicting how local markets,
either countries or regions, would behave under counterfactual scenarios in
which they suddenly become more or less integrated with the rest of the world.
This project will develop a new approach in order to obtain knowledge of such
counterfactual scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;The central idea is to focus on agriculture,
a sector of the economy in which scientific knowledge of how essential inputs
map into outputs is uniquely well understood. As a consequence of this
knowledge, agronomists are able to predict how productive a given parcel of land
would be were it to be used to grow any one of a set of crops. The approach of
this project combines these agronomic predictions about both factual and
counterfactual technologies with a general equilibrium model in which
heterogeneous parcels of land are allocated to multiple crops in multiple local
markets under perfect competition.&lt;br/&gt;To date this research has focused
on applying this new approach to the context of U.S. agricultural markets from
1880 to 2002. A combination of agronomic data from the Global Agro-Ecological
Zones (GAEZ) project and historical data from the U.S. Census identifies the
spatial distribution of crop prices across U.S. counties over time, while still
allowing for unobserved crop-county-year specific productivity shocks. These
estimates of local prices further identify changes in trade costs over time and,
in turn, the gains from market integration over the period from 1880 to 2002.
&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing work in this project applies a similar approach to study
global agricultural trade reform. Despite its vital importance for many
developing countries, there is relatively little work on trade in agricultural
goods. The new approach developed here is potentially well suited to fill this
gap by offering a flexible, tractable, and scientifically-informed framework for
quantitative work on this topic. The goal will be to improve forecasts of how
the removal of agricultural trade policies may affect the prices and trade flows
of agricultural goods, as well as the welfare of those who produce and consume
these goods. Such considerations are at the heart of the World Trade
Organization's Doha Round.&lt;br/&gt;A second area of ongoing work focuses on
the economic consequences of climate change. Since agronomic models (such as the
GAEZ model) can be re-computed under a wide range of climate change scenarios,
the new methodology developed here also has the potential to shed new light on
how countries will adapt to climate change in the agricultural sector through
changes in their output mix and through the ability to trade with other
countries.