* 1227295
* RUI: Geographic and Occupational Mobility During the Great Depression
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jason Long, Wheaton College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 119,816.00

In the aftermath of the recent financial crisis, housing market bust, and
recession, there has been increased scholarly interest in trends in geographic
mobility in the U.S., and especially in the behavior of mobility during times of
economic fluctuation. Mounting evidence points to a downward trend in geographic
mobility in the U.S. exacerbated in multiple ways by the economic downturn.
Recent work indicates that, since World War II, mobility has typically declined
during recessions and that over the past several years housing market factors
such as negative equity, mortgage lock-in, and property tax lock-in exert a
strong negative effect on household mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If indeed the
"Great Recession" has seen a cyclical fall in geographic mobility, it would shed
light on the slow nature of the current recovery in employment growth and carry
important implications for policy-making. For instance, since late 2009, there
has been in increase in the ratio of job openings to unemployed workers. In
normal times, an increase in the number of job openings would be accompanied by
a fall in the unemployment rate, but for the past two years there has been
essentially no associated fall in unemployment. One hypothesis suggests that
this may be evidence of "mismatch" in the labor market: an inability of firms to
hire workers who would otherwise move to find work, due to an unusually strong
reduction in mobility rates brought on by the unusually strong recession.
Determining the importance of mismatch in explaining the slow recovery of
unemployment rates in the past three recessions, and especially the Great
Recession, is a significant ongoing subject of economic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research project is to understand
the effects of the Great Depression on geographic and occupational mobility in
the U.S. during the 1930s. This research project will contribute to our
understanding of the economics and history of the Depression itself and to our
understanding of the effect of economic fluctuations on mobility generally by
exploring the effects of the Great Depression on geographic and occupational
mobility in the U.S. during the decade of the 1930s. To achieve these goals, the
PI along with a team of undergraduate research collaborators will construct and
analyze a rich new data source that will allow us to explore these issues in
fundamentally new ways. What is currently known about geographic mobility during
the Depression comes from the population censuses of the early twentieth
century, an imperfect source for studying mobility and migration, as it depends
on the observation of children's birthplaces to infer changes of location; and
is therefore restricted to married men with young children. This group is not
representative of the entire population, or of the sub-population with highest
mobility rates: the young, single, and/or
childless.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, new data sources and empirical
techniques have dramatically increased our ability to study mobility in an
historical time frame. The research project proposed here would exploit these
new techniques and new data from the 1940 census that has become available in
the spring of 2012 in order to construct linked panel datasets spanning the
Depression decade and the two previous decades.