* 1227160
* Collaborative Research: Land Change in the Cerrado: Ethanol and Sugar Cane Expansion at the Farm and Industry Scale
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* John Brown, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2016
* USD 136,144.00

This project focuses on the impact of land-use and land-cover change from
expansion of sugarcane production and associated economic factors related to
increased biofuel production in the Cerrado. The Cerrado consists of woodland
savanna and is the second largest biome in Brazil. It also is one of the world's
biodiversity hotspots. Global efforts to reduce carbon emissions and higher
demand for "clean," more sustainable alternatives to fossil fuels have led to
the development of biofuel production in many parts of the world, including the
Cerrado. A team of U.S.-based investigators and their Brazilian collaborators
will determine how external factors, including biofuel demand and supply,
sugarcane demand and supply, biofuel industry expansion, and government policy,
impact farmers' decisions to produce sugarcane for biofuel production as well as
other forms of land-use and land-cover change in the Cerrado. They will examine
factors affecting farmers' decision making, and they will predict future land-
use and land-cover change in the Cerrado under different biofuel market and
policy scenarios. The investigators will collect a broad mix of qualitative and
quantitative data using surveys and interviews. They will conduct archival
research to provide a detailed understanding of the policy and macroeconomic
context for the emergence of the sugarcane industry in the Cerrado, and they
will analyze satellite-based remote sensing data to develop an data on land-use
and land-cover change at the field level across the study region. They will
develop a modeling framework to integrate conduct market analyses and farm-level
household analyses in a comparative, longitudinal approach, with an emphasis
placed on viewing sugar and ethanol processes as related to the equilibrium of
supply and demand. The modeling also will provide a predictive platform to model
the impacts of sugarcane production and expansion on land-cover change under
different scenarios using actual field, farm, and market-level data.

This project will enhance basic understanding regarding on how market demand and
supply and government policy have affected the behavior of both the ethanol
industry and the farmers who are providing an increasing supply of sugarcane via
land conversion in Brazil. It also will add insights and information regarding
the extent to which existing agricultural cropland, pasture, and native
vegetation are being converted to sugarcane. With bioenergy and its human and
ecological impacts the subject of debate among policy makers and civil society
in Brazil and elsewhere, project findings will have implications for
conservation initiatives and sustainability. The project will contribute to
graduate education and training at Kansas State University and the University of
Kansas, and it will help build international partnerships between U.S.- and
Brazilian-based researchers and students. The project will ensure future
international collaboration on the impacts of bioenergy expansion in Brazil and
create the basis for comparative work on U.S. and Brazilian energy geographies.