* 1227196
* Modernization and expansion of seawater facilities at the Oregon Institute of Marine Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Craig Young, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2016
* USD 124,495.00

The University of Oregon is awarded a grant to expand and modernize aging
components of the running seawater system at the Oregon Institute of Marine
Biology (http://pages.uoregon.edu/oimb/). The system, which is used daily by
virtually all researchers and students at the facility including scientists from
other institutions, is the most important part of the marine lab infrastructure.
Large seawater pumps near the end of their useful life will be replaced with new
pumps controlled by a microprocessor-based system that can be monitored and
programmed through a secure wireless network. The pumps and controls will be
contained in a new pump house that affords excellent protection from salt spray
and humidity. A backup generator will assure continuous operation during power
outages and wasteful freshwater priming will be replaced with a simple and
sustainable seawater priming system. New storage tanks will increase capacity to
accommodate the growing numbers of visitors and students that use the marine
lab. This infrastructure improvement will support research in developmental
biology, larval biology, animal behavior and ecology, all of which require
reliably pure and abundant seawater.

The seawater system is integral to virtually all of the marine education at the
University of Oregon, including programs directed at elementary school classes
and teachers, undergraduate college students, visiting classes from other
colleges, community college faculty and students, and visiting graduate
students. The general public is served by lectures and workshops as well as a
new public museum and aquarium that will soon open. Several programs at the
University of Oregon are directed at minority students, including Native
Americans. A Coastal Master Naturalist certification program prepares informal
marine science educators for service in state parks and other venues. Marine
science curriculum developed for teachers is made freely available on the
internet.