* 1227181
* Research Improvements at the UNM Sevilleta Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Scott Collins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 96,750.00

The University of New Mexico is awarded a grant to complete the third and final
phase of a long term strategic plan to improve the Sevilleta Education and
Research Facility (SERF) for visiting scientists, summer REU students, graduate
students and group training. This project involves the components to complete
and equip shell spaces in the facility to provide growth chambers, a computer
laboratory, and an institutional kitchen. The first consists of the acquisition
of several environmental chambers of various sizes and capabilities to enable
controlled-environment experiments with plants, insects, small animals and
microorganisms. The second component is a multi-purpose computer research and
training laboratory that will allow training and data analysis ranging from GIS
to molecular evolution and ecology. Funds will provide for computer
workstations, visualization equipment, and tables to furnish this multi-use
classroom-sized computer laboratory. The third component is to complete kitchen
facilities available to researchers participating in events such as training
workshops, research conferences, LTER working groups, and formal and informal
gatherings of REU summer students. Previous phases of this strategic plan have
been completed and resulted in the construction of a new 20,000 square-foot
facility and an increase in guest capacity from 48 to 82 through a combination
of new construction and renovation of existing buildings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit exists in the goal to develop
modern facilities for researchers in many fields of biological science. The
broader impacts include greater access to learning opportunities and research
facilities for an extremely diverse student population at UNM, and for other
visiting scientists and their students from institutions within and outside New
Mexico. UNM is a minority serving institution, and the Sevilleta Field Station
and Sevilleta LTER Program are dedicated to enhancing minority participation in
field-based research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more information about the
Sevilleta Education and Research Facility please visit: http://sevfs.unm.edu/