* 1227780
* 2012 NSF Ceramic Grantees Workshop, June 13-14, Arlington VA
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Greg Geiger, American Ceramic Society
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 24,600.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project supports a workshop focused on the
professional development and networking of Principal Investigators (PIs) who
have active National Science Foundation (NSF) grants from the Ceramics Program
in the Division of Materials Research. The goals of workshop are to: (1) educate
PIs about the NSF proposal submission, review, award, oversight and management
processes; (2) provide an environment for researchers within the field of
ceramics to collaborate and share information about their research projects; (3)
improve communication about research accomplishments; (4) address key issues in
the field; and (5) engage PIs in discussions to improve processes to help the
American Ceramic Society (ACerS) and NSF increase the effectiveness of ceramics
research. As well, ACerS will continue to develop the website for this community
(http://ceramics.org/knowledge-center/national-science-foundation/) that
showcases the accomplishments of the NSF-funded researchers and educators in
ceramics. Specifically, this website links together researchers, abstracts of
their NSF-funded projects, publications, press releases and other highlights.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This two-day workshop will take place
June 13-14, 2012 in Arlington, Virginia. Each participant will provide both an
oral and poster presentation highlighting their research and education
activities. The core part of the workshop includes sessions about writing
effective highlights; reporting requirements; delivering your opinion in
proposal reviews; news about NSF merit review and funding opportunities; the
Materials Genome Initiative; facilities, instrumentation and cooperation in the
USA; American competitiveness and innovation; broadening participation; and the
Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP). As well, an
additional discussion topic will focus on the roles and responsibilities of PIs,
professional societies and government agencies. A post-workshop tutorial will
cover: aspects of NSF proposal submissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
website for the 2012 meeting will be found on this list:
http://ceramics.org/meetings/event-calendar. &lt;br/&gt;Website for 2011
Ceramics PI workshop: http://ceramics.org/knowledge-center/national-science-
foundation/nsf-ceramic-materials-pi-workshop-2011-archive &lt;br/&gt;and the
website for 2010 Ceramics PI workshop: http://ceramics.org/meetings/meetings-
archives/nsf-ceramic-materials-pi-workshop-archive.