* 1227152
* Ethnic Boundaries and Cultural Change in an Amazonian Population
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* John Bunce, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 143,448.00

Ethnographic, historical, and psychological evidence suggests that peaceful
interactions among individuals of different ethnicities can play an important
role in shaping the cultural characteristics of ethnic groups. However, the
general mechanisms by which this occurs are poorly understood. Dr. John Bunce,
of the University of California, Davis, will conduct a two-year investigation of
the effects of inter-ethnic interaction among individuals on cultural norms of
behavior in neighboring Mestizo and indigenous Matsigenka communities along the
Manu River in Amazonian Peru. This study will advance our understanding of the
processes by which ethnic-typical cultural characteristics are maintained, lost,
or transformed as different ethnic groups come into contact and expand
interaction.

The actual distributions of behavioral norms and markers of ethnicity (e.g.,
language, dress, etc.), along with personal inter-ethnic interaction experience,
will be identified and recorded in Mestizo and Matsigenka focal communities
using structured interviews and extensive participant observation. The isolation
of the small communities makes inter-ethnic interaction relatively limited in
scope, easy to observe, and easy for people to recall. Experimental "games" will
then be used to investigate individuals' perceptions of norms and markers in
their own and the other ethnic group. Agent-based evolutionary models will be
developed to gain further insight into causal mechanisms underlying the observed
patterns of interaction experience and norm and marker distributions.

Findings from this research will contribute to social science theory of culture
change that occurs as the result of intergroup contact. In addition to
dissemination in scientfic venues, results also will be discussed in culturally-
appropriate contexts with the focal communities and regional indigenous
organizations. Understanding mechanisms of cultural change will empower them to,
if they wish, design effective strategies to limit the loss of cultural
characteristics that they collectively want to preserve while simultaneously
engaging with outsiders. At the communities' request, the investigator teaches
weekly reading and math classes while working there. Additionally, this project
will expand dialogue and collaboration with Peruvian researchers through
participation in seminars at Peruvian universities.