* 1227614
* Conference:  U.S. Workshop on DNA Banking - January 2013, St. Louis, Missouri
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Wendy Applequist, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 08/31/2014
* USD 40,521.00

A two-day workshop on DNA banking in the US is planned for January 2013, in St.
Louis, Missouri, organized by the Missouri Botanical Garden. Among the 26
invitees will be those from institutions having and lacking DNA collections;
botanists, zoologists, mycologists, and specialists in bioinformatics, including
people at all career stages, will attend; representatives of large and small
institutions, including universities and stand-alone natural history museums and
herbaria, will be invited. Presentations will be given in the morning and
afternoons will be devoted to discussion; 18 of the invitees will be asked to
speak. Topics will focus on two themes, maximizing the utility and efficiency of
operation of existing DNA collections, and identifying and filling the most
critical gaps in those collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
workshop include improving awareness of existing DNA resources, identifying
geographic and taxonomic gaps in those resources and crafting a strategy for
filling the gaps, and discussion of what legal, ethical, and data standards
should apply to all such resources. The outcomes of the workshop will be
published by the Missouri Botanical Garden Press (manuscript editing will be
complete within a year of the workshop).