* 1227930
* BRIGE: Experimental Analysis of Vortex Flow in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Fatemeh Hassanipour, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,302.00

PI: Hassanipour&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1227930&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vast
number of natural and man-made materials are solids that contain pores (voids),
for example rocks, soil, biological tissues, cements, ceramics, etc. These
porous media are used in many areas of applied science and engineering including
filtration, soil mechanics, petroleum engineering, bioengineering, etc. The
static properties of porous media have been studied intensively for many
decades, but the understanding of dynamic interactions of fluids with porous
media remains an important area of investigation that can yield critical and
much-needed improvements to applications in health care, environment, and
various other areas of engineering. The challenges in this area arise from the
complex internal structure of a porous medium, together with the highly
nonlinear dynamic behavior of fluids. The proposed activity involves the
construction of a carefully conceived experimental apparatus that facilitates
precise and repeatable experiments involving (dynamic) vortex flows and porous
media. Key difficulties are addressed, firstly by a high-precision vortex
generator devised in the PI's lab that is controlled by a computer, whose
software is also developed in-house. This will allow the generation of a variety
of velocity profiles for the fluid to an unprecedented level of precision.
Secondly, a synthetic porous medium will be constructed whose optical refractive
index is matched to the fluid, thus making it transparent and allowing
observation and measurement of the flow by planar laser-induced
fluorescence.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits of the proposed activity involves
the investigation of fundamental scientific questions regarding vortex flows in
porous media, namely uncovering the effect of (a) porosity, (b) permeability,
(c) fluid density and viscosity, (d) injection velocity, pressure, pulse
duration, and frequency on the behavior of fluid pattern separation,
accumulation, and transport phenomena of vortex flow within the porous medium.
This research is well motivated by preliminary results and will be conducted
with a new and unique experimental setup for measurements and visualization of
vortex flows in porous media. The interaction of vortex flows with porous media
and their transport through porous media is a new direction that can potentially
be transformative.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposal benefits the society
by contributions to the advancement of many processes and devices that are
critically important to our well being due to their effect on healthcare
(biomedical devices), the environment (underground flows), and agriculture
(erosion, grain drying and conditioning), among others. The results of this
research will be widely disseminated through the web, via
conferences,&lt;br/&gt;as well as seminars. This research will be integrated
with educational activities via new courses, by providing research opportunities
for undergraduates in their required (capstone) design projects, as well as K-12
outreach via collaboration with HI-TECCC (High-Technology Education Coalition of
Collin County). The proposed activity includes a carefully crafted broadening
participation plan that has two main components: one targeting individuals with
disability, and the other targeting under-represented minorities and women. The
PI has created an accessible lab environment and has collaboration with UTD
Office of Accessibility to make research positions available to disabled
students. The PI also has an active, consistent, and successful track record in
recruiting, retaining, and graduating female and minority students.