* 1227232
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intervention Effects in the Acquisition of Raising
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Kamil Ud Deen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2014
* USD 9,774.00

Sentences like (i) the boy seems to the girl to be happy are unusual because the
subject the boy is understood as being associated with the adjective happy
despite the two being distant from each other. Such sentences are referred to as
'raising' sentences because this association is thought to arise from movement
of the subject (raising) from a location closer to the adjective. Compare this
to (ii) it seems to the girl that the boy is happy, where the subject occurs in
its original (unraised) position. Previous research has shown that children have
difficulty understanding raising sentences like (i), but not an unraised
sentence like (ii). This dissertation research investigates whether the source
of difficulty might be reduced to a processing factor referred to as
'intervention' -- the presence of a noun phrase (the girl) intervening between
the subject and the location from which it moved. Intervention effects have been
observed in many structures that involve such moved elements, including object
relative clauses, object wh-questions, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this dissertation is twofold. First, it corrects previously unnoticed flaws in
current methodologies, and thus provides a better picture of children's
abilities with respect to raising. Second, it offers an explanation for
children's difficulty with raising that draws on a phenomenon (intervention)
that generalizes across multiple constructions, thereby reducing the observed
difficulties with raising to a more general facet of human language processing.
The results of this work will allow us to evaluate and compare three different
theories that have been proposed to explain intervention effects in the fields
of language acquisition and adult sentence processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five
experiments will be conducted to investigate how children?s comprehension is
affected by (i) the presence of an intervening noun in raising structures, (ii)
the type of intervening noun (lexical/pronominal), and (iii) the position of the
subject (raised and unraised). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation is
interdisciplinary in bringing together three different subfields: acquisition,
syntax and processing. Furthermore, the approach adopted in this dissertation
has the potential to be extended to a variety of additional populations such as
L2 learners of English and speakers of other languages that permit raising
across another noun phrase.