* 1227005
* Establishment of the Amphibian Research Laboratory at STRI's Gamboa Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Brian Gratwicke, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 318,000.00

The Smithsonian Institution is awarded a grant to construct a multiuser
amphibian research laboratory adjacent to a pre-existing amphibian conservation
center developed by the Panama Amphibian Rescue and Conservation project at the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute's Gamboa field station in Panama. The
facility will provide research space, live animal laboratory space, and
quarantine space to be used by in house staff, visiting scientists, students and
volunteers. The addition of an amphibian research laboratory on the site will
support research across numerous disciplines with a focus on utilizing the
adjacent living collection of highly endangered amphibians. The new amphibian
research laboratory will build critical capacity to improve the quality of
existing NSF-funded collaborative research and open up new possibilities for
such collaborations. The lab may facilitate multidisciplinary research in a wide
range of areas, but disease mitigation research countering the devastating
effects of the amphibian chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis in Panama
will be prioritized.

Broader impacts of the project will be the growth of in-country capacity to
research and counter amphibian declines throughout Latin America and provide a
venue to foster hands-on experience for the scientific training of young
scientists both in the US and Panama. In addition, the existing educational
network associated with the project will help to leverage significant exposure
for research conducted in the new lab both in the USA and Panama, and help to
foster people-to-people awareness between the USA and Panama. For more
information about the STRI Gamboa Field Station please visit the web site at
http://www.stri.si.edu/english/research/facilities/terrestrial/gamboa/index.php.