* 1227305
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: From Analyzing to Anticipating Water Conflicts in High-Risk Dry Tropical Water Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Christopher Kuzdas, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2013
* USD 6,429.00

The contexts for water allocation decisions often involve diverse interests and
high levels of competition. Water conflicts in regions experiencing water
scarcity and social tensions, such as Guanacaste Province in Costa Rica, might
reach critical tipping points if drier conditions occur as projected. Good
governance of natural resources is a multi-objective endeavor that requires
strong institutional capacity to effectively manage conflict situations. This
project explores institutional capacities in a Costa Rican region that has
experienced water conflicts. The research combines conflict data from
interviews, court records, and previous studies in order to examine why some
disputes escalate to become destructive or even violent, while others do not.
Through statistical analysis the projects examines the effects of governance
arrangements on conflict intensity amid varying environmental and socio-economic
conditions. The project also involves stakeholder workshops in a small area
within Guanacaste to explore new methods to link regional-scale analysis to
community-scale planning efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project clarifies
institutional features that make some resource disputes more intractable than
others. Many previous water conflict studies have been conducted at a macro-
scale; yet, most water conflicts take place on regional or community scales. The
regional and local orientation of this project is designed to produce useful
information to improve water governance and management schemes and to aid
decision-makers in allocating water resources. With fewer funds available for
public resource management and drier climates expected in many regions, good
governance arrangements are critical to secure the well-being and sustainability
of local communities and their ecosystems. Communities play increasingly active
roles in managing their resources; yet, linking broader-scale science to local
planning efforts remains a challenge. The project attempts to bridge this gap.