* 1227228
* Quantifying Near-Surface Patterns of Bedrock Fractures and Assessing Controls on Fracture Formation.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Brian Clarke, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2015
* USD 171,556.00

The primary goal of this study is to further develop, calibrate, and test a
seismic refraction-based methodology to investigate subsurface rock-strength
properties and fracture distributions. The strength and coherence of rocks play
key roles in shaping landscapes, resisting erosion, and modulating landslide
hazards. The key factor, however, is not the strength of intact rock, but rather
the effective strength of the entire rock-mass at the surface where it interacts
with climatic, hillslope, and biotic variables. This effective strength is
modulated by the development of fractures that weaken the rock mass and make it
more susceptible to erosion, physical and chemical weathering, biologic
activity, or collapse. To delineate variations in fracture density in the
shallow subsurface, a promising, but largely unexplored methodology combines
shallow seismic refraction surveys of bedrock outcrops with laboratory analyses
of ?intact? samples. Initial results indicate two common fracture patterns
versus depth: rock that is uniformly fractured (apparently by large-scale
tectonic forces); and rock with a distinct fracture gradient in an upper layer
(apparently due to climatic and biotic fracturing processes) that overlies a
much stronger, less fractured lower layer. Although very promising, this
methodology needs to be refined, tested, and explored more thoroughly. Hence the
goal of this study. By focusing the method development and calibration on
artificial and natural bedrock exposures that permit detailed observation,
measurement, and sampling of fracture properties, the seismically-derived
results can be tested and validated by direct comparison to field observations.
With an improved calibration in hand, two fundamental questions about near-
surface fracturing will be investigated: how do near-surface fracture patterns
vary both with depth and spatially across the landscape; and what are the
dominant controls on near-surface fracture formation? In a mountainous field
site in Colorado, the relative importance of (i) freeze-thaw processes in
causing rock fracturing versus (ii) gravitational forces that cause fracturing
due to hillslope steepness and curvature will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why do landslides occur on some hillslopes, but not on
others of equal steepness? Why do parts of the landscape erode much more quickly
than other, similar appearing areas? One key control on erosion or collapse of
hillslopes is the strength of the underlying rock. Whereas various rock types
typically have different intrinsic strengths (a granite versus a mudstone, for
example), the density of fractures in a rock also exerts a fundamental control
on its strength: higher fracture densities and greater connectivity among the
fractures weaken a rock and increase its susceptiblility to landsliding or
erosion. Recent research suggests that fracture densities are at least as
important as intrinsic rock strength in controlling hillslope stability. Despite
the importance of rock fracturing for hillslope stability, methodologies for
quantifying fracture densities have remained elusive: commonly the bedrock is
hidden under a layer of soil, and even when exposed, only fractures on the
topmost surface of the bedrock are visible. A promising, new approach uses
shallow seismic surveys to probe the top 10-20 m of a hillslope and convert
variations in seismic velocity with depth into changes in fracture density with
depth. This research will explore this nascent technology by testing and
calibrating it in natural and artificial bedrock exposures where the fracture
density has been previously quantified. Subsequently, this shallow seismic
methodology (which uses backpack-able portable arrays) will be used to test how
variations in (i) the intensity and frequency of freeze-thaw processes and (ii)
hillslope curvature and steepness influence the density and depth of rock
fracturing. The overall goal is to improve our ability to efficiently assess
both hillslope vulnerability to erosion or failure by landsliding and the impact
of plants, weather, and topography on hillslope stability and bedrock
fracturing.