* 1227620
* Collaborative Research: Robustness of Strategic Behavior to Misspecification of Agents' Beliefs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Siyang Xiong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 163,974.00

This award funds research in the theory of games with incomplete information.
This branch of noncooperative game theory has a wide range of applications in
Economics and other social sciences. Examples include the analysis of optimal
taxation, auctions and procurement design, signaling models of the labor market,
adverse selection models of trade and insurance markets, reputation and
commitment in long-run relationships, credibility of monetary policies, and
strategic trading in financial markets.

Previous research has established that the predictions made by game theory about
behavior in these situations are quite sensitive to the assumptions made about
the players' infinite hierarchies of beliefs. The PIs develop new methods to
study this robustness problem. They evaluate the severity of the robustness
problem by characterizing necessary and sufficient conditions for the strategic
behavior of a given Harsanyi type to be approximated by the strategic behavior
of (a sequence of) perturbed types. This amounts to providing a belief-based
characterization of the strategic topology over types. The investigators also
apply their characterization to a variety of questions concerning robustness to
perturbations of higher-order beliefs, including genericity of common priors and
of critical types, and the connections between robustness of strategic behavior
and the notion of common p-belief.

The project will have broader impact because this branch of game theory is used
to study applied problems in multiple domains, including Computer Science, and
Biology. The PIs will be incorporating their research into graduate courses and
will train graduate students in these new methods.