* 1227759
* BRIGE: Interfacial Defects and the Failure of Nanostructured Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Timothy Rupert, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2014
* USD 174,994.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
award provides funding for the development of failure-resistant nanocrystalline
materials through interfacial engineering. Nanocrystalline materials are
extremely strong, but often fracture catastrophically. This research program
aims to improve the failure resistance of these materials by controlling atomic-
level grain boundary structure and chemistry through intelligent alloy design
and post-processing treatments. High-quality nanocrystalline metals will be
synthesized and heat-treated, followed by thorough characterization of the grain
boundary states. The ability of each alloy to sustain stable plastic flow and
resist fast crack propagation will be measured with micro-scale compression and
fracture experiments. The insights obtained here will be used to develop new
materials theory which connects interfacial details to failure mechanisms and to
optimize the design of damage-resistant nanostructured
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will facilitate the
creation of nanocrystalline materials with both extreme strength and toughness.
The primary goal of the research is to quantify how different grain boundary
defect states alter the onset of failure in nanocrystalline alloys, so that the
deformation physics of highly disordered engineering materials will be more
fully understood. As nanomaterials are becoming increasingly integrated into
present day technologies, the development of innovative strategies for
controlling their properties is of utmost importance. This work will provide a
roadmap for creating nanostructured materials with an ideal combination of
mechanical properties, in order to enable new high-performance technologies. In
addition to scientific deliverables, this project supports an outreach program
to broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities and women in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. A multi-tiered
approach will be implemented to engage and empower high school students and
teachers, as well as undergraduate university students.