* 1227530
* DIP: BioSourcing: A Crowdsourcing Approach to Increasing Public Understanding in Computational Biosciences
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Michael Ferris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,349,989.00

This project explores the hypothesis that compelling learning games based on
contemporary science that offer opportunities to contribute to scientific
inquiry will lead to increased interest in science, increased career choice of
science, increased conceptual understanding of science content, and better
scientific literacy around what scientists do. The idea is to capitalize on
crowd sourcing both to shed light on the answers to open scientific questions
and to engage the public in authentic and needed scientific inquiry in
meaningful ways. The PIs will extend four games that are already designed and
built or that are under construction and develop a platform for supporting a
broad range of participatory science games that offer the public opportunities
to contribute to scientific inquiry. The chosen games all encourage sustained
and deep participation, include apprenticeship opportunities and opportunities
for practicing authentic science, promote reflection in and on action, and are
designed to be emotionally compelling. Games come from four game genres: role-
playing, strategy, action, and puzzle, as different people are drawn to
different types of experiences. All are in the areas of bioscience and
biotechnology, and each addresses some open question in bioscience or
biotechnology that participants might shed light on. The broad range of games
serves several purposes -- offering a substantial enough range of experiences
that a broad range of participants can be expected to join in, offering enough
diversity to know that the infrastructure tying the games together has all of
the functionality required to support a broad range of such games, and offering
enough diversity to answer targeted research questions. Research focuses on
identifying the challenges in creating a broad and diverse public gaming
community that interacts with more formal and established scientific and
educational cultures, how learning occurs in such an environment and how to
promote sustained engagement and deep learning, identifying core features and
mechanisms of games that promote sustained engagement and science learning, and
understanding the design features in the particular games being studied that
contribute to sustained engagement and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
an increasing awareness among scientists that many contemporary science problems
require (or could benefit tremendously from) an actively engaged public.
Communicating the challenges and opportunities of science, and mobilizing the
public to participate in and support scientific inquiry, requires shared
understandings about the values, methods, and epistemologies of science (e.g.,
observation, data collection and analysis, reasoning from evidence, skepticism).
This project focuses on design of learning opportunities that are both engaging
and informative with respect to scientific literacy. The public is invited to
participate in a variety of science-related "games," experiences with scientific
inquiry that are engaging and exciting and that can contribute to scientific
findings. Participants engage as scientists, carrying out the practices of
scientists and reasoning about evidence to draw conclusions, in the process
experiencing the thrills and frustrations involved in scientific discovery and
inquiry. Investigators observe the participants in these games to draw out
principles for designing additional learning experiences that can engage the
public in science and promote scientific literacy and learning at the same time.
What is learned in this analysis will also be applicable to designing engaging
science experiences for use in schools.