* 1228622
* MRI:   Acquisition of a high-sensitivity triple quadrupole mass spectrometer for the Kansas Lipidomics Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ruth Welti, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 443,484.00

A high-sensitivity electrospray ionization triple quadrupole mass spectrometer
with an ultra-performance liquid chromatography system will be acquired for the
Kansas Lipidomics Research Center (KLRC), an analytical laboratory performing
mass spectrometry-based lipid analysis for scientists from all over the world.
Accessories required for lipid profiling (analysis) include a robotic
autosampler and a high-volume syringe pump for sample introduction and a server
to provide mass spectral data processing capabilities. A coordinator/operator
will schedule and maintain the instrument and coordinate its use to ensure
access, giving priority to scientists whose projects require analytical
sensitivity or the high throughput that a high-sensitivity mass spectrometer can
provide. The requested instrument, a Waters Xevo TQ-S, is at least 40-fold more
sensitive than triple quadrupole mass spectrometers acquired by KLRC in 2003 and
2006. Acquisition of a high-sensitivity electrospray ionization triple
quadrupole mass spectrometer will dramatically increase KLRC?s ability to detect
and develop analyses for scarce compounds, including previously undescribed
lipids, and will provide capability to separate and detect isomeric compounds.
Planned projects investigate the functions of lipids and lipid metabolizing,
transporting, and signaling genes and gene products in plants, animals, and/or
protozoa. Mass spectrometry-based lipid analysis, or lipidomics, has not reached
its ultimate potential as an analytical tool, because the methods, materials,
and computational resources to effectively carry out lipid profiling are not
conveniently available. As part of this project, KLRC personnel will aid
scientists who wish to implement lipidomics analyses at their institutions. In
particular, KLRC will provide protocols for sample preparation, mass spectral
methods, and use of an online data processing system. KLRC will share standard
compounds, as feasible, and deliver web-based training and consultation to those
setting up lipidomics analytical protocols at their institutions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the high-sensitivity triple quadrupole mass
spectrometer and accessories by the Kansas Lipidomics Research Center will
enhance or enable proposed and ongoing scientific plans of researchers from
fifteen laboratories in eight U.S. states and three countries. The high-
sensitivity instrument also will be made available to new users and over 200
past and current KLRC analytical users. Use of the much-needed, high-sensitivity
electrospray ionization triple quadrupole mass spectrometer will directly impact
and advance the scientific training of 20 postdoctoral trainees, 32 graduate
students, and 47 undergraduates in 15 research programs. The benefited
undergraduates will include nine students from historically Black Langston
University who are analyzing lipids during light stress responses in an ongoing
project. Trainees from Massachusetts and China will visit KLRC for hands-on
training. A new lecture and laboratory course on lipidomic technologies,
suitable for graduate and upper-level undergraduate students, will be offered at
Kansas State University. Using the high-sensitivity triple quadrupole mass
spectrometer and accessories, functions of lipids and lipid-related metabolism
and signaling will be investigated in animals, plants, and other organisms.
Several plant biologists will use the instrument to delineate and functionally
characterize the lipid metabolic events that occur during plant responses to
environmental stress and during development, including events that regulate the
production of seed oils. The new instrument also will aid scientists identifying
mediators of tissue injury and defining "substrates" for transport proteins. The
ability, provided by the instrumentation, to discover and quantify low-
concentration lipids will consistently add value to ongoing and future projects
by revealing information that will be transformative in understanding metabolic
and signaling pathways.