* 1228280
* Minority Starter Grant - Development of Microsatellite Markers for Cranberry Genetic Improvement
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Juan Zalapa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2014
* USD 54,456.00

The cranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpon Ait.) is a commercially important, North
American, woody plant species in the Ericaceae family. Next-generation
sequencing technologies offer the possibility of generating large numbers of
quality molecular markers quickly and cheaply. The use of such markers will
allow the development of innovative plant breeding systems to speed the breeding
of unique cranberry cultivars. This research will (1) use Roche 454
pyrosequencing data for the development and testing of 2,400 primer pairs, (2)
develop 250 to 500 microsatellite polymorphic markers for cultivated and natural
germplasm characterization and linkage map construction, and (3) develop a
microsatellite marker based fingerprinting assay for the true-to-type
verification of clonally propagated cranberry cultivars. After development and
testing, the resulting microsatellite markers will be particularly useful in
cranberry genetic studies due to high reproducibility, their multiallelic
nature, codominance, relative abundance, wide dispersal in most plant genomes,
and transferability among closely related species.

The cranberry is a commercially important, North American, woody plant species.
The U.S. is a worldwide leading producer of cranberries, which are highly prized
for their tart flavor and nutritional and medicinal attributes. However, little
information is available regarding the genetics of the species. Next-generation
sequencing technologies offer the possibility of generating large numbers of
quality molecular markers quickly and cheaply. The use of such markers will
allow the development of innovative plant breeding systems to speed the breeding
of unique cranberry cultivars to meet challenges such as increasing yield in
sustainable production systems, improving berry quality (including nutrition),
and responding to increasingly variable and extreme climates and insects and
diseases pressures. This project will help support an ongoing education biotech
outreach program targeting diverse audiences.