* 1228549
* MRI Consortium:   Development of a Damping Wiggler Beamline for X-Ray Footprinting at NSLS II
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Sarah Woodson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,684,999.00

This award will fund the development of an X-ray synchrotron footprinting
beamline located at the National Synchrotron Light Source-II (NSLS-II) at
Brookhaven National Laboratory. X-ray synchrotron footprinting (XFP) is a
rapidly growing technique that employs intense, ionizing white X-ray light from
a synchrotron source to produce solvent-derived hydroxyl radicals that readily
cleave the phosphodiester backbone of nucleic acids and covalently modify amino
acid side chains in proteins. The microsecond timescales for this chemistry make
XFP ideal for probing macromolecular structural dynamics, such as assembly of
multi-protein complexes, protein folding process, or changes in protein
structure upon ligand binding. Scientific demand for evaluation of increasingly
complex physiological systems has exceeded the technical capabilities of the
existing X28C XFP beamline facility at NSLS, which will also be affected by the
planned replacement of NSLS with NSLS-II by 2015. The new NSLS-II XFP "wiggler"
beamline will replace the existing facility and also provide significantly
greater white-beam X-ray flux densities for the substantially increased signal
to noise required to drive novel and challenging footprinting experiments
unattainable using existing technology. These include microsecond time-resolved
studies of the dynamics of water in its interaction with macromolecules,
characterization of large megaDalton complexes in solution, membrane protein
structural analysis, and in vivo studies of macromolecular structure and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will enhance facilities available to
the international user community, while using advanced NSLS-II technologies to
drive structural biology studies that are not currently feasible.The existing
XFP program serves over forty well-funded established investigators, most of
whom have numerous postdoctoral trainees and graduate students who will likely
utilize the method in their future careers. Developments in synchrotron XFP
technologies coupled to aggressive outreach and dissemination programs have
influenced non-synchrotron footprinting and structural mass spectrometry
programs that are rapidly expanding across the United States, including
commercial application of the technology in biotechnology development, thus
reflecting the expanding reach and broad utility of the technique. The NSLS-II
XFP beamline facility will represent a unique international resource for x-ray
synchrotron footprinting.