* 1228352
* Collaborative Research:  Special Projects (CNS): BPC-A: Expanding Computing Education Pathways (ECEP) Alliance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Mark Guzdial, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 09/30/2018
* USD 3,153,758.00

Georgia Institute of Technology and the University of Massachusetts, Amherst
join together with state and organizational partners and associates, supported
with a bureau of experts in a new national alliance to facilitate state-level
computing education reforms. The Expanding Computing Education Pathways (ECEP)
Alliance builds on five years of work by the Commonwealth Alliance for IT
Education (CAITE) and Georgia Computes! and on best practices in computing
education, particularly those developed in the community of Broadening
Participation in Computing (BPC) Alliances. CAITE and Georgia Computes! have
been successful in facilitating state-level systemic change that has improved
the quality of computing education, broadened participation in computing, and
increased the number of students in the pathway to computing and computing-
intensive degrees. The partnership will determine the unique needs in other
state/regional computing education systems and develop approaches that address
those needs. California and South Carolina were chosen as initial ECEP partner
states because they have the population, institutions, workforce demand and
individuals or organizations ready to work to institute reform. The project
staff will form a cohort of associate states and regions starting with Alabama,
Indiana, and Puerto Rico, with plans to grow by leveraging CSTA?s Leadership
Cohort and Chapters and STARS partners. Using Massachusetts, Georgia and some of
the partner/associate states and regions to test and refine practices, ECEP will
work with NCWIT, STARS, CSTA and our cadre of experts to disseminate lessons
learned and best practices through mechanisms such as Train-the-Trainer
workshops, workshops on how to run sustainable and effective events (such as
summer camps), and strategies for strengthening and aligning pathways and
curricula. ECEP will train STARS Leaders to do effective outreach, partner with
NCWIT to disseminate best practices and develop new resources for our partner
and associate states, and provide data to inform national and local
organizations on computing education issues in ECEP partner states and regions.
Independent evaluation informs project decision making and develops processes
and tools that are available to new partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
ECEP is to have a significant impact on improving and broadening participation
in computing education state by state. Increasing the number of computing and
computing-intensive degree graduates, and the diversity of those graduates,
requires systemic change to educational pathways. Students decide as early as
pre-teens against computing as a career, but a quality high school computer
science experience can change that decision. Underrepresented minority students
may not gain access to quality computing education unless it is made available
broadly in high schools. The diversity and reach of community colleges makes
them attractive pathways for students if we can facilitate transfer and ensure
success. For computing to be taken seriously in middle, high school and
community and 4-year colleges requires that we define high school computing
curricula, increase the number of well-trained, certified high school computing
teachers, improve post-secondary degree programs, curricular alignment,
advising, and retention, and generally promote K-20 computing education reform.
ECEP state partners and regions should see significant improvements in their
computing education, through public policy, outreach, or changes in the
education system. By transferring the success of CAITE and Georgia Computes!
into other states, ECEP will develop, implement, and evaluate models for
replicating change at the state level.