* 1228842
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Towards Secure, Robust, and Usable Gesture-Based Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Katherine Isbister, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,990.00

This project investigates the feasibility of secure, robust, and usable gesture-
based authentication as an alternative to traditional alphanumeric passwords and
biometrics. It is motivated by the rapid increase in authentication-related
security breaches and by the emergence of new human-computer interfaces. While
the breaches have demonstrated the seriousness of the issue, two emerging types
of gesture-based interfaces, multi-touch (smartphones, tablets) and camera-based
(Kinect), offer a unique opportunity for robust
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefit of gesture-based authentication over
a purely-biometric one lies in the fact that it combines involuntary biometric
features (e.g., hand shape), that are irrevocable, with user-controlled
voluntary characteristics that can be easily changed. Three research thrusts are
being pursued: 1) gesture recognition algorithms (search for robust gesture
features, their compact representation, and reliable classification algorithms),
2) human factors (study of uniqueness, repeatability, ergonomics, device
dependence of gestures, and gesture complexity) and 3) security considerations
(evaluation of authentication performance under a range of performance measures
and different threat models). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful completion of
this research will catalyze the development and adoption of next-generation
authentication methods that are critically needed at the personal,
institutional, and governmental levels. As the price paid (time, money, and
resources) to repair a security breach can be astounding, this project will have
substantial societal impact by increasing the sense of security and reducing
breach-related costs. At educational level, this project is involved in middle
and high school outreach at Boston University as well as the annual
cybsersecurity competition CSAW at NYU-Poly.