* 1228445
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Democratic Participation in Non-Democracies? Mobilizing International Legal Regimes for National Reform in Three Monarchies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Sarah Kaiksow, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,850.00

Are there mechanisms through which non-democracies can be made more accountable
to their citizens? One such mechanism may be the human rights monitoring process
built into international treaties. States that ratify human rights agreements
are obligated to submit reports to monitoring bodies about the steps taken to
bring their domestic practices into line with the treaties. When a state submits
a report, the monitoring bodies invite non-governmental organizations within the
state to comment on whether the state's report is accurate. State reports and
NGO feedback are periodically reviewed in a formal session, after which the
monitoring body issues its own assessment of state compliance. In these ways,
domestic NGOs have an opportunity to put indirect pressures on their states by
providing information to the monitoring bodies on the states' compliance with
human rights law. This process of citizen feedback is particularly salient in
states with underdeveloped democratic institutions. This project analyzes the
role of human rights treaties and their monitoring bodies in providing
opportunities for domestic NGOs to pressure the state through a comparative
analysis of Morocco, Jordan and Bahrain; three monarchies that offer limited
opportunity for citizen participation in the legislative process but that have
ratified human rights treaties that involve these monitoring processes. Reports
on state compliance with treaties on rights of women and labor, and interviews
with civil society activists and attention to NGOs' use of human rights
monitoring to channel domestic pressure for national reform all allow evaluation
of citizen feedback concerning human rights treaties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will discover the extent to which human rights monitoring mechanisms
serve to empower citizens of states with underdeveloped democratic institutions,
an issue of widespread interest. Comparative case studies allow us to explore
how the international community can more effectively support citizen empowerment
in aspiring democracies.