* 1228921
* MRI: Acquisition of a high resolution Q-TOF Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Mande Holford, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 12/31/2015
* USD 332,601.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Mande Holford from CUNY Hunter College and colleagues Charles Drain and Clifford
Soll will acquire a high definition quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) liquid-
chromatography mass spectrometer (LC/MS). The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
small molecules; (b) biopolymers; (c) natural products discovery from complex
mixtures; (d) combinatorial libraries; (e) biophysics involving intact proteins
or enzymatic digests; (f) scaffolds for nanotechnology materials; and (g)
functionalized lipids and dyes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry vaporizes
and ionizes a sample by a variety of methods. The particles (parent and fragment
ions) flow into a mass spectrometer where their mass/charge ratios are measured.
This highly sensitive technique allows determination of the masses of the
particles, their chemical composition and enables one to deduce the structure of
the substances in a complex mixture. An LC/MS combines the physical separation
capability of liquid chromatography with the mass analysis ability of mass
spectrometry. The liquid chromatograph separates a mixture into its molecular
components. These components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are
ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions and their masses are measured.
The instrumentation provided by this award will provide faculty and students the
opportunity to pursue advanced research projects at CUNY-Hunter College. It will
be available for use to faculty and students across the campuses in the CUNY
system. It will advance the training of many students in the use of this
important and widely employed analytical technique and will advance research in
chemistry, materials research, nanotechnology and biochemistry.