* 1228265
* Collaborative Research: Statistical and Computational Models and Methods for Extracting Knowledge from Massive Disparate Data for Quantifying Uncertain Hazards
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Elaine Spiller, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2014
* USD 73,602.00

The investigators propose specific methodological advances in three areas of
statistical science. Many conventional statistical methods break down for
massive data sets because they do not scale well--- the amount of computational
effort or memory increases as a power or even exponentially with problem size.
One area is that of statistical emulation of the output of computer simulation
models. Here the investigators propose to generate adaptive subdesigns
automatically, carefully selecting and using only the small subset of the data
that bears on each specific computational goal; and to develop what they call
"parallel partial emulation" in which emulation is performed simultaneously in
parallel with some model inputs kept at a range of fixed values. A second area
is that of multiple scale stochastic models, exploiting infinitely-divisible
distributions for some model features to permit coupled parallel analyses at a
range of scales, with coarser scales requiring less computational effort and
running faster to help the finer scales reach equilibrium faster. A third area
is dynamic evolution models in which computational effort is focused on those
aspects that change most rapidly, while other aspects are treated as slowly-
varying or piecewise-constant. All methods are applied to the same important
application area, the quantitative assessment of geophysical hazard for volcanic
events.

The investigators propose to develop new mathematical, statistical, and
computational methods to address the problem of making principled statistical
inference on the basis of massive data sets. The new methods are developed and
applied in the context of a specific important societal problem: improving
methods for the quantitative assessment of risk associated with volcanic
activity. In this application area the product of this research would be maps
indicating which areas face specified levels of hazard (say, 1000:1, 100:1,
10:1) for specified lengths of time (say, 1 month, 1 year, 1 decade), with
estimates based on geophysical evidence and validated computational models. The
methods are applicable in other areas of modern empirical science--- both for
making quantitative assessments of other geophysical hazards and, more broadly,
other scientific endeavors with large amounts of data.