* 1228861
* Accuracy Improvement and Uncertainty Reduction of Spectroscopic Parameters of Water Vapor Lines in the HITRAN Database
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Qiancheng Ma, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 235,000.00

The primary objective of this project is to provide theoretical support for
updating and improving parameters for the water vapor molecule in the HITRAN
database. The latest changes made to the pressure broadened half-width, induced
line shift, and temperature exponent for the principal oxygen isotopologue of
water vapor in HITRAN come mostly from theoretical calculations that rely on the
Robert-Bonamy formalism, which was developed more than three decades ago and
contains several approximations. Direct calculation of these spectroscopic
parameters from first principles is characterized by theoretical complexity as
well as numerical difficulty. The proposed approach offers several new features
and advantages. First, re-formulating the Robert-Bonamy formalism shows that the
removal of one debilitating approximation actually reduces the computational
burden. Second, introducing the coordinate representation in Hilbert space
enables the use of sufficiently high cut-offs to guarantee full convergence for
all the calculations. Third, contribution analysis from different collisional
processes establishes a new guideline for selecting benchmark lines in
optimizing the potential model. Furthermore, the adoption of the causal function
concept from signal processing to obtain the Hilbert transforms, crucial in
calculating line shifts, allows the calculations to go forward without even
having to perform the Cauchy principal integrations. With these powerful tools
in hand, the broadened half-widths, line shifts, and temperature exponents for
the absorption lines in the pure rotational band will be recalculated ? all with
full convergence and from the "exact" trajectory model. These results will
significantly reduce the numerical uncertainties, and are thus more reliable
than the existing calculated values in HITRAN 2008.

Reliable information retrieval using space and ground-based instruments, and
reliable climate and atmospheric modeling are directly dependent on accurate
water vapor spectroscopic parameters provided by HITRAN. Research scientists in
many different disciplines have come to expect the high quality of HITRAN as
their indispensable data resource that simply must be correct. The updating of
the HITRAN water vapor spectroscopic parameters will improve the accuracy of
radiative transfer modeling, such as the 20 micrometer 'dirty window' spectral
region that controls the local energy balance in the cold and dry polar
atmospheres. The computational approach described herein is applicable not only
to the water vapor lines in the pure rotation band, but to other bands as well.
Moreover, it can also be used to predict line parameters that involve very high
j states in the development of HITEMP, a project designed to address high-
temperature modeling of the spectra of molecular gases needed for astrophysics,
planetary and stellar atmospheres, as well as industrial, environmental, and
surveillance applications.