* 1228071
* BRIGE: Heterogeneous Traffic over Heterogeneous Relay Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Lingjia Liu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,859.00

PI: Liu, Lingjia&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Kansas&lt;br/&gt;Title:
BRIGE: Heterogeneous Traffic over Heterogeneous Relay
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Heterogeneous networks, especially heterogeneous relay networks, are believed to
be one of the enabling technologies for future broadband mobile communications.
Previous design of such networks usually neglects the role of statistical
queueing delay in performance analysis. However, most traffic of future
broadband mobile data networks will be delay-sensitive while most delay-
sensitive applications have stringent requirements on statistical delay-
violation probabilities. For example, in the 4th generation cellular standard,
the requirement on delay-violation probability for real-time video traffic is 2%
with the delay bound being 50ms for radio access networks. The objective of this
BRIGE research is to provide a unified fundamental framework for the analysis
and design of heterogeneous relay networks under statistical delay constraints
(constraints on delay-violation probabilities). The research components of the
project consist of two parts. The first part focuses on the statistical delay
analysis of wireless multi-hop relay systems to provide a unified framework to
analyze wireless system performance under delay-violation probability
constraints. The second part focuses on heterogeneous relay networks where new
mobile association strategies and load balancing methods will be identified to
maximize the overall network efficiency for a heterogeneous relay
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Mobile wireless devices are an
integral part of society and are currently used by over 75% of the global
population. In the United States, the present adoption rate of mobile devices
exceeds 92%. Research that leads to improving their performance offers the
potential to improve how these devices serve the needs of their users. In
addition to global technological impact, the PI also proposes an educational
plan that will immerse local students especially from the underrepresented
groups in the exciting field of wireless communications. The PI's outreach
activities span from the high school level up through the graduate level. The PI
will also recruit students of underrepresented groups including Hispanic,
female, low incoming and first generation students to participate in the
project. By integrating research and education together, this project will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.