* 1228874
* MRI:   Acquisition of modern x-ray diffraction equipment to enhance research and training
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Alvan Hengge, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2015
* USD 313,156.00

This NSF MRI award will be used to acquire a new rotating anode x-ray generator
and optics for macromolecular crystallography, completing a multi-year effort to
bring state-of-the-art crystallographic facilities to Utah State University. The
equipment supports a number of researchers on the USU campus and surrounding
institutions who depend on structural information but would otherwise have
limited or no access to structural methods. The improved x-ray capabilities
provided through this award will significantly enhance efforts to determine
high-resolution crystal structures of large biological molecules. The projects
supported by these facilities are wide-ranging and include investigation of RNA
surveillance, phosphoryl transfer, metabolic engineering, post-translational
modification, hydrocarbon metabolism, evolutionary adaptation and biofuel
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural studies play an essential role in all
areas of biological and biochemical research, and are an indispensable component
of student training. Facilities for macromolecular crystallography are extremely
limited in the Intermountain Region of the United States. The crystallographic
facilities located on the USU campus provide a critical resource for researchers
throughout the area. The increased capability and reliability of a modern x-ray
source will promote increased use by the current users as well as other research
groups at USU and the surrounding region. This new state-of-the-art
instrumentation, combined with a long-term focus on collaborative research and
training, brings the full impact of structural biology to a smaller,
geographically remote institution. It further provides a model that may be
reproduced in similar environments. A training plan is in place for maximizing
usage of the instrument. Our approach (1) enables research groups to perform
crystallographic experiments independently, and (2) provides widespread exposure
to structural methods. New coursework has been designed to teach
crystallographic methods at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Significant financial resources are available on the USU campus for support of
undergraduate research, and each of the PIs have established track records
engaging undergraduate students in their research efforts. Outreach efforts
include integration of structural biology into a summer high school research
program supported by the department. The expanded course offerings and student
mentoring, coupled with faculty scientific expertise and new state-of-the-art
instrumentation, will give widespread exposure and direct access to the rapidly
expanding field of structural biology.