* 1228027
* BRIGE: Emotion Mapping of Children through Human-robot Interaction and Affective Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Karla Welch, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,583.00

PI: Welch, Karla&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Louisville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: With an increase in the
number of machines in daily life, there is a need for more intuitive systems
that can interpret explicit as well as implicit, more subtle, means of
communication. Since emotions and affective expressions play a role in decision-
making, learning, and other cognitive functions, human interaction with
technology, such as a computer or robot, will improve if affect recognition is
part of that interaction. The design of affect-sensitive interactions between
humans and technology, a research area known as affective computing, is an
increasingly important discipline in the human-robot interaction community. This
BRIGE proposal seeks to monitor physiological signals during interactive
activities. This project will develop and test wireless, wearable sensors for
use in an affect-sensitive adaptive system. The proposed system will make
predictions about user's affective states and adapt the interaction to alter and
improve user experience. Settings to be examined include games of varying
difficulty utilizing an embodied robot and activities focused on teenagers with
and without autism during periods of waiting (a likely stress-inducing activity
for which external interceding feedback may help autistic individuals cope). The
proposed system will allow the interaction to make alterations based on
physiological data and inferred affective states to improve human-robot
interaction and address social stressors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The low-cost and highly deployable technologies developed in this proposal could
have significant impact on making physiological signal monitoring more widely
available. The results will support the investigation of closed-loop human-robot
interaction tasks where the robot will implicitly sense human affective (i.e.,
emotional) states using affect recognition algorithms, and the robot can then
alter its behavior to address specific human needs. They may also create
completely new intervention strategies for children with autism. In addition,
the educational and broadening participation objectives will engage high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in the design and research evaluation of
advanced technologies for autism intervention, human-robot interaction, and
affective computing. Efforts to reach out to underrepresented students cover two
annual events that will showcase the ongoing research, and the planned
experiments allow individuals with disabilities to engage in scientific
research. The proposed work has potential to appeal to a wide range of students
from electrical engineering, computer engineering, and bioengineering as well as
experimental psychology and psychiatry; and findings in this area will address
unanswered questions about affective computing.