* 1228936
* TWC: Medium: DoS Attacks and Countermeasures in Underwater Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Shengli Zhou, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 436,419.00

The goal of this project is to provide secure and robust communications in
underwater sensor networks (UWSNs). Specifically, the project is investigating
denial of service attacks and their countermeasures in such
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a growing interest in developing
underwater acoustic sensor networks in recent years, aiming for breakthroughs in
aquatic environment monitoring for scientific exploration, commercial
exploitation and coastline protection. The unique properties of underwater
environments result in two major differences between UWSNs and land-based sensor
networks: the communication method and sensor node mobility. Because radio
frequency (RF) signals attenuate quickly in water, communications in UWSNs
normally use acoustic channels, which feature long latencies, low bandwidth,
high error rates, and high energy consumption. The mobility of sensor nodes
leads to dynamic network topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since underwater sensor
nodes are deployed in the field and communicate through acoustic channels that
can be accessed easily by adversaries, they are vulnerable to various attacks.
This project investigates denial-of-service (DoS) attacks and countermeasures in
underwater networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three research
thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. DoS attacks and countermeasures at the physical
and link layers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. DoS attacks and countermeasures at the
network layer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. System integration and field testings.
The outcomes of the project, including both attacks and countermeasures, will be
thoroughly evaluated in simulation, lake, and ocean
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to more robust
communications in underwater networks, and thus advance the development and use
of such networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the research significance, this
project impacts education on three fronts. First, it will support graduate
students in their advanced research in the fields of security, communication,
networking, and computer engineering. Second, it will motivate undergraduates,
especially women and other under-represented groups, to participate in advanced
research in computing and engineering. Third, this project will promote multi-
disciplinary collaboration.