* 1228937
* SBES: Medium: Investigating the Role of Distrust in Unauthorized Online Activities Using an Integrated Sociotechnical Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Lisa Pytlik Zillig, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 490,758.00

Unauthorized online behavior motivated by social, political, economic and
cultural (SPEC) conflicts is increasing. However, research dealing with cyber-
attacks has tended to be reactive and to focus on defense, instead of proactive
and focused on the root psychological and social causes of such attacks. Despite
considerable evidence that trust and distrust impact rule-following behaviors
and obedience to the law, little research investigates the role of distrust in
promoting unauthorized online behaviors. Critically, trust/distrust research in
other areas suggests the cyber-attacks might be reduced through interventions
aimed at forms of distrust. Thus, advancing knowledge about distrust in general
and in this specific domain is important both for social science and
cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project will answer questions
about whether different types of distrust have different effects on willingness
to engage in or provide support for cyber-attacks, and will investigate the
effectiveness of sociotechnical interventions designed to reduce unauthorized
online behaviors. The central hypothesis is that relationships between distrust
and unauthorized online behaviors (or support of such behaviors) depend on the
specific bases of distrust, and require different remedies. The project will
achieve its aims by the development of vignettes that systematically vary
conditions likely to foster trust or distrust and motivation for unauthorized
online behaviors. The effects of the variables manipulated in the vignettes will
be tested in other groups of students using online experiments and simulation
(role-playing) activities. The project will also develop and test an online
deliberative space that can both take advantage of the research findings and
provide an environment for theory-testing. Specifically, the online prototype
will be able to manipulate key trust/distrust-relevant features of the
deliberative space while measuring and tracking participant online behaviors,
providing data that can then be subject to data mining procedures in order to
find important patterns of behavior related to trust and
distrust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the current research is
that it uses distrust as an organizing construct to understand individual
behaviors and attitudes toward security in cyberspace and innovatively uses
science communication as the specific application domain to investigate
cybersecurity. By examining the antecedents and consequences of distrust, and by
integrating a variety of research approaches, this research will both (a)
advance theoretical models of trust and distrust generally, and (b) enhance the
prevention of cyber-attacks specifically by providing insights that contribute
to the design of institutions and interventions perceived as legitimate and
obedience-worthy even in the context of culturally divisive issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed activities are that
the research findings will contribute to the creation of online spaces for
public engagement that encourage optimal behavior and reduce destructive and
ethically questionable behaviors (e.g., cyber-attacks, hacktivism). The platform
developed for our research will be widely applicable to studying problems in
other domains, and can be used to further research, as well as in applied
educational and policy contexts. Through this project, hundreds of undergraduate
and graduate students will be exposed to topics beyond their discipline
including cybersecurity, climate change and public deliberative engagement.
Finally, by educating students about online deliberation, pros and cons of
argumentative discourse, public engagement and policy making, we are training
future scientists to be leaders and world citizens.