* 1228591
* MRI: Acquisition of a state-of-the-art thermal ionization mass spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* James Day, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

An award from the Major Research and Instrumentation Program (MRI) will support
the acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) for state-of-
the-art isotopic measurements at the newly-formed Scripps Isotope Geochemistry
Laboratory at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. This new instrumentation will
enhance existing mass spectrometry facilities in the San Diego region. A TIMS
instrument will allow precise measurements of a range of extinct (e.g., Mn-Cr),
long-lived radiogenic (e.g., Os, Sr, Nd, Pb), and stable isotope systems (e.g.,
Ca) at a range of sample sizes and employed to a range of geological,
cosmochemical, oceanographic and biological processes. The instrument will be
used to measure radiogenic isotope compositions of igneous rocks to understand
planet formation and differentiation and to trace chemical variations in Earth?s
mantle, to establish the formation of precious metal ores and to investigate
processes occurring during highly-explosive volcanic eruptions. In the
biological and ocean sciences the instrument will be used to precisely measure
stable isotope fractionations in the carbonate skeletons of marine organisms to
study ocean-acidification, and to isotopically trace hydrothermal alteration and
biologically mediated water-rock interactions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new
TIMS facility will help achieve a fundamental obligation to train an
increasingly large, diverse and talented pool of post-doctoral researchers and
graduate and undergraduate students who rely on isotopic approaches for their
dissertation research in the San Diego area. It will permit enhanced
undergraduate participation through independent research dissertations, research
experience for undergraduate programs, and through integration of principles,
examples and methods of isotope ratio measurements using next-generation mass
spectrometry into the classroom. A state-of-the-art TIMS will also enhance on-
going community outreach efforts, including demonstrations and examples used in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics events for underrepresented
minorities and female students.