* 1228778
* MRI: Acquisition of Hybrid CPU/GPU Nodes for the Interdisciplinary UMBC High Performance Computing Facility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Matthias Gobbert, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: 12-28778&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Matthias K Gobbert; Erill, Ivan; Olano,
Thomas M; Sparling, Lynn; Thorpe, Ian&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Maryland Baltimore County&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Hybrid CPU/GPU Nodes for
the Interdisciplinary UMBC High Performance Computing Facility
&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring an
instrument based on advanced GPU/CPU computers with 360 TB high-performance
storage and high-speed communication links, aims to enhance the current UMBC
High Performance Computing Facility. The instrument enables research in emerging
data-intensive high-performance computing topics. This multi-disciplinary and
collaborative project involves faculty and students from biology, chemistry,
computer science and engineering, electrical engineering, environmental systems,
mathematics, physics, and statistics. &lt;br/&gt;The following current, as well
as new research projects, benefit immediately from the availability of the
enhanced high-performance computing instrument:&lt;br/&gt;- Parallel Algorithms
for Numerical Simulations of Partial Differential Equations; &lt;br/&gt;-
Application of GPU Processing to Atmospheric Chemistry and Dynamics
Modeling;&lt;br/&gt;- Atmospheric Remote Sensing;
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and
educational initiatives should be highly impacted by the research enabled
through the instrument. The research team, including female faculty members, has
interactions with the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) organization and
the Center for Women in Technology (CWIT). Undergraduate students will be
involved in the UMBC REU site on high performance computing. Furthermore, the
instrumentation should contribute to attract students from under-represented
groups into sciences. Presented are plans and initiatives to do so.