* 1228669
* TWC SBES: Medium: Utility for Private Data Sharing in Social Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Stephen Matthews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,066,889.00

One of the keys to scientific progress is the sharing of research data. When the
data contain information about human subjects, the incentives not to share data
are stronger. The biggest concern is privacy - specific information about
individuals must be protected at all times. Recent advances in mathematical
notions of privacy have raised the hope that the data can be properly sanitized
and distributed to other research groups without revealing information about any
individual. In order to make this effort worthwhile, the sanitized data must be
useful for statistical analysis. This project addresses the research challenges
in making the sanitized data useful. The first part of the project deals with
the design of algorithms that produce useful sanitized data subject to privacy
constraints. The second part of the project deals with the development of tools
for the statistical analysis of sanitized data. Existing statistical routines
are not designed for the types of complex noise patterns that are found in
sanitized data; their naive use will often result in missed discoveries or false
claims of statistical significance. The target application for this project is a
social science dataset with geographic characteristics. The intellectual merit
of this proposal is the development of a utility theory for algorithms that
sanitize data and statistical tools for their analysis. The broader impact is
the improved ability of research groups to share useful, but privacy-preserving,
research data.