* 1228650
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Courts and Party Labels in Leading Voters to Punish Corrupt Politicians: Evidence from Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Collier, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Helena Silverstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Electoral accountability and judicial institutions are two important means of
changing existing corruption dynamics in government. Yet in a number of
countries, corrupt politicians frequently get reelected, reinforcing the
persistence of corruption. This project seeks to understand when and why voters
punish corrupt politicians. The work focuses on the effect of (1) types of
candidate corruption, (2) court rulings, (3) a candidate's political party, and
(4) a voter's level of partisanship on the voter's decision to vote against a
corrupt politician. The project will develop a survey with an embedded
experiment that will shed light on the mechanisms that lead voters to punish
corrupt politicians in Brazil, a country where 168 national legislators face
criminal charges or are under investigation. The survey of 2,000 voters will
expose respondents to candidate choices with varying corruption types, political
parties, and court rulings on candidate corruption. This research fills a void
in the literature on corruption, and offers a perspective on how political
determinants, such as the party system and partisan attachments, mediate
corruption perceptions.

The project deepens our understanding of two important means of changing
corruption dynamics in government: electoral accountability and judicial
institutions. The research also enables government agencies and civil society
organizations to craft strategies for information campaigns designed to inform
citizens of candidate corruption. Finally, the work engages the political
science and legal community in Brazil, facilitating cross-border scholarly
exchange.