* 1228275
* Large-scale stochastic inverse and data assimilation problems with applications to subsurface imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Eric Darve, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

Improvements in sensing technology and experimental measurements have led to an
explosion of data in many fields. This is the case for example in imaging and
inverse problems. Although many numerical algorithms are available to process
this data, until recently the computational cost of processing the data was not
the main issue. For example in the field of imaging the space below the land
surface of the earth, with application in groundwater and oil exploration, CO2
sequestration, contaminant location, etc., researchers used to have only a
limited number of measurements and only coarse reconstruction of the underground
was possible. Nowadays it is possible to have hundreds of thousands of
measurement data collected at different locations and times. As a result the
volume of data to process as well as the resolution of the predictions that are
possible have increased tremendously, making many existing methods impractical.
To explore the range of solutions consistent with measurements, the prevalent
approach is based on a stochastic or probabilistic description of the subsurface
properties and is called stochastic inversing. This research will apply novel
numerical algorithms to address computational challenges for stochastic
inversing in this context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there has been
a renewed interest in the subsurface (underground) for example in the context of
CO2 storage. In this example, CO2 is extracted from emissions in thermal power
plants and then injected underground under a geologic layer that is impermeable
to CO2. This is an effective technology to reduce CO2 emissions to the
atmosphere and allows the continued use of fossil fuel plants such as coal
plants without releasing large amounts of greenhouse gases. This technology
however has drawbacks; in particular it requires monitoring of the CO2 plume
underground to make sure that there is no leak to the surface. This is important
for example to provide guarantees to the public, in cases where the surface area
above the injection site is populated. Although leakage is extremely rare and
would not be a serious cause of concern (CO2 does not become toxic until high
levels of concentration), such monitoring is required for complete confidence.
Among other objectives, this project will develop novel computer algorithms to
allow reconstructing the location of CO2 plumes from measurements taken for
example at well sites.