* 1228653
* Doctoral Dissertation  Research: (De)Legitimizing the Jury? An Empirical Analysis of Felon Jury Exclusion
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2014
* James Binnall, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 04/30/2014
* USD 26,993.00

Forty-nine states, the federal government, and the District of Columbia restrict
a convicted felon's opportunity to serve as a juror. Of those jurisdictions,
twenty-nine ban convicted felons from jury service permanently, eliminating
approximately thirteen million citizens from the national jury pool. Justifying
these statutory exclusions, policymakers and courts cite a need to protect the
jury process from those who might compromise its integrity. Yet, to date, no
study has examined how convicted felons impact the adjudicative process or are
impacted by their inclusion in that process. Using a mixed methods approach,
this project explores these interrelated themes by 1) examining how felon jurors
shape jury systems (in the field and in the laboratory), and 2) analyzing the
influence of jury service on convicted felons' perceptions of the law and, in
turn, their subsequent reentry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reintegration of
convicted felons and their participation in democratic processes often inspires
polarized debate. This project will expand and inform that debate, filling voids
in existing empirical research on the adjudicative process and the reintegration
of former offenders. It will also extend research on legal compliance as a
function of the perceived legitimacy and fairness of the law. In these ways,
this project speaks to policy, practice, and theory as they relate to the jury
process, reentry, and the tenets of participatory democracy.