* 1228180
* A New Approach to Electromagnetic Scattering from Ice Crystal Aggregates for Improving Quantitative Radar Measurements of Clouds and Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Kultegin Aydin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 496,167.00

The goal of this research is to improve the qualitative and quantitative
interpretation of radar measurements of clouds and precipitation composed of ice
crystals and their aggregates. Aggregates are the dominant ice phase
contributors to the area fraction of precipitation across the globe. Satellite
radar systems and a growing number of ground-based research radars in the U.S.
and around the world operate at millimeter wave frequencies and are focused on
the qualitative and quantitative characterization of clouds. Recent studies have
suggested errors in excess of an order of magnitude in the millimeter-wave radar
cross sections of aggregates. A new approach to modeling aggregates provides a
pathway to efficiently and accurately determine radar cross sections from
irregular shaped particles. An improved accuracy of radar cross section
calculations of ice particles is necessary to enhance our understanding of
millimeter wave radar observations of stratiform clouds, melting layer, and ice
precipitation.

This research will be accomplished through a new modeling approach for studying
the electromagnetic scattering characteristics of ice crystal aggregates.
Advances in computer technology and computational algorithms have made it
possible to evaluate millimeter wave scattering from pristine crystals with well
defined shapes and composition. Irregularly shaped hydrometeors such as ice
crystal aggregates (snowflakes) have been modeled as homogeneous particles with
spherical or spheroidal shapes through an effective medium approximation of
their dielectric constants. It has recently been shown that at millimeter
wavelengths this "bulk" model approach for ice crystal aggregates leads to
significant underestimation of their radar cross sections. This study models the
complex shape and composition of aggregates using pristine crystal types that
appear in nature (e.g., needles, columnar crystals, dendrites, bullet rosettes).
The pristine crystals that makeup the aggregates are constructed using tiny ice
spheres. An established computational algorithm is used to evaluate the
electromagnetic scattering characteristics of the aggregates constructed in this
manner.

Intellectual merit: This research brings a new and efficient approach to
accurately characterizing electromagnetic scattering from ice hydrometeors,
which will be used for simulating millimeter wave radar observations of clouds
and developing algorithms for the interpretation radar measurements.

Broader impacts: Results from this study will find application in surface and
space-based remote sensing of clouds and precipitation, satellite communication
link design, and weather research. A graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow
will participate in these research activities. They will be trained in both
theoretical and experimental methodologies and techniques necessary for
conducting the research. The generated electromagnetic scattering data will be
made available to the research community through a database maintained on the
web.