* 1228768
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Breaking the Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) Bottleneck in Symbolic Security Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Clark Barrett, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,816.00

The security of our software is critical for consumer confidence, the protection
of privacy and valuable intellectual property, and of course national security.
Because of our society's increased reliance on software, security breaches can
lead to serious personal or corporate losses, and endanger the privacy,
liberties, and even the lives of individuals. As threats to software security
have become more sophisticated, so too have the techniques and analyses
developed to improve it. Symbolic execution has emerged as a fundamental tool
for security applications. Its main idea is to run a program using symbolic
instead of concrete values: a set of symbols are assigned to the program inputs,
and the outputs are expressed as a set of "verification conditions", logical
formulas over the input symbols. A number of successful security analyses use
symbolic execution and similar methods to recast security questions about
programs as constraint satisfaction problems in some formal logic. Automatic
reasoners for that logic can then be used to solve those problems. In the last
few years, solvers based on Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) techniques have
become a natural choice in such approaches to security because of their superior
performance and automation compared to more traditional theorem provers and
their greater generality with respect to ad-hoc tools or propositional
satisfiability solvers.

This collaborative project brings together experts in security and in SMT to
pursue two complementary research goals: (i) harness the full power of SMT
solvers to improve current security tools based on symbolic analysis; and (ii)
design and develop new techniques to address the needs of anticipated future
security applications. Specific activities addressing these goals include:
collecting challenge benchmark problems from existing security analyses and
developing targeted SMT optimizations for these benchmarks; developing
appropriate security abstractions in the SMT language used to express security
verification conditions; developing logical theories and algorithms for
reasoning about character strings in such verification conditions; exposing a
general framework for extending the verification condition language; and
developing techniques for computing symbolic solution sets for SMT constraints.
These activities are expected to (i) significantly increase the flexibility,
performance, and reasoning capabilities of SMT solvers in support of security
applications; (ii) improve the performance and scalability of current security
analyses by leveraging the reasoning power of SMT solvers; and (iii) provide a
foundation for new, more powerful, and more expressive security analyses.
Overall, this project will help create more scalable and expressive security
applications which could have a considerable impact on society as they enable
the production of software much more resistant to security attacks.