* 1228478
* The Biopolitics of Farmworker Health in Methyl Iodide Regulation and Adoption
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Julie Guthman, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 169,920.00

Understanding how and why chemicals come to be used and when they are withdrawn
from use is an important question for policy and for social studies of science.
Agricultural chemicals are an especially critical site for the investigation of
these processes, given the stakes for growers, policymakers, producers,
consumers, and farmworkers. This study contributes to understanding these
dynamics through an investigation of the causes of the approval and subsequent
withdrawal of methyl iodide, a soil fumigant widely used in strawberry
production that was designed to replace methyl bromide, which is planned to be
phased out of use by 2015. Methyl iodide was known to have negative effects on
human health, but was approved nonetheless. The study investigates how spatial,
chemical and social knowledge of the effects of methyl iodide on farmworker
health and their offspring and the availability of substitutes entered into
regulatory and adoption debates and decisions. Methods include analysis of
public hearings and public comment, interviews with constituent groups that
participated in the regulatory debates, and interviews with representatives of
the strawberry industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results provide new
theoretical tools for understanding how scientific knowledge, regulation, and
ethical concerns about biological consequences of chemicals intersect to shape
the commercial viability of chemicals. More broadly, the research illumiminates
how the spatial distribution of chemicals and ethical concerns shape chemical
regulation. Research findings are disseminated to policymakers, farmworkers, and
to academic researchers. The wide dissemination of research findings enables a
range of actors to have access to knowledge needed to engage the process of
chemical regulation more effectively.