* 1228110
* BRIGE: Understanding and Managing Humanitarian Logistics Systems through Advances in Optimization and Game Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jessica Heier Stamm, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,998.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
grant provides funding to quantitatively assess the loss of efficiency that
occurs in humanitarian and public health logistics systems in the absence of a
centralized decision-making authority and to discover mechanisms to mitigate
this impact by optimally designing system parameters. Centralized decision-
making in such settings is unlikely, but decentralized system outcomes can be
poor. This research will examine settings in which individuals choose a facility
for service, for example, to pick up needed supplies after a disaster or be
vaccinated against an infectious disease. Models will be created by integrating
concepts from game theory and optimization to represent decisions of
decentralized agents, who act according to different objectives but whose
decisions impact overall system outcomes. New theoretical performance bounds
will be developed to compare the performance of the decentralized system to a
best-case system in which a centralized planner can assign individuals to
facilities. Efficient algorithms will be sought to solve the decentralized
problem. Finally, mechanisms will be designed to coordinate the decentralized
system, or ensure that its performance more closely approximates a centralized
one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead
to the creation of new optimization and game theory tools with significant
potential to inform decision-making in humanitarian and public health logistics
systems. The research will highlight opportunities for greater efficiency and
effectiveness in these settings, improving the utilization of scarce resources
and outcomes for affected populations. Analysis of the proposed models will also
advance theoretical understanding of more general decentralized networks. The
proposed research activities are integrated with a broadening participation plan
that will create pathways to engineering careers for pre-college and
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups by engaging these students
in outreach and research activities that illustrate ways that engineers make a
difference in society.