* 1228243
* Collaborative Research: Data-driven Inverse Sensitivity Analysis for Predictive Coastal Ocean Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Clinton Dawson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,398.00

The goal of this project is to improve the predictive capabilities of
computational models of the coastal ocean, by combining a novel measure-
theoretic approach for inverse sensitivity with experimental data. Advanced
computer models of the coastal ocean, such as the Advanced Circulation (ADCIRC)
model, can be used in predictive mode to estimate storm surge as hurricanes
approach landfall for the purposes of emergency evacuation and response.
However, the accuracy of ADCIRC, and other computer models, relies on the
painstaking process of model calibration based on uncertain input parameters.
The investigators study the estimation and model sensitivity for certain
critical parameters, in particular bathymetry, bottom friction, and wind stress.
Applying the solution to the inverse problem for prediction is complicated by
two issues. First, the map from the input data and parameter space to the
observable space generally reduces the dimension which implies the inverse
problem has set-valued solutions. Second, even though the models considered in
this project provide deterministic physical descriptions, all of the data
available is subject to natural stochastic variability as well as
experimental/observational error and uncertainty generally described
stochastically. The measure-theoretic algorithm computes a probability measure
over the entire parameter space from which an ensemble of model selections may
be chosen to deliver reliable predictions of critical quantities of interest
such as maximum water elevation along the coast. The PIs study various
mathematical issues including estimation of various sources of error inherent in
a non-intrusive implementation of the measure-theoretic approach. The use of
experimental data and the ADCIRC model creates a unique opportunity for
verification and validation of proposed
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative predictions of coastal
ocean conditions is central to long-range studies of coastal sustainability, the
development of priorities and policies for the restoration and maintenance of
coastal ecosystems, enhancing the economic vitality of coastal communities, and
assessing risk of coastal populations to natural disasters. While coastal
predictions of various complexity have been under development and used routinely
for decades now, a series of events over the past seven years has driven a
revolution. Namely, Hurricane Katrina (2005), in devastating fashion,
demonstrated the perils of underestimating the vulnerability of coastal
communities to storm surge. Following on the heels of Katrina were hurricanes
Rita (2005), Gustav (2008) and Ike (2008), which all caused tremendous damage to
communities along the northern Gulf of Mexico, and more recently the Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill, which occurred off the coast of Louisiana and threatened the
entire Gulf ecosystem. These events spurred a serious and sustained effort to
improve the ability to predict coastal ocean conditions. However, the prediction
of coastal conditions beyond what can be observed, e.g. predicting future
maximum storm surge from current and near past coastal observation data in real-
time, is an exceedingly challenging mathematical, statistical, and computational
problem. In this project, the investigators study and apply state-of-the-art
techniques in order to improve the predictive capabilities of coastal ocean
models used to predict storm surge. The computational methodology and tools
developed under this project are applicable to other problems in coastal
engineering, marine science, material science and other engineering disciplines.
Technology transfer of the mathematical and numerical methodologies developed
under this project will occur with the coastal ocean modeling community, and
with agencies such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, NOAA, the Department of
Homeland Security, state and local agencies, industry, and other universities in
the U.S. and abroad.