* 1228770
* MRI:   Acquisition of a liquid chromatograph mass spectrometer for microbial metabolomics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* David Stahl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2016
* USD 617,845.00

The PIs request funding to acquire a state of the art ultra high pressure liquid
chromatograph coupled to a quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer to study
the metabolic function of microorganisms that have relevance in natural and
engineered systems. Environmental metabolomics seeks to demonstrate and quantify
the metabolic reactions that occur in microbial systems. New directions in
proteomics, and even more so in metabolomics, bring biogeochemists closer to the
chemistry of natural systems by enabling the measurement of the enzymes
responsible for these reactions (proteomics), or the transformations of their
substrates and products (metabolomics). While numerous high-end LC-MS
instruments exist in research labs within the medical sciences, only a select
few environmental microbiology labs nationwide have high-end instruments capable
of addressing the complex problem of microbial function. Microbial metabolomics
has the potential to transform our understanding of the metabolic capabilities
of microbes and to understand at a biochemical level how microbes function and
respond to environmental cues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposed
equipment acquisition are to bring the field of mass spectrometry based
metabolomics to the study of environmental microbiology and engineered microbial
systems; to advance this field through the development of novel metabolomics
approaches; to facilitate sharing of knowledge between investigators through a
user group community; and to train the next generation of investigators in high
mass accuracy mass spectrometry and its application to the study of the
microbial world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally high end mass spectrometers are housed in
specialized facility with dedicated personnel, where users submit samples for
analysis without direct access to the instrument. The proposal here will make
the instrument accessible to large number of postdoc, graduate students, and
undergraduates including underrepresented groups after proper training, thus
will greatly promote teaching, training and learning activities for mass
spectrometry technologies. The method and technology developed will certainly be
very useful for broad metabolomics community, where there still lacks a
"standard" methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program Recommendation: The Program
recommends an award at the requested level.