* 1228466
* Career Mentoring Forum and Student Travel Support for 2012 IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Alexander Brodsky, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2013
* USD 24,000.00

This award provides travel support to U.S.-based students to attend the 2012
IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE 2012), and to enable
them to participate in a career mentoring forum to be held as part of the main
conference. The conference will be held in Washington (DC), USA from April 1-5,
2012 (http://www.icde12.org). This conference provides a venue for researchers
who are addressing problems in designing, building, managing, and evaluating
advanced data intensive systems and applications. It is a leading forum for
researchers, practitioners, developers, and users to explore cutting-edge ideas
and to exchange techniques, tools, and experiences. It provides an ideal setting
for students to learn about the state-of-the-art research in the field by
hearing outstanding invited speakers and attending tutorials. There are seven
focused workshops and six topic-specific tutorials that will be held in
conjunction with the main conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past decade,
data has exploded in its availability. There has been a rise in the number of
data-rich sciences and application domains, such as social network analysis,
bioinformatics, computational biology, link analysis, counterterrorism and
security. The attendance of ICDE 2012 will expose students to cutting-edge
research and to relevant applications in a variety of domains. Participation in
the premier research conferences ICDE is an integral component of the training
of Ph.D. students in data engineering. The conference is aimed at providing an
opportunity for Ph.D. candidates to present their work and receive constructive
feedback and mentoring from established researchers in data engineering. Such
feedback and mentoring is expected to improve the quality of the students thesis
research. Similarly, students recipient of a travel award will be able to attend
technical sessions, plenary talks, panels, tutorials and workshops. Participants
will interact with peers who share similar interests from other universities, as
well as hundreds of leading researchers from around the world. This experience
will be fruitful towards the shaping of their future research endeavors. Both
the student forum and travel awards will also help broaden the representation of
women and members of underrepresented minority groups within the Data
Engineering research community. Details of the student activities will be posted
at http://www.icde12.org/nsf-fellowships/.