* 1228397
* The Human Visual Pathways and Skilled Reading
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Brian Wandell, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 680,936.00

Thought and emotion are processed in the brain in large part by cortical
neurons, small cells located in a thin (3-5mm) sheet on the surface of the
brain. These neurons combine signals from different parts of the brain. The
inputs and outputs of these neurons, the brain's wiring, are the axons. Some
axons make short-range connections between neurons. They carry signals only a
few tenths of a millimeter. Other axons make long-range connections. They carry
the signals several centimeters between neurons in widely separated parts of
cortex. In recent years, for the first time in human history, it has become
possible to measure in the living human brain the path traveled by the long-
range axons. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Brian
Wandell of Stanford University is developing methods for measuring and
identifying, noninvasively, the path followed by axons that travel a few
centimeters. The new methods are based on magnetic resonance imaging data and
specialized mathematical algorithms. This project is implementing a mathematical
method to test the accuracy and improve the spatial resolution of these methods.
This methodological advance will make it possible to make new brain measurements
to identify the axons in visual cortex that carry the signals essential for
seeing and reading. Experiments are being conducted to identify all the major
white matter fiber tracts in the human visual cortex and also to identify
specifically the tracts from visual to reading areas of the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-range connections essential for vision are
located in the posterior part of the brain. When we read, these visual signals
are carried to more anterior parts of the brain. The neurons in these anterior
regions interpret the shape of the letters and words, and are essential for
skilled reading. The ability to resolve the reading pathways in individuals,
including both the cortex and the axons, is within reach. This project is
implementing new mathematical methods to identify these pathways in individual
subjects. The first measurements are designed to understand the development of
the long-range visual connections essential for seeing. A full wiring diagram of
the relevant brain pathways and measurements of typical growth trajectories will
make it possible to identify developmental abnormalities in individual children
so that they can receive appropriate intervention. The methods will be
applicable to many other parts of the brain, and there is a plan for wide
dissemination of the analysis software.