* 1228306
* WORKSHOP: Collaborative Research:  A Workshop on the Normative Implications of Empirical Research in Law and Courts
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Brandon Bartels, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 08/31/2013
* USD 24,518.00

An interdisciplinary workshop will systematically probe how the many insights
from the empirical study of law, courts, and judging have direct normative
implications concerning how policy and institutions ought to be designed and
executed. This workshop will bring together leading empirical researchers and
will focus on a breadth of topics in law and courts. Empirical political
scientists who study law and courts have not always made their work accessible
to relevant policymakers. However, contemporary research on the context of the
judicial process has produced numerous insights that could be useful in
policymaking. The question guiding the workshop is: How can these empirical
findings be used to make judgments about how judicial processes, institutions,
and policies ought to be designed, operated, and executed? The PIs will produce
an edited volume from this workshop that will disseminate research in a
framework that could prove useful to policymakers. The workshop's intellectual
merit rests in engaging in interdisciplinary field-building that will highlight
how academic, empirical research can be directly relevant to broader policy
debates. The workshop's broader impact would be in demonstrating how empirical
research is directly relevant to policymakers and the public. With appropriate
dissemination, it could contribute to efficient and effective judicial
institutions and processes. The workshop will bring together a truly diverse and
interdisciplinary mix of scholars, including senior and junior men and women,
some from Ph.D. granting departments and some from B.A. institutions.