* 1228248
* Coarse-to-fine Discovery for Genetic Association
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Donald Geman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2016
* USD 635,000.00

Mendelian traits are governed by single genes, and methods to
identify&lt;br/&gt;these genes have been remarkably successful. In stark
contrast,&lt;br/&gt;complex traits result from multiple genetic variants that
are&lt;br/&gt;individually neither necessary nor sufficient, often interacting
with&lt;br/&gt;each other and the environment. Indeed, collectively,
genetic&lt;br/&gt;variants identified to date for complex traits typically
explain less&lt;br/&gt;than 10% of the phenotype variance. No unified
computational and&lt;br/&gt;statistical framework has been advanced for
organizing the discovery&lt;br/&gt;process. To date, a single strategy has
dominated: static&lt;br/&gt;variant-by-variant analysis. In contrast, the
investigators propose a&lt;br/&gt;new coarse-to-fine statistical framework
motivated by the biomedical&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis that mutations contributing to
a specific disease cluster&lt;br/&gt;in specific pathways, and in genes within
these pathways. Simulations&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate that multi-scale, hierarchical
coarse-to-fine sequential&lt;br/&gt;tests have greater power than conventional
methods under this&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis. The researchers convert these
heuristics into mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and provide a comprehensive analysis, both
empirical and theoretical,&lt;br/&gt;of the trade-offs resulting from the
introduction of carefully chosen&lt;br/&gt;biases about the distribution of
active variants within genes and&lt;br/&gt;pathways. The new methods are applied
to data from real genome-wide&lt;br/&gt;association studies (GWAS) with large
cohorts to validate their&lt;br/&gt;utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing the
genetic variants that contribute to cardiovascular&lt;br/&gt;disease, diabetes,
autism, and other prevalent disorders would have&lt;br/&gt;great value in
identifying drug targets, predicting people at risk,&lt;br/&gt;and suggesting
personalized therapies. These diseases are not caused&lt;br/&gt;by mutations in
single genes, however, but by multiple mutations that&lt;br/&gt;combine to
disrupt multi-gene biological pathways. The investigators&lt;br/&gt;therefore
develop a new statistical framework that begins the search&lt;br/&gt;for
disease-risk genes at the pathway level, then sequentially narrows&lt;br/&gt;the
search to genes within pathways and alleles within genes.&lt;br/&gt;Successful
applications to ongoing human genetic studies involving&lt;br/&gt;tens to
hundreds of thousands of people identify genes contributing
to&lt;br/&gt;cardiovascular disease. More generally, the coarse-to-
fine&lt;br/&gt;statistical framework has great value in the current era of
"big&lt;br/&gt;data", with increasingly large data volumes calling for
innovative&lt;br/&gt;statistical methods.