* 1228614
* WORKSHOP: ACM Group 2012 Conference Doctoral Research Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Aleksandra Sarcevic, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2013
* USD 20,316.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 12
graduate students, along with a panel of about 4 distinguished research faculty
mentors. The event will take place in conjunction with the 2012 ACM Group
Conference (GROUP 2012), to be held October 27-31, 2012, on Sanibel Island,
Florida, and sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery?s Special
Interest Group on Computer-Human Interaction (ACM SIGCHI). The bi-annual GROUP
conference is a leading international forum for the presentation and discussion
of research and practice on organizational behavior, information systems, social
informatics, human-computer interaction (HCI), and computer supported
cooperative work (CSCW). It is attended by approximately 120 researchers and
professionals from around the world; research reports published in the GROUP
conference proceedings are competitively reviewed and widely
cited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GROUP 2012 Doctoral Consortium (DC) will be a
research-focused day-long meeting on Sunday, October 28, with follow-up events
that take place during the conference's main technical program. Student
participants will be later stage doctoral students from both the United States
and abroad, who represent the various disciplines and subfields of interest to
the conference. The goals of the workshop are to build a cohort group of young
researchers who will then have a network of colleagues spread across the world,
to guide and shape the work of the new researchers by having experts serve as
mentors and give advice, to provide encouragement and support for the selection
of GROUP research topics, to make it possible for promising new entrants to the
field to attend a leading research conference and to illustrate for them the
interrelationship and diversity of GROUP research, and in general to make the
new entrants? experience at the GROUP conference enjoyable and rewarding, so
that they will be encouraged to return and submit to future conferences in the
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The GROUP conferences represent a
critical link between the research communities supported by CISE/IIS and the
broader social, behavioral, and management sciences. Maintaining and fostering
research dialog among these diverse disciplines will result in synergistic and
transformative research collaborations. Further, developing young researchers
who can effectively bridge two or more of the broader CISE/IIS, social and
management sciences is an important goal to ensure the future vitality of the
IIS research community. The GROUP DC will bring together the best of the next
generation of organizational systems, information systems, social informatics,
and CSCW researchers. The social network among this next generation of
researchers, and the relationships with senior researchers, created by the
workshop will play a critical role in their enculturation into the profession.
The organizers will be proactive in order to ensure that both students and
faculty are a diverse group across multiple dimensions including nationality,
scientific discipline, gender, institutional affiliation, and under-represented
minority status.