* 1228956
* MRI: Acquistion of a Thin Film Materials Depostition System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Deidra Hodges, Southern Polytechnic State University
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2013
* USD 204,150.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) funding will support the acquisition
of a thin film materials deposition system for materials and Nano/micro-
electronics research. The objective of this research is to support the
fabrication and development of low-cost, efficient Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin films
and solar cells research. This MRI instrumentation will also support research at
the High Performance Polymer and Composites Center at Clark Atlanta University
(CAU) by examining the potential use of cured graphene as flexible substrates
for CZTS solar cells. The approach is to fabricate and characterize thin layers
of materials comprising the CZTS solar cell device, using the deposition system
to sputter the device?s back contact (molybdenum), window layer (zinc oxide),
front contact (aluminum doped zinc oxide), and evaporate the absorber layer
(CZTS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The use of renewable green
resources, such as photovoltaics (PV) offer a favorable and promising
alternative to the worldwide energy problems. Expensive materials and processes
limit the potential for future long term cost reductions in PV. CZTS is a
semiconductor material consisting of abundant, low-cost, low-toxicity elements.
The support of this MRI proposal, the PIs recent award of a NSF BRIGE grant, and
the PI?s collaborations with CAU, Georgia Tech and SPSU, predicts a successful
path toward breakthroughs and success in research and training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: Support of this MRI proposal will help to
continue broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in an emergent
area of national need ? alternative renewable energy systems, in several STEM
disciplines, and in research and training activities.