* 1228620
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Extending Smart-Phone Application Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Somesh Jha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 443,364.00

This research is focused on the creation of new techniques and algorithms to
support comprehensive analysis of Android applications. We have developed
formally grounded techniques for extracting accurate models of smartphone
applications from installation images. The recovery formalization is based on
TyDe, a typed meta-representation of Dalvik bytecode (the code structure used by
the Android smartphone operating system). In developing TyDe, we are formalizing
the TyDe type inferencing, ill-formed bytecode structure management, and
creating a generalized Dalvik-to-Java retargeting logic based on bytecode
"instruction templates".

TyDe and the models they represent are being used to perform deep analysis of
application structure to infer potential application behaviors that may harm
users, their data, or the cellular or Internet infrastructure. In particular,
these analyses support whole program analysis, reflection, and smartphone
specific data flow analysis. Such analyses provide a means for evaluating an
applications adherence to best security practices or organizational requirements
by inspecting permission structures, component interfaces, and source code and
library origins for signals of malicious behavior. The analysis techniques are
being evaluated on a large corpus of real-world applications extracted from real
application markets.

In the broadest view, this work is providing new avenues for researchers,
industry, and consumers to assess potential dangers presented by applications
retrieved from smartphone application markets, an advancing the state of the art
in application program analysis.