* 1228104
* BRIGE: Fluorescence Based Single Molecule Force Spectroscopy with DNA Nanotechnology
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Carlos Castro, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2014
* USD 174,604.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding for the development of a nanoscale device for fluorescence-
based high throughput single molecule force spectroscopy. The device will be
assembled using the recently developed nanotechnology DNA origami. DNA origami
enables the construction of nanoscale objects with unprecedented geometric
complexity via programmed molecular self-assembly. The device will comprise a
stiff framework of bundles of double-stranded DNA, attachment points for two
biomolecules, a flexible polymer force probe, and fluorescent molecules to act
as a readout of the interaction between the two biomolecules of interest. The
force probe will facilitate binding between the biomolecules, and subsequently
apply a known force acting to rupture the interaction. The bond lifetime will be
monitored using a fluorescence readout, which is amenable to high throughput
data collection. Interaction lifetimes will be measured as a function of force
to determine kinetic parameters that govern the molecular interaction. Initial
proof-of-principle experiments will probe DNA and RNA base-pairing interactions.
Ultimately, the device will be implemented to study protein-DNA, protein-RNA,
and protein-protein systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single molecule force
spectroscopy studies have provided critical insight into the interactions that
stabilize biomolecular machinery and regulate the function of cells. However,
the widespread application of force spectroscopy has been hindered by the need
for cumbersome and expensive equipment and low throughput data acquisition. If
successful, this research will enable economical and high-throughput force
spectroscopy studies of biomolecular machinery. The ultimate goal is to develop
a device that can be packaged and distributed for widespread application on
basic laboratory fluorescence microscopes. This award will also support the
establishment of a biomolecular machinery short course to be offered to high
school age students at summer engineering camps and the development of a
research seminar course aimed to recruit underrepresented engineering students
to pursue graduate level research.