* 1228490
* Empirical Benchmarks of Design Parameters for Group Randomized Trials in Teacher Professional Development Intervention Studies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Benjamin Kelcey, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 01/31/2014
* USD 538,632.00

Professional development of teachers is a strong component in the theory of
action of improving student outcomes, yet such efforts are rarely rigorously
evaluated. One of the problems of robust evaluation of professional development
is that these programs are largely conducted with teachers in their school or
district settings rather than being randomly assigned individually to different
activities. This requires that the evaluation design be developed around group
randomized trials, and the field of educational evaluation lacks important
knowledge of how to structure such evaluations. This project is developing
estimates of the empirical benchmarks of design parameters to be used to
structure evaluations of whole school professional development efforts in
mathematics. The project uses the large data sets that have been accumulated
using the Mathematical Knowledge of Teaching (MKT) measures to develop estimates
of the variation in teacher pedagogical content knowledge in mathematics to
provide values that can be used to estimate sample size and other design
parameters in evaluation design. Researchers from the College of Education at
Wayne State University, the Educational Testing Service and Michigan State
University are conducting this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages the data collected from multiple professional development projects for
mathematics teachers that have used the MKT under the auspices of the
researchers that have been collected in an online Teacher Knowledge Assessment
System from over 10,000 teachers in over 1150 schools. The data from the MKT is
combined with data that is available publically in the Common Core of Data about
the schools and districts within which the professional development was
conducted and additional data that have been collected by the MKT researchers.
The researchers use random intercept hierarchical linear models to estimate the
design parameters for four different group random trial designs. They examine
the impact of several covariate sets of parameters on the variance components
and the corresponding estimates of intraclass correlation. The resulting
parameters are reported in association with the conditions of the schools and
districts in which the data were generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings
from this study are reported in the professional literature on research and
evaluation design. In addition, professional development workshops disseminate
the findings and the processes used to develop them at national educational
research and evaluation meetings. In addition, the researchers include their
findings in updates of the Optimal Design software that is used by multiple
researchers and evaluators to structure the design of their own studies. Too
frequently, researchers do not have sufficient knowledge of the potential
contextual issues surrounding the schools and districts in which they work to
make accurate estimates of the parameters that they should use to determine
important characteristics of their research such as sample size. The findings of
this study provide more realistic estimates of the design parameters that
researchers and evaluators need to conduct their own studies.