* 1228695
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Flexible and Practical Information Flow Assurance for Mobile Apps
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Gary Leavens, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 333,690.00

This project is developing tools and techniques for cost-effective evaluation of
the trustworthiness of mobile applications (apps). The work focuses on
enterprise scenarios, in which personnel at a business or government agency use
mission-related apps and access enterprise networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
such scenarios there are incentives and resources for much more substantive
evaluations and controls on information flow than are currently found in
commodity app marketplaces. The project aims to advance the science needed for
static techniques to be usable by professional development and evaluation teams
and useful for achieving dramatically improved assurance. The project's goals
are to: (a) find flexible and expressive ways to specify information flow
requirements for apps, (b) find effective ways to specify what is assumed about
the Android platform, and (c) find practical static analysis and verification
techniques to check security of apps with respect to given policies and the
platform. Results include specification techniques and theory - models and
algorithms. These are applied in case studies with prototype tools that the
project develops, to evaluate how well the goals are
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's techniques can be deployed by
certification organizations to provide scientifically sound techniques for
assurance, thus&lt;br/&gt;enabling the full benefits of highly-integrated mobile
software in mission-critical situations. Software designers will benefit from
being able to precisely specify end-to-end requirements as well as component
interfaces. Software developers will benefit from reliable means to detect
design flaws and bugs, malware in third-party software, and unintended
functionality that exposes vulnerabilities. Beyond the specific target of mobile
software, the techniques will be of use in other settings, especially web
applications, where it is crucial to reason about interfaces between mutually
untrusting parties making heavy use of callbacks. The project could help improve
security in government agencies and private sector, indirectly benefitting
national security and the general population.