* 1228231
* Marking the Boundaries of Punishment: Retribution Directed at Innocents, Animals & Collectives
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Geoffrey Goodwin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 74,997.00

Understanding what motivates the human desire to punish is essential for
building an effective and fair legal system. Are punitive motivations informed
by a desire to deter future wrongdoers and better protect society or by a
retributive drive to deliver just deserts to offenders for past bad acts? What
factors must be present to find an entity punishment-worthy and how do these
factors impact the severity of our punitive response? While our judicial system
offers answers to these questions in the form of penal codes, sentencing
guidelines, and other legal rules, there is scant evidence to show that these
provisions align with people's intuitions about punishment. Additionally, past
psychological research that has tried to isolate the motivations underlying
people's desire to punish offenders is inconclusive, owing to the difficulty of
separating retributive and general deterrence motivations. Using online and
laboratory experiments, the present project aims to provide much clearer
evidence for the existence of a specifically retributive motive. The project
also aims to document the scope of retribution. Does this motivation to punish
rely on the actor having human adult mental states and moral capacities or can
entities generally thought to be inappropriate targets for state-level
punishment - including children, adults with limited mental capacities, and non-
human entities - be appropriate recipients of punishment?

The data from this project will be critical to a number of pressing policy
issues, including the movement incorporating more retributive principles into
state and federal criminal law, and recent moves to place limitations on capital
punishment by the Supreme Court. Although the project should yield benefits most
directly for scholars, judges, and legal policymakers, the project is also
designed to enhance the educating, training, and mentoring of the next
generation of scholars at the intersection of law and psychology.