* 1228496
* Studies of the Impact of Organic Nitrates on Nitrogen Cycling and Aerosol Production
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Shepson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2016
* USD 565,740.00

This project aims to improve the understanding of the role of organic nitrates
as reservoirs for atmospheric nitrogen oxides, and the role of biogenic volatile
organic compound (BVOC) oxidation in the production of organic nitrates. Organic
nitrate production can limit the production of ozone, and deposit atmospheric
nitrogen back to forests, where it can be utilized in plant biochemistry and
thus carbon sequestration. This study also aims to better understand the role of
organic nitrates derived from BVOCs in the production of secondary organic
aerosol SOA, and chemistry in the aerosol phase that can result in low vapor
pressure products contributing to SOA mass. The focus is on improving our
understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of three of the most important BVOCs
(representing approximately 600 teragrams per year of emissions), i.e.,
isoprene, alpha-pinene and beta-pinene. The specific objectives are: 1.
Determine individual and total gas phase yields of organic nitrates from
hydroxyl radical (OH) reaction with alpha- and beta-pinene, as well as
measurements of the aerosol phase organic nitrate yields. 2. Study the
partitioning of the alpha-pinene and beta-pinene nitrates between gas and
aerosol phases. 3. Investigate aerosol-phase chemistry, specifically oxidation
and oligomerization of organic nitrates, and sulfonation of olefinic nitrates
and those with alcohol groups. 4. Measure the OH and ozone reaction rate
constants for isoprene nitrates and alpha-pinene nitrates (APNs), and measure
the yield of nitrogen dioxide from OH- and ozone oxidation of these species. 5.
Develop detailed photochemical oxidation mechanisms for isoprene and alpha- and
beta-pinene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of this chemistry will
aid in the ultimate development of Earth System Models that describe the
chemistry of BVOCs and their impact on climate and air quality. Collaborations
will be established with scientists and students at the University of East
Anglia (UEA) in the United Kingdom, and at other partnering universities, thus
creating opportunities to connect students at Purdue and the partnering
universities in semester or summer abroad experiences that include participation
in research in the respective collaborators' laboratories. Local high school
students and teachers will be engaged in the science, through participation in
the Global Ozone Project (see: http://go3project.com/network2/ index.php/
pages/home), which involves a network of measurements of tropospheric ozone by
students, who learn about atmospheric science through active research.
Specifically, an ozone instrument will be installed in a rooftop weather station
at West Lafayette Junior/Senior High School where an earth science class will
participate in the interpretation of data, and incorporation of that data in a
global network of similar measurements, that can connect their learning to that
of other students around the world. Interpretation of data will teach them about
relationships between human activities, weather, and air quality. Students will
be invited to attend the principal investigator's group meetings, and connect to
this research, so that high school students get an advance perspective on how
science is conducted in a university research laboratory. Graduate students will
engage in this process, so that learning is a two-way effort for the students.