* 1228510
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Enforcing the Law in an Authoritarian State: Property Rights Reform in China
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Kevin O'Brien, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2013
* USD 25,200.00

The rule of law and secure property rights are thought to be essential
ingredients for economic growth and prosperity. But how does the rule of law
emerge? Why do some governments enforce laws while others ignore them? This
project investigates the origins of the strong legal institutions through a
study of property rights in China. Over the past decade, local governments in
China have illegally seized land from hundreds of thousands of farmers. Yet in
some areas of the country, farmers evidently enjoy stronger protection of their
legal rights than in others. According to official statistics, in some provinces
less than 1 percent of land seizures are illegal while in others the figure is
as high as 24 percent. What explains the relative strength and weakness of
property institutions in different areas of China?

To address this question, this project uses multiple methods. A new geospatial
dataset of close to a million property seizures will provide a broad picture of
what economic and political conditions are associated with increased rule of
law. This project includes a comparative analysis of cities in four Chinese
provinces. These case studies will provide a more detailed understanding of the
processes that allow individuals to act to protect their legal rights and
strengthen institutions.

The origins of strong laws and secure property rights are of interest to
policymakers as well as scholars. Development agencies often work to build
stable institutional foundations that can lead to long-term growth without long-
term aid commitments. The issue is also relevant to policymakers who want to
build the rule of law in unstable countries that pose potential security
threats. The project generates theory and data for these efforts to move from
well-designed laws to well-enforced ones.