* 1228782
* TWC: Phase: Medium: Collaborative Proposal: Understanding and Exploiting Parallelism in Deep Packet Inspection on Concurrent Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Somesh Jha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 950,816.00

Deep packet inspection (DPI) is a crucial tool for protecting networks from
emerging and sophisticated attacks. However, it is becoming increasingly
difficult to implement DPI effectively due to the rising need for more complex
analysis, combined with the relentless growth in the volume of network traffic
that these systems must inspect. To address this challenge, future DPI
technologies must exploit the power of emerging highly concurrent multi- and
many-core platforms. Unfortunately, however, current DPI systems severely limit
their use of parallelism by either resorting to coarse-grained load-balancing or
restricting their analysis to very simple, hard-coded detectors.

In order to fully exploit parallel hardware platforms, in this project we
develop a comprehensive approach that introduces parallelism across all stages
of the complex DPI pipeline. We investigate application-independent scheduling
strategies that take existing DPI analyses and automatically parallelize their
processing. We do so by mapping them into a domain-specific intermediary
representation that abstracts from specifics of the underlying hardware
architecture while providing low-level consistency guarantees. Conceptually, the
project's goal is to virtualize and abstract parallelism as a fundamental
primitive, just like how virtual memory abstracts away physical memory size
limitations from programmers.