* 1228889
* MRI: Acquisition of an analytical imaging X-Ray photoelectron spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Ching Tang, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 559,986.00

This award to the University of Rochester is for the acquisition of a high
resolution imaging X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS). It will provide
researchers with: (1) a highly sensitive quantitative tool to measure elemental
composition, and chemical and electronic states of diverse inorganic and organic
thin films and solids: and, (2) provide an imaging capability of chemical
patterns and structured films with sub 3 nm lateral resolution. It will offer
highly accurate and non-destructive characterization of inorganic semiconductors
and insulators, organic and polymeric thin films, bio-inorganic interfaces,
organic self-assembled monolayers, multilayered thin film devices and
air/moisture sensitive samples. The XPS instrument will enable such
multidisciplinary research projects as: (1) investigation of thermodynamic
parameters of immobilized ligand-substrate pairs; (2) XPS and Ultraviolet
Photoemission Spectroscopy (UPS) study of the model organic photovoltaic
interfaces; (3) surface characterization of semiconductor quantum dots; and, (4)
science and preservation of Daguerreotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shared access
to the instrument will be based on the successful model currently employed by
the University of Rochester's Nano facility, and it will find immediate use by
researchers in the departments of Chemical, Mechanical, and Biomedical
Engineering, Chemistry, Optics, Physics, Computer Science, Materials Science,
and the Medical Center. The shared XPS facility will also facilitate
collaborations between Rochester University and surrounding academic
institutions and industries. One of the critical parameters of the new
instrument is fully automatic operation, which can analyze multiple samples.
This will permit the 24/7 use of the instrument and will facilitate analysis of
samples from research institutions outside of the greater Rochester area. The
instrument will significantly impact the University's undergraduate and graduate
research programs. Three courses will be modified to help students interested in
Engineering, Physics, and Materials Science learn about advanced
characterization technique and give them a hand-on experience with XPS and other
analytical and imaging tools.