* 1228164
* Statistical modeling and computations for data with network structure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* George Michailidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2016
* USD 449,998.00

Recent advances in computing and measurement technologies have steadily placed
network structures at the center of many disciplines in science and engineering.
In many applications, researchers are dealing with multiple networks; either as
the result of temporal evolution of the data generating process, or as the
result of a mixture in the data generating process. This project aims to develop
effective solutions to novel problems arising in the analysis of multiple and
time evolving network structures. To accomplish this objective, (a) new
statistical models are introduced, together with (b) a systematic investigation
of the computational issues involved in estimating their dynamics and
structures. Particular emphasis is placed on new theoretical techniques and
computational tools for network problems. The research targets open problems in
many fields, including biomedical and social science research, where network
modeling and analysis plays an exceedingly important
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop statistical
models and address related computational issues for large complex data sets with
network structure that would aid researchers in the biomedical and social
sciences to gain the necessary insights and form hypotheses to follow-up.
Further, the developed methodology will be integrated into the curriculum of
statistics at the UM and form a key component for dissertation projects. The
results will be disseminated through an open software tool and presentations at
conferences and workshops from the investigators.