* 1228291
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Kingshuk Majumdar, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2015
* USD 97,383.00

Proposal #: 12-28291 PI(s): Majumdar, Kingshuk Kremar, Maja; Szarecka, Agnieszka
Institution: Grand Valley State University Title: MRI/Acq.: High-Performance
Computing Cluster for Research and Education Project Proposed: This project,
acquiring a computing cluster with multiple nodes, aims to have the equipment
serve as a central resource for high performance computing at the institution.
Complementing a small 8-node computing cluster, this cluster supports research
and training of faculty and students in physics and cellular and molecular
biology and provides the opportunity to foster an emerging community of
interdisciplinary researchers from other fields interested in solving complex
computational problems. Some research activities include: - Order-disorder
phases of two and three dimensional magnetic spin systems; - First principle
calculations using density functional theory; and - Quantum mechanical modeling
of the binding pocket and antibiotic resistance in a set of beta-lactamases. The
instrumentation provides a means to test, optimize, and carry out some
computations locally. Broader Impacts: Serving as a powerful stimulus for the
recruitment of undergraduates that include first generation, minority and non-
traditional students, the instrumentation should also leverage individual
research funding in a mainly undergraduate-serving institution and foster
further the integration of research and education. Moreover, this acquisition
should promote an exciting learning environment for the next generation of
students providing an accessible entry to research and education at the
frontiers of Computational Science, Information Technology, and Cluster
Computing.