* 1228772
* HCC: Doctoral Symposium at the Seventh International Conference on the Theory and Application of Diagrams
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Nathaniel Miller, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2013
* USD 20,195.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 12
graduate students, along with a panel of 4 distinguished research faculty
mentors. The event will take place in conjunction with the Seventh International
Conference on the Theory and Application of Diagrams (DIAGRAMS 2012), to be held
July 2-6, 2012, on the campus of the University of Kent, UK. Diagrams are wide-
ranging and open-ended representations that include sketches, drawings, charts,
pictures, 2D and 3D geometric models, and maps. They are a vital tool in human
communication in areas such as art and science, as well as commerce and
industry. A better understanding of how effective diagrams can be generated and
used has the potential to produce transformative advances in these areas.
DIAGRAMS is a bi-annual, international conference series that covers all aspects
of research on the theory and application of diagrams. The goals of the
interdisciplinary conference are to present and discuss (a) state-of-the-art
research on computational, cognitive and socio-cultural theories, models and
techniques of reasoning with diagrammatic representations, and (b) cutting-edge
intelligent and interactive information technologies for using diagrammatic
representations in supporting human reasoning. Research topics include
understanding diagrammatic reasoning in humans, understanding the use of
diagrammatic representation for communication, developing techniques for
automated diagrammatic reasoning, and designing tools for use of diagrammatic
representations. DIAGRAMS is the only conference that provides a united forum
for all areas that are concerned with the study of diagrams. The conference
series is overseen by the Diagrams Steering Committee with a rotating
membership; more information is available at the conference website
http://www.diagrams-conference.org/2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of the DIAGRAMS 2012 Doctoral Consortium is to increase the exposure and
visibility of young graduate student researchers in these areas. The workshop
will be a research-focused day-long meeting that affords participants an
opportunity to present their work and get feedback from established researchers
in the field, who will be present to comment on the young researchers'
presentations in an informal and constructive environment. Each invited
participant will be asked to give a short talk, which will be followed by
discussion and critiquing. For some students, this may be their first
opportunity to give a research talk outside their home institutions, which will
help prepare them for future scholarly discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: DIAGRAMS 2012 will significantly increase our understanding of
diagrammatic reasoning in humans and machines, and will add momentum to the
development of new information technologies for the use of diagrammatic
representations in support of human reasoning. The conference will help develop
human research capital by enabling interactions between senior and junior
researchers and by catalyzing new collaborations. The doctoral consortium will
increase the exposure and visibility of young graduate student researchers in
these areas, and help train them by providing early input from senior
researchers in the field in an interactive and constructive environment. The
social network among this next generation of researchers, and the relationships
with senior researchers, created by the workshop will play a critical role in
their enculturation into the profession. The organizers will be proactive in
order to ensure that both students and faculty are a diverse group across
multiple dimensions including nationality, scientific discipline, gender,
institutional affiliation, and under-represented minority status.