* 1228522
* Examining an epigenetic biomarker of social perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* James Morris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 07/31/2016
* USD 675,905.00

Social interaction is a critical component for the formation and development of
interpersonal relationships. In order to facilitate social interaction, humans
have developed a specialized set of perceptual skills allowing for rapid
assimilation of socially relevant information. These skills are often referred
to collectively as social perception and in normal development the human brain
forms specialized brain circuitry to accommodate these skills. Individual
differences in social perception have a strong heritable component and therefore
should be mediated by common genetic variation that impacts the structure and
function of this specialized brain circuitry. However, contemporary genetic
techniques focusing on the DNA sequence variation have been limited in
explaining variability in complex social behavior. One potential solution to
this problem is to expand the approach to consider other biological processes
that impact the function of the gene without changing its sequence. These
modifications are referred to as 'epigenetic' and are thought to play a critical
role in healthy and disordered behavior. With support from the National Science
Foundation, Drs. James Morris and Jessica Connelly of the University of Virginia
are combining approaches from human neuroscience with molecular genetics to
explore the role of epigenetic processes on neural circuitry supporting social
perception. The project focuses on defining individual epigenetic variability
along the oxytocin receptor gene. Oxytocin is a hormone that acts as a
neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain and plays a critical role in social
perception. Epigenetic modification of the oxytocin receptor gene influences its
function and therefore should influence behaviors that are mediated by oxytocin.
To test this hypothesis, subjects are assessed for epigenetic variability along
the oxytocin receptor gene and then have their brains scanned while performing
three common tasks that engage brain circuitry underlying social perception. The
primary analysis focuses on the relationship between epigenetic variability and
brain activity related to social perception. Secondary analyses consider how
this relationship is related to complex behaviors such as empathy and stress
reactivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a new paradigm to
understand how genetic variability can impact social behavior. To date,
epigenetic modifications have been largely ignored when considering how genes
may modulate brain activity as measured by modern neuroimaging techniques. The
application of epigenetic techniques to neuroscientific investigations of social
behavior will contribute to new models of personality and individual
differences, and help explain vulnerability to psychiatric and developmental
disorders that are defined by a wide range of individual differences. The
project presents a unique opportunity for students wishing to cross-train in
genetics and human neuroscience.