* 1228369
* Statistical Representations and Algorithms for Brain Connectivity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Hans-Georg Mueller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2016
* USD 495,000.00

The statistical analysis of samples of images and in particular of fMRI brain
images is a challenging problem, due to the high complexity of these data and
their large size. Current methodology is mostly ad hoc, which limits the scope
and quality of the analysis. This research addresses this situation by
developing model-based statistical methodology, speci cally for the analysis of
function-valued spatial stochastic processes, within a more general frame- work
of object data analysis. Such data are encountered in spatio-temporal
climatological studies and in resting state fMRI. The latter is used for task-
free brain imaging in order to determine brain connectivity and is a main focus
of this research. A key aspect is that the investigators view each brain as a
sampling unit and develop statistical methods that utilize the entire sample of
available brain images to infer common structures and variation in connectivity.
The methods are generally applicable for the assessment of dependency structures
for spatial processes. The investigators study both modeling of individual
connectivity for a given realization of the spatial process, as well as
connectivity at the population level. To model individuals, they investigate
random covari- ance surfaces and their properties, adopting adequate metrics on
the space of covariance functions. To model population connectivity, the
investigators develop a decomposition for spatio-temporal covari- ance. For all
proposed methods, they investigate theory, efficient computational
implementations and applications to both brain and spatial
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators develop advanced
statistical methods for brain imaging data. Such data are routinely collected
for many individuals in functional magnetic resonance imaging and are large and
complex. Their analysis requires the development of sophisticated computational
and statistical tools, which is the focus of this research. The methods are then
applied to quantify and compare recurring patterns of connectivity of different
parts of the brain for individuals and across populations. Besides
characterizing the function of the brain, patterns of connectivity may include
early indicators of pathology such as early signs of dementia. The investigators
also study the broader impact and applicability of the new methodology.