* 1228631
* RUI/MRI: Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer for Marine Science Research at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Kathryn Van Alstyne, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2014
* USD 346,880.00

The PIs request funding to acquire a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS)
with a multipurpose sampler for Shannon Point Marine Center (SPMC). The
requested instrument has a scan range that will enable it to detect and identify
a diverse range of compounds. The multipurpose sampler will allow liquid and
headspace samples to be injected manually or with an autosampler. It will also
allow samples to be concentrated and then be desorbed and injected into the
GC/MS. The instrument will be used by marine scientists and students, including
many members of underrepresented groups, at SPMC and by visiting scientists and
student researchers from other institutions who are working at SPMC. This
instrument system will provide capabilities that are currently unavailable to
researchers at the lab, even at the main Western Washington University campus.
The instrument purchased on this grant will be used by SPMC faculty and research
staff, visiting scientists, and participants in SPMC?s NSF-funded Research
Experiences for Undergraduates and Multicultural Initiative in the Marine
Science: Undergraduate Participation programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPMC has a long track record of training and
education of underrepresented groups, including the 2002 Presidential Award for
Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring for their
Multicultural Initiative in Marine Sciences. SPMC has Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) and Multicultural Initiative in the Marine Sciences:
Undergraduate Participation (MIMSUP) programs. There is also a strong track
record of dissemination of research results, including both presentations at
conferences and publication in peer reviewed journals. In support of basic
science, as this MRI is, the SPMC group has demonstrated noteworthy dedication
to impacting diverse areas of science and segments of society.