* 1228521
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Counterfeit goods, the state, and intellectual property: An ethnography of legal consciousness in post-socialist China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Hsiao-Ling Su, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 23,096.00

China, upon its accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, became
obliged to abide by multilateral agreements that protect intellectual property.
The concept of private ownership embedded in intellectual property rights,
however, contrasts with vaguely defined local property relations and contradicts
practices of reciprocity common in China. Through an ethnographic study of two
distinct markets in the Yangtze River Delta, this project investigates the
emergence and formation of a legal consciousness of intellectual property rights
in a context where legal reforms enforce private ownership even as long-
practiced customs of reciprocal exchange continue. The researcher will examine
how retail shopkeepers, sales staff, and owners of legitimately registered
brands in the two markets experience, interpret, and negotiate changing
copyright and trademark laws, private ownership of ideas, and property in
general as they sell counterfeit goods and build local brands. During twelve
months of fieldwork, the researcher will employ a combination of three methods:
participant observation, semi-structured and life history interviews, and public
text collection.

This project is the first empirical study to examine legal consciousness of
intellectual property rights in a society undergoing a post-socialist
transition. Revealing the power and limits of Euro-American legal categories as
mediated by the Chinese state and local cultural practices, this research
advances law and society research, the anthropological analysis of property,
ethnographic approaches to the state, and the cross-disciplinary study of
intellectual property rights as part of globalization. More broadly, the
findings will enrich public understandings of how emergent property regimes are
shaped by everyday practices of underrepresented groups. With a better
understanding of the conditions of differently positioned market people and the
options available to them, policymakers at both national and international
levels can design policies that are more culturally appropriate and equitable.