* 1228139
* BRIGE: Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting Shock Absorber
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Fengxia Wang, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2016
* USD 173,612.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding for the evaluation of a piezoelectric energy regeneration shock
absorber. The piezoelectric energy regenerator, composed of several piezoceramic
(PZT) unimorphs, will provide vibration suppression and generate energy from
vibration. An electromechanical model is developed based on nonlinear composite
thin beam theory and nonlinear constitutive law. An optimized design is obtained
via parametric study. As system parameters of the energy regenerator vary, such
as the geometric dimensions and the material properties, the variations in the
amount of generated energy will be analyzed. The effect of the electromechanical
nonlinearity and the geometric nonlinearity of the PZT unimorph on the
efficiency of energy regeneration will be investigated. A novel electrical-
mechanical combined energy harvest circuit, which can operate under two modes,
is designed for obtaining maximum energy from a piezoelectric generator. The
overall objective of this research is to better understand the electromechanical
properties of piezoelectric materials; to design a shock absorber with good
vibration suppression as well as high energy recovery
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Piezoelectric energy harvesting as a green
energy creation method provides an alternative option for alleviating the world
energy stress. The success of the proposed study will bring to life a new
generation of high energy efficiency cars with emission reduction, and hence
improve our environmental conditions. This research will provide a comprehensive
understanding of the electromechanical properties of piezoelectric material. The
study of the power performances in nonlinear dynamical regime will especially
impact material science and bring novel ideas to the design of future
piezoelectric generators. The study of the nonlinear domain switching behavior
of the constitutive model will accelerate the development of boundary value
problems and domain wall dynamics. Results from this project may find
applications in areas of mechanical, biomedical, and information technology.
This project serves underrepresented students at different levels: a) workshops
for African-American high school students and their teachers will be developed,
b) female graduate students and a minority undergraduate student will be
recruited to work on this project, and c) a women in engineering research
symposium will be organized to serve as a career mentoring tool for female
students. &lt;br/&gt;