* 1228258
* Video-recorded Interrogations: Beyond Camera Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* G. Daniel Lassiter, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 189,797.00

Abstract

Many of the wrongful convictions that have been brought to light over the last
two decades have their roots in the interrogation phase of criminal
investigations where coerced or false confessions are sometimes extracted from
detained crime suspects. A solution that has been widely recommended to help
prevent this particular problem is to video record custodial interrogations in
their entirety. Such a procedural modification indeed has the potential to
improve the administration of justice; however, prudence calls for careful
consideration of its possible pitfalls. Guided by basic psychological science,
most notably the literature on illusory causation, Dr. G. Daniel Lassiter's more
than 25 years of systematic investigation has empirically documented the
existence of what is now commonly known as the camera perspective bias in video-
recorded interrogations. That is, videos in which the camera directs observers
visual attention onto suspects (rather than onto interrogators or equally onto
suspects and interrogators) tend to produce more prejudicial evaluations of
suspects, their statements are assessed as more voluntary, they are more likely
to be judged guilty, and they receive more severe sentence recommendations.
Importantly, Dr. Lassiter's research program also demonstrated that the
advantages associated with video recording; for example, a more detailed record
of the interrogation is provided to fact finders without introducing bias or
undermining accurate assessments if an equal-focus perspective is taken by the
video camera.

Although it is clear that camera perspective is an important issue that any
video-recording policy designed to protect the innocent should address, it is
unfortunately not the only concern suggested by the behavioral science
literature. The proposed research draws on four additional areas of
psychological science to derive further potential limitations of video-recorded
interrogations. A series of experiments are planned that will 1) determine the
extent to which these hypothesized limitations would likely detrimentally
influence actual fact finder evaluations of video-recorded interrogations, and
2) evaluate possible strategies for successfully counteracting them. An initial
set of studies investigates the possibility that even an equal-focus video
recording in certain circumstances may not fully protect minority suspects, due
to what Dr. Lassiter and colleagues call a racial salience bias. A second set
examines the potential judgment perseverance the defense must overcome to permit
fact finders to correctly reinterpret a video interrogation that the
prosecution, by virtue of trial convention, has the opportunity to first
characterize as establishing a defendant's guilt. A third set focuses on the
source monitoring errors fact finders may commit that could impede their ability
to accurately conclude that a video-recorded confession narrative was actually
contaminated by information provided by police earlier in the interrogation. A
final set draws on construal level theory to test whether inducing an abstract
(high) or concrete (low) level of mental construal prior to viewing video-
recorded interrogations promotes more accurate assessments of a confession's
reliability.

The proposed work will also yield clear research-based guidelines for legal
practitioners and policy makers that will further improve the likelihood that
the video-recording reform will fulfill its promise to minimize the possibility
that an innocent person will be convicted based on an interrogation-induced
false confession. In Dr. Lassiter's previously funded NSF projects, several
graduate and undergraduate students were able to learn firsthand how basic
psychological theory and research can give rise to scientific investigations
that are of considerable practical import to the justice system and thus society
more generally. Similarly, the proposed work will expose a new generation of
students and future scholars to all phases of a programmatic research agenda
that is simultaneously high in scientific rigor and immediate real-world
applicability.