* 1228299
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The moderating effect of working memory capacity while telling lies under cognitive load
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Maria Hartwig, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,045.00

The project examines the role of working memory capacity (WMC) in lying. WMC is
the ability to use focused attention and cognitive effort to accomplish goals.
Anything that requires attention and concentration will use WMC. Research
indicates that lying may require more WMC than telling the truth because lying
requires suppressing truthful information, generating a lie to tell, and telling
that lie in a believable way, among other cognitive tasks. In comparison,
telling the truth primarily requires recall of information. Previous research
shows that liars display some behaviors which indicate cognitive load. When
liars and truth tellers are placed under extra cognitive load, such behaviors
become more pronounced in liars compared to truth tellers. These behaviors can
be used to more accurately distinguish liars from truth tellers. The current
research will examine how this finding is affected by WMC, as research has shown
that WMC is related to an individual?s ability to cope with cognitive load. In
Studies 1 and 2 participants will lie or tell the truth either under cognitive
load or no cognitive load. WMC will be measured to examine its impact on verbal,
vocal, and visual behavior. In Study 3, observers will judge the truthfulness of
participants from Studies 1 and 2. This project will help advance the
understanding of how working memory affects deception, specifically whether
individuals with greater WMC are better at coping with cognitive load during
lying. This project will also expand research on individual differences in the
deception field by studying how variation in a particular cognitive capacity
affects deceptive behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning more about lying and
truth telling can aid law enforcement and other groups who face the task of
judging credibility in their professional life. This research can be used to
help develop methods of lie detection that exploit the cognitive processes of
liars. In addition, this project will contribute to the training of a graduate
student.