* 1228477
* MRI: Development of a Thermal Melt Probe System for Extensive, Low-Cost Instrument Deployment at the Bed of the Greenland Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Dale Winebrenner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2015
* USD 659,301.00

The aim of this MRI proposal is to develop a low-cost instrumentation package
for studying the hydrologic system at the bases of glaciers and ice sheets.
Estimating future contributions of the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) to sea level
rise depends critically on a quantitative understanding of dynamic subglacial
hydrology. Pressurized water in subglacial hydrological networks strongly
modulates sliding of the ice sheet over its bed, even as those networks evolve
in response to input rates and quantities of surface melt water, on a wide range
of scales in time and space. The pressure of water beneath the ice sheet is thus
the single most important dynamic and diagnostic variable in the system. Despite
this importance there are presently very few field measurements of pressure (or
any other subglacial variable) beneath ice sheets, because of the practical
limitations of existing methods. Existing ice drilling and coring rigs capable
of reaching those depths comprise tons of equipment and fuel, and are operated
by crews of several or more people. Without dramatically increasing their
logistics loads, many projects are therefore unable to acquire measurements of
basal water pressure, despite direct relevance of such data to their
investigations. The investigators propose to develop thermal melt probes, that
would melt their way autonomously down through the ice at speeds of meters per
hour. Advances in miniaturized instrumentation, solid-state power-control
electronics, and high-voltage cabling now enable reliable, robust and
sophisticated measurements of basal water pressure and other variables with
small, logistically light melt probes. The proposal is based on a subscale
prototype that has been built and tested in sea ice and a mountain glacier. The
investigators plan to commission the new system by emplacing at least one probe
beneath 600-1000 m of ice in western Greenland and acquiring basal water
pressure data to serve as a proof-of-concept for a wide range of further
proposals. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the course of
this project.