* 1228272
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Welcoming the Outsider: Variations in Local Construction of the Law toward Immigrants
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Charles Epp, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,753.00

Local agencies in the US increasingly play a key role in immigration enforcement
and in providing services to immigrants. This project will study the local
construction of law on the street regarding immigrants by studying the degree of
agencies' "welcomeness" to immigrants. A 2011 pilot study revealed that some
local agencies have comprehensive policies favoring integrating immigrants into
the local community; others do little or are hostile to integration. The
research will examine how widely local law enforcement agencies and public
libraries are welcoming (or unwelcoming) to immigrants and what conditions shape
the degree of welcomeness. This project will evaluate three different claims
concerning the incorporation of immigrants. The first approach posits that
agencies in communities experiencing greater immigration levels will be less
welcoming; an alternative posits that agencies? policies will be influenced by
shared professional practices. Finally, it may be that front-line employees are
influenced by the characteristics of their immediate situation and the actions
of the person they are addressing. The research will include a two-phased study
using organizational surveys of national samples of law enforcement and
libraries and interviews with a sub-sample of leaders and front-line employees,
supplemented by observations. These agencies interact commonly with immigrants,
but vary in whether they are regulatory-agencies or service-agencies. The
national samples will allow comparisons across widely-varying levels of
immigrant populations, local political preferences, and degree of agency
connection to professional networks. The project will enhance understanding of
the local construction of immigrant policy. In addition, the project may help
local agencies develop policies and training programs to improve relationships
with immigrants. The project will also produce two databases, one of interview
transcripts and one of survey data that will be available to researchers and
professionals.