* 1228198
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative Proposal: Policy Compliant Integration of Linked Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,898.00

The ubiquity of computing technology and the Internet have created an age of big
data that has the potential to greatly enhance the efficiency of our societies
and the well-being of all people. The trend comes with problems that threaten to
prevent or undermine the benefits. An immediate concern is how to fuse,
integrate and analyze data while respecting privacy, security and usage
concerns. A second issue is allowing data to remain distributed, enabling its
owners to maintain and control quality as well as to enforce security and
privacy policies. A final underlying challenge is helping to produce sound and
useful results by assuring that systems understand the meaning of the data being
integrated and analyzing access and usage policies. For some domains, like
health informatics and clinical research, solving these problems will have a
significant impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores an
approach to solving these problems by developing a policy-compliant integration
system for linked healthcare data. The system models data, schemas and policies
using open Web standards such as Semantic Web languages, federates queries to
independent Linked Data stores based on content, provides policy enforcement by
modifying incompliant queries, and uses formal methods to guarantee correctness
of key components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides new approaches to
solving one of the most significant problems our society faces in the 21st
century: benefiting from the integration of distributed linked data while
respecting security, privacy, and usage requirements. The prototype tools and
systems are incorporated into our educational activities and made available to
others via appropriate open source licenses.