* 1228531
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The New Regulatory Regime: A Study of Non-State Regulation in China's Food Safety System
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Kevin O'Brien, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 08/31/2013
* USD 23,335.00

Is China pursuing a new model of regulatory development that relies more heavily
on non-state forces? This study seeks to highlight the important role that non-
state regulators such as food producers,NGOs and producer associations can play
in China's food safety system. This project will examine how and to what extent
non-state organizations complement the regulatory functions of the state; and,
assess why some non-state regulators create, enforce, and transmit food safety
norms more effectively in certain contexts. This project draws on nine case
studies compared across product type and geographical region, and a cross-
sectional survey.

The study of regulatory capacity in China has largely centered on the role of
the state, emphasizing the effects of centralization or legislative design on
regulatory outcomes. As a result, the discussion of how to improve regulatory
compliance has tended to overlook a key actor; non-state organizations. The
study of informal organizations and their role in regulation will make the
following intellectual contributions. First, this study will contribute to the
literature on development, as it will show how and to what extent non-state
regulation is possible in developing countries. Second, this project will
contribute to discussions concerning how to leverage public-private partnerships
to improve governance.

This dissertation will allow conclusions concerning how to improve food safety
in multiple settings, and will focus on the development of new, and more
effective, partnerships between the state and informal organizations to reduce
the outbreak of major food poisonings. Second, this project will discuss how
international organizations can cooperate with indigenous non-state regulators
to improve food safety outcomes. Third, given the increasing trade in food
between the United States and China, a study on food safety in China is
essential to American public health.