* 1228996
* EXP: Understanding the Transformative Potential of Spoken Assessments of Science Understanding for Young Learners
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Wayne Ward, Boulder Language Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2015
* USD 249,567.00

This exploratory proposal addresses a significant goal in the New Science
Framework and one that was previously highlighted in the NRC report: "Taking
Science to School: Learning and Teaching Science in Grades K-8". The goal of the
project is the teaching and learning of the norms of scientific argument,
explanation, and the evaluation of evidence for productive participation in the
discourses of science, starting in the early grades. The investigators assert
that even though some students do not read well, there may be significant
scientific understanding which will go unrecognized unless alternative methods
of evaluation are developed such as oral assessments. Oral assessments by
pedagogical agents which can elicit explanations from students and engage them
in serious dialog are an alternate to oral assessments by humans. The project
has two goals: 1) assess the benefits of incorporating spoken prompts into
written assessments, and 2) investigate spoken dialogs between a student and a
virtual or human teacher testing if they can produce detailed and accurate
assessments of science understanding as well as the ability to verbalize
complete and accurate science explanations. The site for this project is the
Boulder Valley School District's low and mid-performing schools and its Summer
Science Camp program for language-minority students. FOSS, the Full Option
Science System, a curriculum used by over 100,000 teachers and 2 million
students, and the FOSS Summative ASK assessments will be used for the curriculum
and to measure learning. This effort builds on an earlier successful development
by the same team of My Science Tutor (MyST), an intelligent tutoring system to
improve science learning by third, fourth, and fifth grade students through
spoken dialogs with Marni, a virtual science tutor in multimedia environments.
Elementary science will be the content area for this project as well. Primary
organizations involved are Boulder Language Technologies, the Boulder Valley
School District, and the University of Colorado. It is expected that these
exploratory studies will show that alternative forms of assessment are feasible
and should be used more widely to raise the achievement level of both language-
minority students and elementary students in general. The evaluation will
include an external expert review and regular critical review of the project?s
methods and progress, analysis procedures, and interpretation of data into
findings.

The proposed studies will expand the options of assessment conditions available
for students in early grades, particularly those who are weak readers and
writers and English language learners. The project will expand the pool of
students who can demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of science,
addressing a critical need to expand the pool of students engaged in science
learning.