* 1228345
* Punishment Regimes and the Multi-Level Effects of Parental Imprisonment:  Inter-Institutional, Inter-generational and Inter-sectional Models of Inequality and Exclusion
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* John Hagan, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Helena Silverstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 247,620.00

How do effects of high levels of incarceration of parents on their children vary
across the U.S.? Research has not systematically examined variation in these
effects with a comprehensive and representative national sample that allows
analysis of variation across U.S states. This research will be the first to
examine variation in effects of maternal and paternal incarceration using a
research design that can jointly examine state and school level policies on
children. The research will be based on data gathered since 1995 on adolescents
who are now adults in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health [Add
Health]. The research will apply a life course theory to examine potentially
modifiable pathways from childhood to adolescence and early to middle adulthood,
focusing on such well measured developmental factors as high school grades,
delinquency, justice system contacts, depressed feelings, and substance use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching thesis is that variable effects of
parental imprisonment are experienced by youth transitioning into and through
adulthood in American society. The approach is intergenerational in linking
imprisoned parents to children; inter-institutional in connecting state
punishment policies with local schools; and intersectional in differentiating
outcomes along racial/ethnic and gender lines of inequality. The research is
concerned with explaining early adult outcomes of inequality, including
earnings, employment, financial strain, and perceived relative socio-economic
position. The sample is a historically unique cohort of parents and children
born during the peak growth years (the 1980s) of mass incarceration and surveyed
four times during the expansion of American imprisonment. The project includes
the following objectives: (1) develop measures of state punishment to be
appended to the Add Health data; (2) test state punishment effects; (3) test
school punishment policies and related school effects; and (4) test parental
imprisonment effects.