* 1228261
* Measuring and modeling object similarity in the brain: combining conceptual and perceptual representations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Shimon Edelman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 486,656.00

The brain uses similarity to generalize from the known to the unknown. For
example, when a person encounters a new type of fruit and has to decide whether
or not it is edible, the person must judge how similar it is to already known
edible and inedible items. However, the type of similarity that is taken into
account matters. A coconut can look like a rock (visual similarity), but for
making a decision about edibility the fact that it hangs from a leafy tree
(semantic similarity) is key. With funding from the National Science Foundation,
Dr. Rajeev Raizada of Rochester University is investigating how the brain uses
similarity to respond adaptively to changing circumstances. With an
understanding of how types of similarity, such as visual and semantic
similarity, are encoded in the brain, it should be possible to decode them from
neural signals. In this project, Dr. Raizada is combining brain imaging with
computational modeling and behavioral testing. He is developing novel methods of
neural decoding to predict the similarity of brain patterns on the basis of
computational models of the stimuli that people are perceiving. In addition, the
methods are designed to investigate patterns across different people's brain
activations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel computational methods being
developed in the project could have significant broader impacts, for example,
such techniques underpin brain-computer interfaces that attempt to restore
communication to locked-in patients. Moreover, the modeling of semantic
similarity in the brain has implications for disorders such as semantic
dementia. There are also possible implications for technology. The brain
responds flexibly to changing circumstances, but artificial systems, in
contrast, are all too often brittle. When confronted with circumstances similar,
but not identical, to familiar ones, they break down. Insights into how the
brain generalizes from the known to the unknown have the potential to transform
our knowledge of how the brain achieves its adaptability, opening up new avenues
for endowing artificial systems with similar skills.