* 1228419
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Does Law Matter for Social Movement Networks?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Stephen Perz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 08/31/2013
* USD 19,152.00

Social movements have catalyzed change in the U.S. legal system by demanding
more stringent enforcement of existing laws, the repeal of laws, and the
creation of new laws. Much less research, however, has approached the interplay
of law and social movements from the opposite perspective, that is, examining
how the creation of law affects social movements. This research aims to shed
light on these dynamics by examining how the movement opposing surface mining in
Appalachia has evolved since the passage of the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA). The significance of SMCRA cannot be overstated,
as the act called for the federal regulation of surface mining, headed off the
growing movement calling for the abolition of the practice, and also legitimated
the controversial extraction method known as mountaintop removal.

The researchers approach this social movement as a network, aiming to understand
how the relationships between anti-surface mining social movement organizations
changed, and continue to change in response to legal engagements. Engagements
include the tactics used, as well as the ways they frame the problem of surface
mining and the goals they seek. Network analysis allows the researchers to
correlate the network positions of individual social movement organizations with
their legal stances. Interviews with organizational leaders allow the
researchers to garner insider assessments of how the law influences intra-
movement dynamics and how movement dynamics influence the law.