* 1228244
* Statistical Analysis for Partially-Observed Markov Processes with Marked Point Process Observations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Yong Zeng, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 278,533.00

The proposed research, involving stochastic differential equation models, aims
at the analysis of ultra high-frequency data (UHF), which are marked point
process (MPP) observations. It has an array of applications in finance, and
stochastic control and filtering. With harnessing newly available Graphics
Processing Units (GPU) supercomputing power in mind and targeting benchmark
stochastic volatility and Levy models, the first objective is to develop new
uniformly consistent recursive algorithms via Bayesian Inference via Filtering
Equations (BIFE) for propagating and updating joint conditional measures such as
joint posterior distributions. The new recursive algorithms, which numerically
solve the stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs), are suitable for
GPU computing, because the algorithms can not only be parallelized for
computation, but also be partitioned for memory storage in each CPU. Moreover,
the new algorithms provide additional many-fold increase in computing power due
to the advantage of implicit methods over explicit methods. Combining GPU
computing and gains from advances in numerical algorithms, this project carries
out real-time tracking of stochastic volatility and real-time Bayesian model
selections over sophisticated benchmark financial models for streaming UHF
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic trading in all major world financial
markets has routinely generated streams of UHF data. UHF data have spurred
interest in empirical market microstructure and present new and interesting
challenges that are essential to comprehend market microstructure, to monitor
and regulate markets, and to conduct risk management. Theoretical,
computational, and implementation issues for the estimation and applications of
these models will be investigated. This project trains interdisciplinary Ph.D
students with co-disciplines in Economics, develops a new graduate course, and
produces a research monograph on this topic. The PI works closely with both
undergraduate and graduate students, creates illustrative and research data
sets, and develops publicly available software.