* 1228126
* Understanding Human Responses to Environmental Change Using a 2,500-Year Reconstruction of Paleoecologic and Socioeconomic History
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Scott Mensing, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 537,295.00

This project investigates how past societies responded to climate change. There
is a general sense that modern societies are more insulated than pre-industrial
societies from the effects of climate change, but this may not prove to be true.
Developing a more complete understanding of how natural and human-caused changes
affected the environment in the past can potentially guide decisions aimed at
promoting future sustainability. Physical scientists often view abrupt changes
in past climate as the primary cause for societal collapse; however, social
scientists argue that sociopolitical decisions contribute to environmental
change, and we should not study societal vulnerability without including an
analysis of social structures. This project will integrate paleoenvironmental
reconstruction with socioeconomic history to identify linkages between social
and environmental change associated with climate variability. The research team
includes paleoecologists, geologists, social historians and archeologists who
will investigate a site near Rome, Italy that has been continuously utilized for
over 2,300 years. The team will analyze medieval literature and property maps
preserved in the archives of local monasteries, municipalities and the Vatican
to obtain written "eye-witness accounts" of landscape change to help reconstruct
the socioeconomic history of the region. In addition, the team will analyze
physical evidence from lake sediments, including forest history from pollen,
flood and erosion history from paleomagnetism and sediments, lake history from
diatoms, temperature from oxygen isotopes, and fire history from charcoal
analysis. By comparing the timing of significant environmental changes in the
paleoenvironmental reconstruction to the timing of social history from written
records the team will be able to suggest whether environmental change was caused
by humans, by climate, or some complicated interaction of the two. In cases when
climate change appears to have resulted in socioeconomic collapse, the research
team will explore different models of socio-political structures that influenced
how the local population was able to respond to the
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights from this work will contribute to our
understanding of actions that may guide policy decisions that better prepare
communities for sustaining their local environment when faced with climatic
change. The project will contribute to K-12 education by providing professional
development to high school teachers of science, history and social studies.
These teachers will create cross-disciplinary lesson plans that meet science
curriculum standards and be disseminated to educators throughout the country
using the Nevada Data Portal. Three graduate students will be supported while
they earn advanced degrees in Geography (PhD), Geological Sciences (PhD) and
Education (MA). These students will gain international experience, working with
Italian researchers and graduate students. Six undergraduate students will also
be supported as well as one early career female research scientist. This project
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups by both recruiting
students from these groups, as well as working with high schools in communities
with large populations of underrepresented groups. This project will advance
scientific knowledge by creating a high resolution record of environmental
change in the heart of the Roman Empire, a region that has been central to
advances in western culture for thousands of years.