* 1228228
* MRI: Development of a Spark-Assisted Laser Multicharged Ion Deposition and Implantation System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Gon Namkoong, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 332,446.00

This award to Old Dominion University is for the development of a Spark-assisted
Laser Multicharged Ion Deposition and Implantation System. This system is
expected to be a major improvement in performance and cost over existing
multicharged ion sources and will have the ability to select ion charge and
kinetic energy over a wide range. Multicharged ions have recently attracted
significant attention for use in tools for nanoprocessing and nanofabrication of
various electronic devices and sensors. They also have applications in medical
imaging and treatment and in chemical analysis. This project integrates a laser
multicharged ion source with a cost-effective ion density amplification stage
based on a spark discharge. The multicharged ions are selected and transported
to a processing chamber. With increased charge state, the ions carry substantial
potential energy. The multicharged ion interaction with the solid involves the
release of this potential energy in addition to its kinetic energy. For slow
multicharged ions, the release of potential energy can be localized to a depth
of a few nanometers (10-9 meter) at the surface, making them ideal for
nanoprocessing. On the other hand, fast multicharged ion beams can deposit
significant energy at a relatively deep target location, making them ideal for
applications requiring localized high energy deposition as used in carbon ion
radiotherapy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multicharged ion source is being
developed at the Applied Research Center, which is a consortium of four Virginia
universities, the Jefferson Lab, and several industries; all share lab
facilities. Old Dominion University (ODU) collaboration with consortium members
involves joint use of resources by students, course sharing, and joint
publications. Results will be incorporated in several graduate and undergraduate
courses in diverse subjects, such as nanotechnology, plasma processing,
microelectronic fabrication, statistical process control in semiconductor
manufacturing, solid-state electronics, semiconductor characterization, pulsed
power, and renewable energy. This project will involve several faculty and
graduate students and collaboration with researchers at Université du Québec en
Outaouais. A user facility will be established for multicharged ion
applications. This facility is expected to operate for at least 15 years with
2-5 graduate students continuously using the instrument. Undergraduate students
will be involved in this multidisciplinary work as part of their senior design
course and in summer projects. ODU is an urban university with a diverse student
population, and this instrumentation development project will be particularly
useful in attracting underrepresented groups. The multicharged ion technology
will be featured in ODU engineering open houses, Jefferson Lab open houses, and
the annual Hampton Roads Technology showcase. The development of the spark-
assisted laser multicharged ion source will represent a new scientific and
industrial tool with many potential applications in various industries, in
particular in the emerging nanotechnology industry. ODU will seek industrial
partners for licensing patents, know-how transfer to industry, and
commercialization.