* 1228526
* Cortical representations of visually specific information in working memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Frank Tong, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 613,633.00

Visual working memory is a core cognitive function that allows people to
actively maintain and manipulate information about stimuli that are no longer in
view. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Frank Tong of
Vanderbilt University is investigating how the human visual system actively
maintains information about visual features and objects over delay periods of
many seconds. This project is evaluating the hypothesis that visually specific
content is maintained in working memory as a result of top-down feedback to
early visual areas of the brain as well as to higher-level object-selective
areas of the brain. The question is to what extent early visual brain areas can
retain visually precise information about an actively remembered object. Dr.
Tong is developing advanced methods to decode patterns of human brain activity
for the purposes of reading out information about what item a person is
maintaining in working memory. Experiments are investigating how multiple visual
areas represent information about simple visual patterns and complex objects.
Additional experiments are for testing whether these working memory
representations are robust to visual interference, and whether their contents
can be dynamically manipulated and modified based on the goals of the
participant. The results are designed to provide new insights into the neural
bases of visual working memory, its robustness to interference, and its capacity
for flexible manipulation of remembered visual content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The visual working memory system provides an essential
link between immediate perception and higher-level cognitive processes, and is
important for mental imagery, vision-based learning, visuospatial planning, and
the maintenance of an updated representation of the objects in one's
environment. Understanding the neural bases of visual working memory is
important for advancing knowledge of human brain function and is also relevant
to developing better methods to improve learning in educational settings.
Research on visual working memory is also a prerequisite to developing better
methods to diagnose individuals with impairments in visual working memory, and
it may eventually lead to treatment interventions. The methodological advances
from this project are also highly relevant to research on brain-computer
interface, and they constitute an advance in the ability to decode specific
mental content from patterns of human brain activity.