* 1228024
* Support for U.S. Participants at the 15th International Congress on Catalysis (July 1-6, 2012 / Munich, Germany)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1228024&lt;br/&gt;Wachs
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a continued and growing world interest in the
role catalysts play in synthesis of petroleum- and renewable-based products for
fuels, specialty chemicals, environmental controls and process efficiency. The
importance of catalysis is reflected by the fact that 25-30% of all manufactured
goods in the U.S. involve at least one catalytic step. Therefore, it is crucial
for U.S. scientists to participate in activities that foster collaborations and
new ideas in an area that impacts over a quarter of the U.S. economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests partial travel support for 25 U.S.
academic participants so they may participate in the 15th International Congress
on Catalysis. The 15th International Congress on Catalysis which will be held in
Munich, Germany on July 1-6, 2012, will bring together experts from around the
world to discuss all the developments on the practical and new understanding in
catalysis over the last four years. The scope of the 15th International Congress
will include all types of catalysis (homogeneous, heterogeneous and others)
related to innovative and current topics, with emphasis on prediction of
catalyst performance and characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
primary purposes of this travel grant is to provide support for junior faculty
to participate, as well as to support women and underrepresented minority
candidates. This is an ideal opportunity for these groups to establish
international collaborations as well as to understand the cutting edge of
catalytic science and engineering.