* 1228302
* Understanding the Role of Convective Momentum Transport for the Madden-Julian Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Duane Waliser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2016
* USD 495,830.00

This project seeks to understand the role of convective momentum transport (CMT)
in the lifecycle of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). The MJO is an envelope
of organized convection that propagates from the Indian Ocean to the Pacific
Ocean and constitutes the dominant form of intraseasonal precipitation and
atmospheric circulation variability in the tropics. The MJO influences a variety
of tropical weather and climate phenomena,including tropical cyclones (affecting
hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico), the onset and intraseasonal fluctuations of
the monsoons and rainfall over Asia, Australia, Africa, and the Americas, and
the onset of El Nino events. CMT refers to the vertical transport of horizontal
momentum that takes place due to the updrafts and downdrafts in convective
clouds. Traditional theories of the MJO have emphasized the role of convective
clouds in transporting heat and moisture, and in driving large-scale
circulations through latent heat release. But some recent studies suggest that
CMT may play a critical role for the development of the MJO circulation through
a two-way dynamical interaction between the MJO and convectively coupled
equatorial waves (CCEWs) within the much larger MJO envelope. Through detailed
analysis of newly available datasets, including those produced during the
Dynamics of the MJO (DYNAMO) field campaign, the principal investigators seek to
achieve a comprehensive characterization of CMT associated with the MJO, and
thereby improve our understanding of the role of cumulus effects on MJO
development.

The MJO is of practical as well as scientific interest, given the many climate
and weather impacts of MJO activity. The work performed here has the potential
to improve MJO forecasts, through the development of parameterizations through
which the effects of CMT can be included in numerical models used to produce
long-range predictions of the MJO. In addition, In addition, the project
provides support and train a postdoc, thereby providing for the future
scientific workforce in this area.