* 1228581
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Agenda Dynamics in the U.S. Federal Courts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Christopher Zorn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2014
* USD 23,399.00

Whether courts set the agenda or simply react to policy attention in other
institutions is a question unresolved by social scientists and legal scholars,
and one with important implications for policymakers. For example, by using the
courts, do interest groups encourage attention for their preferred policies?
Through litigation, do citizens gain the attention of government? These and
other questions are part of a larger puzzle: what part do federal courts play in
the policy process? On this, two separate perspectives have emerged. In the
first view, the courts are passive implementers of policy, with attention in the
courts following attention in other institutions. Contrary to this perspective,
an emerging literature suggests the courts can be used by litigants and interest
groups to proactively shift issue attention across multiple policymaking
institutions. To address these questions, this research offers the first
comprehensive, long-term study of issue attention across the federal judiciary.
The investigator examines change in the issue attention of litigants, judges and
interest groups within the federal courts and documents their relationships
within and across courts. Beyond the judiciary, the author tests competing
theories of how Congress and the executive branch impact, or are impacted by,
the issue attention of actors within the legal system. In doing so, this project
offers a unique contribution to studies of the hierarchical relationships of
federal courts as well as the role of courts in the policy process.

Moreover, the data provided by the study offer a substantial resource for
scholars of judicial politics, interest groups, agenda-setting, and the policy
process. More broadly, for litigants and groups designing broad strategies to
influence public policy, whether or not the courts are influential in
determining issue attention has dire implications. For judges and court
administrators who are responsible for oversight of the judicial process, the
proposed research and resultant data will also be of potential interest.