* 1228619
* Creating a State-Level Public Opinion Data Base for Law and Courts Scholarship: New Frontiers in Research on the Public's Views of Third Branch Politics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* James Gibson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 08/31/2016
* USD 91,264.00

Social scientists know at least two important things about law and politics in
the United States. First, public opinion matters. What the public prefers - and
what it will tolerate - is an important element of many aspects of law and
politics, as in the support the public is willing to extend to legal
institutions, especially when they make unpopular decisions. Second, states
matter. The U.S. is a federal system, so states always matter. But when it comes
to law, the vast majority of legal activity takes place in the individual
states. It follows, therefore, that public opinion in each of the American
states is important.

However, in the social sciences, the large survey data bases have been far more
concerned with ordinary politics (primarily electoral), rather than law and
politics, and therefore have not surveyed the American people on issues relevant
to those concerned with law and politics.

This project will produce a state public opinion data base on this topic that
can be used by scholars of widely varying theoretical foci. Marrying a newly
developed statistical methodology that can derive state-level estimates from
national survey data to an existing survey data base focused on legal matters,
this project promises to create a treasure-trove of measures of how the
residents of individual states feel about numerous issues of law and politics.
For instance, this project will allow the assessment of whether the methods of
selecting and retaining judges in the American states have any consequences for
public attitudes toward law and courts. By creating and disseminating state-
level measures of public opinion on law and legal institutions, this project
will stimulate new efforts to understand the relationships between the
judiciaries and their constituents, the people of the American states.