* 1228719
* SBES: Medium: Economic Incentives and Organizations for a Trustworthy Cyberspace
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Kevin McCabe, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 09/30/2013
* USD 297,921.00

In this research controlled economics experiments are used to test the
predictions of economic theories that hypothesize effective cybersecurity
tradeoffs within an organization depends on both worker incentives and the
structure of job duties. In these experiments a team of economists and
cybersecurity experts are working together to design virtual world experiments
that measure the impact of different incentive arrangements and job design on
operational cybersecurity risks. This is particularly interesting in computer
intensive environments where the mix of competing tasks include easily monitored
tasks with easily verified impact on organizational goals, such as tasks
performed by application programming teams, and tasks that have a more ambiguous
impact on organizational performance such as tasks associated with cybersecurity
practices. In the former case high powered incentives often compete against the
relatively low powered incentives associated resulting in the inefficient
management of cybersecurity risks. The goal of this research is to better
understand how management practice interacts with available cybersecurity
technologies and cybersecurity threats to enable better risk management
strategies within organizations. Such research provides evidence based findings
that will make organizations more aware of their cybersecurity/operational-
efficiency tradeoffs and thus allow them to improve their organizational
practices and consequently their risk management strategies against
cybersecurity threats.