* 1228455
* CONFERENCE: C. elegans Development, Cell Biology and Gene Expression Meeting being held June 7-10, 2012 in Madison, Wisconsin.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Martha Soto, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2013
* USD 6,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The C. elegans Development, Cell Biology and Gene
Expression Topic Meeting will be held at the U. Wisconsin, in Madison, from June
7th to 10th, 2012. This meeting, expected to attract 500 scientists from around
the world, will bring together junior and senior researchers to discuss the
latest findings in C. elegans development, cell biology and gene expression
studies. The C. elegans Topic Meetings, held every two years at diverse
locations, are smaller meetings that encourage frequent interactions between
meeting attendees through short oral presentations, long poster sessions,
workshops and shared meals. An Organizing Committee with a breadth of experience
and background will select the best talks from submitted Abstracts with
particular attention to highlight the work of graduate students and postdocs and
to keep the speaker list diverse. Students and postdoctoral fellows, and persons
underrepresented in science will be encouraged to present their research at this
meeting to promote their scientific and career development. This meeting will
include seven thematic sessions. Each will begin with a Keynote Address from a
leading C. elegans researcher, including one Nobel Laureate, who will place
their work in historical context for the benefit of new researchers in the field
and to highlight the interconnections between different subfields of biology
that have led to the growth of research in C. elegans development, cell biology
and gene expression&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will promote excellent science and will support
the career development of younger scientists. The findings from the meeting will
be shared with the public through the posting of meeting Abstracts and of data
collections introduced at the meeting via WormBase (www.wormbase.org), a well-
curated web site that supports research in C. elegans. Support from the NSF will
allow scientists in the U.S. to send their junior trainees to the meeting
including undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, as well as
lab members with disabilities and/or persons underrepresented in science, who
may otherwise not be able to attend this meeting. Of the four meeting organizers
three are women, including two underrepresented in science. The Organizing
Committee includes men and women from around the world, with high representation
by junior faculty.