* 1228792
* TWC: Phase: Medium: Collaborative Proposal: Understanding and Exploiting Parallelism in Deep Packet Inspection on Concurrent Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Robin Sommer, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 577,998.00

Deep packet inspection (DPI) is a crucial tool for protecting networks from
emerging and sophisticated attacks. However, it is becoming increasingly
difficult to implement DPI effectively due to the rising need for more complex
analysis, combined with the relentless growth in the volume of network traffic
that these systems must inspect. To address this challenge, future DPI
technologies must exploit the power of emerging highly concurrent multi- and
many-core platforms. Unfortunately, however, current DPI systems severely limit
their use of parallelism by either resorting to coarse-grained load-balancing or
restricting their analysis to very simple, hard-coded
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fully exploit parallel hardware
platforms, in this project we develop a comprehensive approach that introduces
parallelism across all stages of the complex DPI pipeline. We investigate
application-independent scheduling strategies that take existing DPI analyses
and automatically parallelize their processing. We do so by mapping them into a
domain-specific intermediary representation that abstracts from specifics of the
underlying hardware architecture while providing low-level consistency
guarantees. Conceptually, the project's goal is to virtualize and abstract
parallelism as a fundamental primitive, just like how virtual memory abstracts
away physical memory size limitations from programmers.