* 1228325
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectrometer for Research and Education in Chemistry and Physics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Juan Noveron, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 225,035.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Luis Echegoyen from the University of Texas El Paso and colleagues Juan Noveron,
Michael Eastman, Cristian Botez and Dino Villagran will acquire an electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer. The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
synthesis of and sampling the highest occupied and the lowest unoccupied
molecular orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) of endohedral metallofullerenes (EMFs) and
their derivatives; (b) parallel proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) with
dimolybdenum bimetallic units; (c) understanding the electronic structure of
Ru2(5+) dimers; (d) coordination chemistry of paramagnetic centers in metal-
organic supramolecular nanomaterials; (e) cyanide polymers; and (f) magnetic
behavior of metal oxide nanoparticle ensembles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPR
spectrometers detect electrons, more specifically, the energy necessary to
excite an electron to a higher quantized energy state. This occurs when the
spectrometer provides the energy necessary to flip the spin of an unpaired
electron in the presence of an applied magnetic field. This information provides
insight into the electronic structure and bonding of the material being studied,
which can be utilized to understand its properties and how it might be used or
improved. This spectrometer will provide faculty and research students with
modern instrumentation not currently available at the institution advancing
their research projects significantly. It will be used in an undergraduate
laboratory course providing training in this analytical technique to large
numbers of Hispanic-American students at an institution with a 78% undergraduate
student body of Hispanic origin.