* 1228284
* Graduate/Undergraduate Travel to 19th Annual Southeastern Regional Yeast Meeting (SERYM) being held February 24-26, 2012 in Atlanta, GA
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Anita Corbett, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2013
* USD 4,800.00

Intellectual Merit The 19th Annual Southeastern Regional Yeast Meeting (SERYM)
will be held on the campus of Emory University from February 24-26, 2012. This
annual meeting provides a unique opportunity for yeast researchers from states
in the Southeastern region of the U.S. to come together to share their
preliminary research findings and discuss new research tools and emerging
technologies. The proposed meeting on Yeast is unique in that it is a regional
meeting designed to increase the participation of undergraduates, graduate
students and underrepresented groups and because it is aimed at researchers
investigating a variety of yeast species not limited to the more common model
organisims S. cerevisiae and S. pombe. A key strength of this meeting is the
opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate students to present their
research in platform and/or poster formats. The regional nature of this meeting
provides opportunities for students to discuss their research work with leading
scientists, laying the foundation for future scientific development and
collaborations.

Broader Impacts One of the goals of the meeting is to promote student attendance
and participation and the requested funding will support the attendance of 16
students. Students had a strong presence at the 2011 meeting, with undergraduate
and graduate students comprising 62% of the total meeting attendees and giving
62% of the platform and 66% of the poster presentations. Students from
underrepresented groups will be given priority participation support. To
increase the participation of students from underrepresented groups, we have
invited students and mentors from Spelman College, Morehouse College, and
Clayton State University to participate in SERYM 2012.