* 1228121
* BRIGE: Optimal formation of consecutive vortex rings for propulsion systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jifeng Peng, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2014
* USD 174,957.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1228121&lt;br/&gt;Peng,
Jifeng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key hydrodynamic feature of vortex ring formation
with implication to propulsion is that there is a limit in ring growth. Studies
have established the limiting process on isolated vortex ring formation from a
starting jet, and associated optimal ring formation with the limiting formation
time. Inspired by animals such as squids and medusae, a novel propulsion
technique has been developed utilizing consecutive vortex rings generated from a
pulsed jet. The ring formation process of a pulsed jet is significantly
different than that of a starting jet because when rings are generated in a
repeated fashion, the interaction between rings alters the dynamics of jet shear
layer and vortex formation. This is demonstrated in a recent study in which the
limiting formation time is reduced significantly when a pulsed jet generates
consecutive vortex rings in close proximity. The formation time alone is not
sufficient to describe the ring formation process and the pulsing frequency also
plays a significant role. To fully exploit the potential of pulsed-jet
propulsion, it is imperative to investigate the influence of vortex interaction
on ring formation and establish the limiting ring formation process and its
optimization for a pulsed jet. In this proposed project, experimental studies
will be performed to investigate the formation process of consecutive vortex
rings from a pulsed jet and to determine the effects of ring interaction on the
shear layer dynamics and ring formation process. The research will emphasize
vortex ring growth and its limit, as a dynamical systems analysis will be used
to quantify entrainment and identify pinch-off. The dependency of the limiting
formation time on the pulsing frequency will be established. Thrust generated
from a pulsed jet will be quantified and correlated with ring formation
dynamics. A theoretical model will then be developed to predict ring pinch-off
and to explain the empirical results. A numerical framework will also be
developed to optimize the kinematics of the pulsed jet for vortex ring formation
and propulsion. Many features of biological systems that act as constraints in
optimal ring formation will also be explored, including stopping vortices formed
during recovery strokes, time-dependent jet velocity profile, periodic variation
in propulsion velocity, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed project will advance the understanding of vortex ring formation from a
pulsed jet, and elucidate the effects of vortex interaction on jet shear layer
dynamics and ring formation. It will establish the limiting ring growth process
for a pulsed jet, as well as its optimization for propulsion. The knowledge
obtained in the project will serve as the guideline for applications of pulsed-
jet propulsion, a promising design for future aerial/underwater vehicles. In
addition, the understanding on various constraints in optimal ring formation
inherent in biological systems, as well as on their adaptations to these
constraints, will not only contribute insights to the fields of biological
locomotion and integrated biological systems but also complement existing design
principles of engineering propulsion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will explore many fundamental fluid dynamics questions
regarding vortex ring formation and interaction. It will have potentially wide
applications in the emerging field of pulsed-jet propulsion and will further
advance this novel propulsion technique. The proposed project will allow
education and training for both undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will
develop a new lab component (flow visualization and measurement) for the Fluid
Mechanics Lab course at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. The experimental
equipment used in the project will be utilized for students practice in this
course, and also as demonstration in another course, Propulsion. The proposed
research will also be translated into new educational curricula that are
accessible to future generations of engineers and biologists alike. The PI will
develop a new multi-disciplinary course, Biomechanics and Bio-inspired Design,
for the Mechanical Engineering and Biology curriculum at UAF. Most Alaska
students, especially Alaska Native students, love nature and this proposed
course would appeal to many of them and generate interest in engineering
disciplines. The project will also serve K-12 students from the State of Alaska
through outreach programs such as Alaska Summer Research Academy and Alaska
Native Science &amp; Engineering Program. These opportunities for training and
mentorship will be directed toward the underrepresented Alaska Native students.