* 1228662
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation (LC-MS/MS) for the Trace Analysis of Anthropogenic Organic Compounds and Their Metabolites in Various Complex Matrices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Guangshu Zhai, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 237,556.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1228662&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Guangshu
Zhai&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed instrument will support the body of
research at The University of Iowa on trace organic compounds and their
metabolites in the environment and living organisms by increasing capacity and
capabilities. This instrument will allow in-depth studies within our ongoing
projects, including the transport and fate of hormones in plants (Zhai and
Schnoor), hydroxylated metabolites of PCBs in poplars (Zhai and Schnoor), rats
(Robertson) and human blood (Hornbuckle); organic pollutants by extreme flood
events (Hornbuckle, Just, Schnoor); PCBs sulfate metabolites of PCBs in poplars
(Zhai and Schnoor), rats (Robertson and Duffel); the enantioselective metabolism
of chiral PCBs and their metabolites (Zhai, Schnoor, and Lehlmer); PCB-related
compounds in the environment (Hornbuckle, Lehmler, Thorne) and others. All the
organic compounds mentioned above have the potential of great harm to our health
and environment. All the researchers in this team will use this LC-MS/MS to
address many public concerns on the health of environment and human beings. All
the findings of these researches will greatly advance our knowledge and
understanding of the behavior, fate and toxicological mechanisms of organic
pollutants in the environment and alert people to take suitable protective
measures.