* 1228519
* AHRC-NSF MOU: Alternative Accountabilities for Past Human Rights Abuses
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kathryn Sikkink, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Helena Silverstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 305,124.00

Countries around the world have developed a wide range of innovative strategies
to hold perpetrators accountable for past human rights violations. To date,
systematic and cross-national research has focused on three main mechanisms:
criminal trials, truth commissions, and amnesties. The project aims to develop
an empirically-tested theory of the adoption, diffusion, and impact of a fuller
set of transitional justice mechanisms. In pursuit of this aim, the researchers
will add to their existing transitional justice database 'alternative
accountabilities' (i.e., civil trials, lustration and vetting, reparations, and
customary justice). The project addresses an important scholarly and policy
question: do alternative accountabilities successfully substitute or complement
other transitional justice mechanisms to strengthen human rights protections,
democracy, and peace? This project further develops the earlier research of the
PIs, in which they have found that trials are critical to positive democracy and
human rights improvements. While alternative accountabilities are used around
the world in combination with trials and amnesties or alone, no systematic
research on their impact exists to date. This project will fill that void. The
project?s intellectual merit involves developing a new theory of when, how, and
why these mechanisms contribute to human rights, democracy, and peace that the
researchers will produce for scholarly publication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's broader impact includes academic training, policy-development, and
future research. The grant will further the professional development of post-
doctoral fellows and graduate students, and the research team will produce
policy recommendations regarding alternative accountabilities that the team will
present to policy-makers. Finally, the researchers' online database will allow
academic and policy-oriented researchers around the world to have access to the
most up-to-date and comprehensive database on a full set of transitional justice
mechanisms used from 1970 to the present.