* 1228497
* Issue-specific jury instructions in eyewitness cases: Are they more effective than traditional safeguards?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Steven Penrod, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2015
* USD 194,262.00

DNA exonerations demonstrate that eyewitness error is a primary source of
erroneous convictions. The question naturally arises - can we find better ways
to guide jurors in their assessments of eyewitness evidence? In 2012, the US
Supreme Court, in Perry v. New Hampshire, decided (8-1) the first case involving
eyewitness identification considered by the Court since 1977. The Court ruled
that "it suffices to test [eyewitness] reliability through ... the presence of
counsel at postindictment lineups, vigorous cross-examination, protective rules
of evidence, and jury instructions on ... the fallibility of eyewitness
identification." The decision is cited in state and federal courts that provide
juries with instructions addressing specific aspects of eyewitness
identifications. The largest step in this direction was taken by the New Jersey
Supreme Court in 2011 in a unanimous decision in State v. Henderson. The
Henderson court: 1. embraced scientific findings concerning factors affecting
eyewitness reliability; 2. made a series of explicit findings concerning those
factors; 3. delegated the task of drafting explicit jury instructions concerning
those factors; and 4. expressed a general preference for those instructions over
the use of eyewitness expert testimony.

The viability of issue-specific instructions such as those advanced in Henderson
has not been tested - though limited research on broad-based eyewitness
instructions to jurors has demonstrated that general instructions do not
sensitize jurors to the factors embraced in Henderson. Because issue-specific
instructions may alert jurors to eyewitness accuracy factors beyond lay
knowledge, it is possible that enhanced research-based issue-specific
instructions will more effectively improve jurors' evaluations of eyewitness
evidence as compared to more general instructions. The PI will examine whether
issue-specific eyewitness jury instructions can sensitize jurors to eyewitness
evidence. In the planned mock-jury study the PI will compare eyewitness evidence
and the type of eyewitness instruction jurors receive to test whether issue-
specific eyewitness jury instructions sensitize jurors to variations in
eyewitness evidence.