* 1228857
* TWC SBES: Medium: Collaborative: Evolutionary Approaches to Privacy and Information Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alessandro Acquisti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 187,500.00

The project explores the influence that offline cues and stimuli, indicating the
presence of other human beings in the physical world, and often processed
unconsciously by our brains, can have over security and privacy behavior in
cyberspace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is predicated around an
evolutionary conjecture: Human beings have evolved to detect and react to
threats in their physical environment, and have developed perceptual systems
selected to assess these ?physical? stimuli for current, material risks. In
cyberspace, the same stimuli often are absent, subdued, or intentionally
manipulated by third parties. Hence, security and privacy concerns that would
normally be activated in the offline world are restrained, and defense behaviors
are hampered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is impossible to test such
conjecture directly, indirect evidence compatible with the conjecture can be
obtained by investigating the impact that external stimuli in the physical world
have on security and privacy behavior in cyberspace. The proposed research
consists in a stream of human subjects controlled experiments investigating such
impact of various sets of stimuli or cues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
significance of this research is two-fold. First, it attempts to advance the
scientific understanding of what makes security and privacy decision making in
cyberspace uniquely different from, and sometimes more difficult than security
and privacy in the physical world. Second, by investigating a factor that may
significantly disrupt user behavior in cyberspace, the research findings could
inspire the construction of systems that induce more secure behavior.