* 1228308
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Algebraic and Geometric Tools and Algorithms for the Analysis of Data Clouds and Large Data Arrays
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Kirby, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2016
* USD 659,498.00

This proposal concerns the development of theory and algorithms for knowledge
discovery in large data clouds characterized on Grassmann and Flag manifolds.
This work includes applications to the detection of geometric misclassifications
as well as the development of algorithms to exploit recent work on the detection
of spatially-correlated Gaussian time-series. The investigators propose a
mathematical framework centered on computing statistics for data clouds on
Grassmann and Flag manifolds. This includes, for example, a theoretical
characterization of a Schubert Variety of Best Fit. The results of the research
will be applied to data sets that include, e.g., automatic identification of
insects, the brain computer interface, statistical signal processing, foliage
diversity in landscapes, automatic identification through hyperspectral imagery,
acoustic arrays, super-resolution, and action recognition in video
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed interdisciplinary research program
addresses a major challenge in research related to the processing and extraction
of meaningful information from large collections of data. The investigators'
propose new geometric and statistical tools for classifying patterns of
interest. The research program provides students with a unique multidisciplinary
experience and research integration in education. Goals of the research include
optimizing the detection, characterization and classification of features and
anomalies in signals. A Data Set Repository of a broad nature for the purpose of
furthering national expertise in Geometric Data Analysis. This repository will
facilitate the development of algorithms ofinterest to a range of scientific
interests.