* 1228337
* Real-time Processing Algorithms for LiDAR Point Cloud Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Seongjai Kim, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2016
* USD 205,459.00

The project will develop a real-time processing system for geospatial survey
data acquired by light detection and ranging (LiDAR) technology. Surface
reconstruction and attribute detection for LiDAR point cloud data are
challenging due to natural surface roughness, diverse noises, and huge data
sizes. In the existing literature and commercial software, surface
reconstruction has been carried out by various methods such as the inverse-
distance weighting, kriging, splines, and wavelets. However, the problem is ill-
posed and the conventional reconstruction methods either introduce observable
interpolation artifacts or become too computationally expensive when the number
of data points increases. The investigator will develop and analyze an effective
partial differential equation (PDE)-based surface reconstruction algorithm,
called the recursive curvature interpolation method (R-CIM), which produces a
smooth image surface of a minimum oscillation, and of which the computational
cost is in the order of the image size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop an optimal image reconstruction algorithm for LiDAR point cloud data via
collaboration between the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Mississippi
State University, and Agriculture Research Service, United States Department of
Agriculture. The proposed algorithm (R-CIM) is optimal in the sense that it
possesses a minimum oscillatory behavior and its computational cost is in the
order of the image size, independent of the data size. It will contribute to
research on image reconstruction and advance various real-time applications
towards the real world which involve nonuniformly sampled data. At the same
time, the proposed researh includes the development and implementation of the
state-of-the-art algorithms for various LiDAR data processing tasks. The project
nurtures collaborations between an agricultural engineer and mathematicians
having backgrounds on PDEs, numerical analysis, and image processing; it would
support a graduate student and an undergraduate student for three years. All the
newly-developed software will be freely shared with the community.