* 1228995
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative Proposal: Safety in Numbers: Crowdsourcing for Global Software Integrity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Brian Demsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 800,000.00

The recent explosion in malware poses financial, privacy, and safety risks. This
project explores a fundamentally new approach to malware detection that promises
to be faster, more effective, and cheaper than current
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of malicious software, or malware, has
seen increases in both malware's capabilities and sheer volume. Recent malware
makes use of a number of sophisticated technologies including polymorphism,
public key encryption, and peer-to-peer architectures. These advances are driven
by significant resources put into malware development by both criminal
enterprises and countries. Traditional malware detection tools rely on slow
manual processes and the recent advances in malware have outrun the ability of
existing tools to cope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a new approach to
the malware crisis that centers around constructive use of crowd-sourcing. The
key insight is that the collection of machines on the Internet contains
information that can be used to automatically classify software as either
legitimate or malicious. This information includes not only the behavior of
malware on individual machines but also the behavior of the aggregate
population. For example, the aggregate statistics of how software propagates
across the network can provide insight into whether the software is
malicious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of the proposed work is binary
translation-based dynamic signatures. Traditional malware detection tools have
used static signatures, but polymorphic techniques have made this approach
significantly more difficult. The project employs binary translation to
efficiently collect dynamic traces for both code execution and behavioral events
such as network communication and then generate signatures for these
traces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project significantly reduces the threats of
malware to society, especially since software developed through the project is
freely available. The project is mentoring members of underrepresented
minorities, and is infusing its ideas into the curriculum.