* 1228333
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Utilizing smartphones as experimental interventions for job search and employment at reentry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Naomi Sugie, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 32,200.00

Finding work in the immediate months after release from prison has been
identified as a key factor for reducing recidivism and promoting successful
reentry. Scholarship has documented the extensive barriers that individuals with
criminal records likely encounter while searching for work; however, we know
little about actual job search experiences at reentry and what factors lead to
successful employment. Prior research has been limited by traditional data
collection methods, which are particularly inadequate for studying poor and
mobile groups. Using smartphones, this project will collect detailed information
about reentry and job search experiences among men recently released from
prison. Surveys will be sent to participants via smartphones twice a day for
three months and an Android-based application will passively collect information
on participants? geographic mobility and call logs. The project will
experimentally test the importance of participating in a peer-based text forum
for job leads and social support via the smartphones, as opposed to receiving
job leads directly from the researcher. Prior scholarship has established the
importance of social contacts for providing information and influence during job
search; for individuals with fewer ties to the formal labor market, social
support and motivation provided by peers may be particularly important for
search persistence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is timely and policy-
relevant, considering the scale of mass incarceration, the numerous challenges
faced by individuals recently released from prison, and the mixed outcomes of
employment reentry programs. The study capitalizes on recent advances in
smartphone technology to study a traditionally hard-to-reach population. The
experimental treatment - participation in a group-based text application - tests
a potentially important and cost-effective intervention that employment reentry
organizations can easily adopt. As part of the project, the researcher will
develop an Android application, which includes a web-based interface for
nonprogrammers, and will make the application available to social science
researchers interested in non-traditional data collection methods.