* 1228059
* BRIGE: Microwear Mechanism of Carbon Film under Extremely High Speed Surface Contact accounting for Phase Transition and Oxidation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Chang-Dong Yeo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 169,376.00

ECCS-1228059&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yeo, Chang-Dong&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas Tech
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: BRIGE: Microwear Mechanism of Carbon Film under
Extremely High Speed Surface Contact accounting for Phase Transition and
Oxidation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The main objective of this BRIGE project is to investigate the microwear
mechanism of surface protective carbon films under extremely high speed contact
by accounting for thermomechanical and chemical stability of materials. An
integrated research will be carried out through (1) analytical modeling and
computational simulations of rough surface sliding contact, and (2) systematic
experiments of high speed contact to measure the wear, phase transition, and
oxidation of film and substrate materials. The unique features of the proposed
research are to: (a) incorporate the in-situ changes of thermomechanical and
chemical film properties into the analysis of wear behaviors, and (b)
quantitatively measure the physical and chemical degradation of materials after
high speed contact experiments. In analytical modeling, inhomogeneous contact
stress and frictional heat flux will be obtained from an improved rough surface
contact model. Individual flash temperatures of surface asperities (i.e., multi-
points of heat source) will be applied into a theory of heat transfer to
calculate the final temperature of carbon film and substrate. The phase
transition changes the strength of carbon film, while the oxidation affects the
adhesion energy of carbon atoms on substrate. In computational simulations,
these transient material properties will be incorporated into finite element
analysis code to investigate the in-situ wear performance of carbon film. To
verify and improve the proposed analytical/computational researches, systematic
experiments will be performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It is
expected that the proposed research will clearly answer the question of why
carbon films experience critical wear under extremely high-speed contact even
with mild contact load. The outcomes of this research will thus deliver
scientific solutions for carbon films to (a) improve the reliability and
accuracy of a system, and thus (b) reduce energy loss from unexpected friction
and wear. The exciting research outcomes will be brought into the education of
college students and K-12 outreach program. The exciting research outcomes will
be brought into the education of college students and the K-12 outreach program.
An undergraduate course in the area of tribology and interface engineering will
be created including classroom lectures and hands-on laboratory experience, and
undergraduate students will readily participate in actual research activities. A
simplified mock-up experiment will be developed for K-12 students, which will
increase their understanding on thermomechanical contact behavior in solid
materials. In particular, to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering and science, a systematically designed mock-up will be
provided in summer camps and lab experience for female and Hispanic K-12
students. Currently two female students are involved in the PI?s research. The
PI will keep efforts on recruitment of the underrepresented students through
close interaction with the Hispanic Student Society in Texas Tech University.