* 1228717
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Towards Securing Coupled  Financial and Power Systems in the Next Generation Smart Grid
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 347,358.00

For nearly 40 years, the United States has faced a critical problem: increasing
demand for energy has outstripped the ability of the systems and markets that
supply power. Today, a variety of promising new technologies offer a solution to
this problem. Clean, renewable power generation, such as solar and wind are
increasingly available. Hybrid and plug-in electric vehicles offer greater
energy efficiency in transportation. The power grid that manages the generation,
transmission and distribution of electric power, however, was designed and
constructed in the 1960?s and is ill-suited to handle these emerging energy
technologies. Operating the electrical grid using power sources with random and
uncertain availability, like solar and wind, requires new sensing and control
methods. Widespread use of plug-in/hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) will not only
require far greater power capacity, but will also radically change the peak
usage profile, with large evening demand that cannot be shifted. To address this
problem, our current power grid must be upgraded with a control system that uses
the full power of modern sensor and computing technology to increase efficiency.
This new power grid, with an integrated, modern IT control plane is commonly
referred to as the Smart Grid, which uses distributed control, customer
integration and market based control mechanisms.

It is critical to build security features into this Smart Grid from the
beginning to ensure fairness, to provide warnings of misuse, to provide control
algorithms that minimize damage from malicious behavior, and most importantly,
to provide robustness and high-availability of power delivery even in the
presence of bad-faith actors. This project develops methods to achieve security
in power and market delivery. This entails a study of economic market models
with stability as one objective but also in consideration of new sources of
power and usage, both on the producer and the consumer sides. To achieve
security, the following techniques are used synergistically: vulnerability
discovery by formal analysis; on-line monitoring, anomaly and specification-
based intrusion detection; and recovery and reconstitution by feedback control.
Unique to this project, it is emphasized that the security enhancements take
place at both the market level and the system level, requiring separate state-
estimation models. These seemingly disparate domains are unified through mapping
functions among the states of the respective models. By integrating the two
control models, future Smart Grids can detect and respond to activity, either
malicious or caused by natural disturbances, that threaten either level; the
unification of the models permits the investigation of attacks that possibly
impact both levels. Results of this work would lead to a secure and reliable
Smart Grid architecture that is robust in the face of attacks on both the power
delivery and market control systems. The inherent cross-disciplinary nature of
the research will educate future researchers to be conversant in both cyber-
security and associated economic issues, through co-advising between the
departments of Computer Science and Economics at both UC Davis and Pennsylvania
State University and through course modules developed under this work, again
involving both campuses. Results will be transitioned to partnership with PG&E,
SMUD, the West Davis Village, and other utilities in California, Pennsylvania,
and Connecticut.