* 1228868
* Complex Adaptive Systems as a Model for Network Evaluations (CASNET)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Kunz Kollmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2016
* USD 799,881.00

Complexity theory as a theoretical framework for the evaluation of the Nanoscale
Information Science Education Network (NISE Net) is the focus of this evaluation
research project. The researchers include evaluation scholars at the University
of Minnesota and research directors at the Science Museum of Minnesota, The
Museum of Science in Boston, and the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry. The
intent of the project is to study how complexity theory supports evaluation
capacity building within the network of informal science organizations that
makes up a national community of researchers and informal science educators
whose goal is to improve public awareness of, engagement in and understanding of
nanoscale science, engineering and technology. Components of complexity theory
that are being studied include internal diversity and redundancy, the
interactions among different individuals and organizations with the network, the
extent to which the control of the network is distributed, the extent of a
shared goal or identity operates throughout the system established by the
network, and how the system responds to change in the external environment.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study employs a tiered case study of the way that
primary actors within NISE Net are designing and implementing a new evaluation
system to examine the programs that the institutions within the network are
conducting. The first tier includes those individuals who are responsible for
designing and implementing the resources used in the network to improve the
public understanding of nanoscale science. The second tier are the individuals
who use the resources developed by the network. The study utilizes a multiple
case study methodology that examines individual cases that can be collected
together to describe the operation of a complex network of individuals and
organizations. NISE Net operates as a heterarchy whereby individuals are
organized hierarchically within institutions and communicate horizontally across
organizations. The case study methodology results in a framework of the
evaluation efforts that will be studied iteratively using a design-based
research approach to inform stakeholders and support changes in the framework as
it evolves over the course of the study. Observations of the planning and
implementation of evaluation efforts, document review and interviews with key
stakeholders comprise the data collected and analyzed in this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex evaluation efforts such as those being
conducted by NISE Net require more than simple evaluation frameworks that
examine inputs, activities, outputs and outcomes. Networks by their very nature
are a system of stakeholders whose interactions quickly become complex and
difficult to study. Complexity theory offers the conceptual organization by
which complex systems can be studied and their evaluation efforts characterized.
This project informs scholars in the evaluation field about models of evaluation
that support examining the quality of work being conducted by complex systems
such as NISE Net. The publications intended by this study have the potential to
inform the evaluation community about how complexity theory can be brought to
bear to study network systems in education.