* 1228535
* Mechanisms of Attention in Early Visual Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* George Mangun, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 604,108.00

The sensory world is rich in information, but subjective experience and
experimental demonstrations reveal that the nervous system is limited in how
much of this confused mass of information it can effectively process at any
moment in time. Selective attention provides a means by which organisms regulate
the flow of sensory information by enhancing the processing of relevant
information and inhibiting irrelevant or distracting events. Numerous studies in
humans and animals have established that attentional control mechanisms
influence visual information processing within the cerebral cortex. However, the
neuronal mechanisms of selective attention remain poorly understood at the
cellular and synaptic levels. Using a novel method for measuring the effects of
attention on synaptic communication between identified neurons, Drs. W. Martin
Usrey and George R. Mangun of the University of California, Davis are
determining the influence of attention at the earliest stages of processing in
the cerebral cortex. In so doing, they are testing several long-standing
hypotheses about the spatial organization of voluntary attention, the
interactions between target facilitation and distractor suppression mechanisms,
the role of spatial scale in determining the locus of selection in voluntary
attention, the role of thalamocortical mechanisms in reflexive attention, and
the contributions of specific visual pathways to voluntary and reflexive visual
attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning through graduate
and postdoctoral scholar involvement in undergraduate research supervision
related to the project. Via the University of California Davis Summer
Undergraduate Research Program (SURP) and the Young Scholars Program (YSP), the
PI and the Co-PI will also mentor undergraduate and promising high-school
students interested in pursuing careers in science. These programs promote
underrepresented groups and provide research opportunities for students from
non-research colleges. The project will enhance international collaboration
through exchange programs. The proposed research will strongly benefit society
in education and health. Because selective attention is a core cognitive
process, elucidating attentional mechanisms in humans remains a high priority in
efforts to understand, diagnose and treat psychiatric conditions that involve
deficits in attention, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), autism, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and schizophrenia.
Ameliorating these disorders provide increased opportunities for advancing
education and human productivity.