* 1228685
* Web-based Poster Display and Archival Tool for Broad Dissemination of Research Advances
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Julio Ramirez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2013
* USD 20,567.00

Currently, there is limited ability to share research posters presented at
technical conferences, workshops, and meetings beyond the attendees. This
greatly limits the rapid sharing and dissemination of research advances.
However, using the Internet, with current synchronous and asynchronous
technology, to share posters in a form of virtual reality enables a much broader
audience than just those in attendance to view, comment, and interact with
researchers. To enable this broader research collaboration and dissemination,
under this award, the education, outreach, and training development team at the
Purdue headquarters for the NSF-supported George E. Brown, Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) operations will develop a web
application called the virtual poster session. This virtual poster session
technology will be demonstrated at the National Science Foundation, Division of
Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI,) grantees conference in
Boston, Massachusetts, during July 8-12, 2012. This web-based tool aims to
enhance the poster experience for CMMI conference attendees by taking advantage
of web applications and handheld devices that will archive and display CMMI
grantee research posters. In addition, the posters will be archived on the
http://www.nees.org web site for at least one year, thus making the posters
available for viewing and interactions by a broader audience beyond the
attendees at the conference.

Virtual reality concepts for viewing digitized posters enable group
collaborations, comment capabilities, and discussion opportunities not
constrained by geographical location. The expansion of poster session
capabilities using virtual reality software from an open source creates
opportunities to expand educational access, as well as research review and
comment from multiple interested parties. Creating a virtual poster program will
expand the visibility of CMMI-supported research activities, eliminate the
geographical constraints to sharing and discussing research advances, and
broaden access to continuing research.