* 1228127
* BRIGE: Scalable Bottom-up Synthesis of Well-defined Diamond Nanowire/Nanotube Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jingjing Qiu, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2016
* USD 202,640.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
grant provides funding to develop a novel bottom-up nanofabrication method to
synthesize semiconducting diamond nanowires. Vertically aligned diamond nanowire
arrays will be fabricated with well-defined nanostructures and high aspect
ratios by the proposed bottom-up nanofabrication method. The processing
parameters will be optimized to control the size and shape of diamond nanowires.
Theoretical work will be carried out to achieve a physical understanding of the
diamond crystal growth to provide more insights for the nanofabrication process.
Synthesized diamond nanowires will be experimentally characterized in order to
reveal their structure-property and size-property relationships. Both
experimental and theoretical efforts will be implemented to achieve a simple and
cost-effective technique for large-scale fabrication of well-defined diamond
nanowire arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will lead to
a novel manufacturing process for diamond nanowires. The technology developed in
this work will contribute to wider applications of nanodiamond in various
fields, such as chemical sensors, biological assays, optoelectronics, and
supercapacitors. In addition, this research will be closely integrated with
educational activities to broaden participation of undergraduate and graduate
students who are members of minority groups in engineering research so that they
may choose an engineering career in the future. Through collaboration with a
campus outreach program, the proposed interactive two-day summer workshop will
provide K-12 students unique hands-on-experience opportunities on cutting-edge
engineering technologies, and stimulate their interests in science and
engineering. The results of this project will be integrated into curriculum and
broadly disseminated through NSF annual reports, conference presentations, and
journal publications.