* 1228757
* MRI:   Acquisition of an integrated live imaging system for research and teaching at Brandeis University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Avital Rodal, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 436,005.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition by
Brandeis University of an integrated live fluorescence imaging system that
greatly increases the speed and resolution at which dynamic events can be imaged
in cells and in solution. The system will be equipped with both spinning disk
confocal and epifluorescence modes, and will be tailored for photoactivation
microscopy, an elegant approach to label small populations of fluorescent
molecules acutely in space and/or time. The instrument will use a newly
developed setup in which the spinning disk confocal modality is equipped with
two cameras, enabling maximum speed for simultaneous detection of multiple
fluorophores. The epifluorescence modality will push the limits of fast
fluorescence imaging by taking advantage of the most recent developments in LED-
based illumination and rapid sCMOS camera acquisition. These new technologies
will permit the study of extremely rapid biological events (with durations of a
few seconds and velocities of micrometers per second) that until now have been
extremely difficult to measure directly. Thus, the proposed instrument will
allow a new level of spatial (by labeling a set of molecules starting at a
particular location) and temporal (by labeling a sparse population of molecules
at any given time) investigation into research problems ranging from
cytoskeletal dynamics, membrane traffic and signal transduction to sensory
processing and synapse formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular processes
essential for life are driven by complex molecular machines that move through
the cell, interact with each other, and execute their functions in seconds.
Recent technological breakthroughs in microscopy have greatly improved the speed
and resolution at which we can directly see these dynamic molecular events.
Researchers at Brandeis across the Biology, Biochemistry, and Physics
departments and at the University of Massachusetts, Boston will use the new
imaging system to tackle a broad range of scientific problems, ranging from how
a neuron forms synapses to how simple biological molecules self-assemble into
complex force-generating machines. This instrument will train undergraduates,
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, fostering interdisciplinary
collaborations across science departments at Brandeis and in the Boston science
community. As part of this training, we will take advantage of the instrument to
establish a new project laboratory in live-cell imaging at Brandeis for our
undergraduate and Masters students who may not be members of a research
laboratory and therefore would not otherwise have access to an advanced
instrument. This instrument will integrate education, training and research to
provide new fundamental insights into the dynamics and interactions of molecules
in cells and in the test tube.