* 1228559
* LSS Postdoctoral Fellowship: Trust and Confidence
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Brian Bornstein, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 11/30/2017
* USD 210,118.00

This project funds a postdoctoral fellow in interdisciplinary trust and
confidence research. Public trust and confidence in governmental institutions is
integral to democracy and necessary for effective and efficient governance. What
does it mean, though, to say there is trust or distrust? The vast majority of
studies and theories in trust and confidence are immersed only in one
discipline, often ignoring contributions from other social sciences. This
proposal funds a postdoctoral fellow, who could come from any social scientific
discipline, to join an interdisciplinary team dedicated to developing and
testing a comprehensive, multi-stage, interdisciplinary theory of trust and
confidence in governmental institutions. The fellow will conduct relevant
research and also bring together additional, interdisciplinary researchers
interested in advancing trust/confidence research and theory. The
interdisciplinary research is being conducted in a variety of settings and
contexts where the findings will have practical implications: courts, law
enforcement, municipal government, water regulation and natural resource
management agencies, and science, including nanotechnology and agricultural
biotechnology.

Measurement of trust and confidence and its relationship to knowledge about
governing institutions is extremely important to the governing institutions the
research team engages. The team has been communicating results of their research
to the community organizations; the postdoctoral fellow will be closely involved
in coordinating information sharing with governing institutions.