* 1228456
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal Strategies by Social Movement Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Laura Beth Nielsen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,800.00

Social movements have long played a crucial role in American democracy.
Commentators frequently describe courts as the engine of social change, and
social movements all along the political spectrum have successfully used
litigation to impact law and policy. But for all the focus on whether courts are
effective agents of social change, there is little research on how social
movement organizations choose legal goals in the first place. By shedding light
on how legal organizations interact with broader social movements, this research
will help explain the role of legal organizations in American
democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two research questions.
(1) How do different legal organizations develop specific legal goals and
strategies? (2) How do legal strategies change over time? By comparing different
organizations, this research identifies the key role organizations play in
deciding how to respond to a changing legal context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legal
organizations develop an organizational identity that defines who is involved in
the organization, what the organization does, and how outsiders perceive the
organization. This research demonstrates that these organizational identities
guide decisions on legal strategies. When faced with multiple potential
strategies, organizations choose strategies most consistent with their broader
goals. However, these broader goals and organizational identities can also
sometimes change dramatically. This research examines how the legal context and
countermovements impact this relationship between broader organizational goals
and specific legal strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi method approach will
be used to compare four legal organizations. Data will include: (1) historical
studies of each organization, focusing on how organizations come to adopt
specific goals; (2) interviews with lawyers at each organization; (3) interviews
with clients of each organization; (4) interviews with lawyers opposing each
organization; and (5) surveys of donors to each
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the central role litigation plays
in social and political change, this research provides insight into the broader
functions of the American political system.