* 1228489
* MRI: Development of a High Accuracy, High Precision Laser System for Measurements of Nuclear Structure and Fundamental Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Oscar Naviliat-Cuncic, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 223,000.00

A ring-dye laser will be added to the laser infrastructure of the existing BEam
COoling and LAser spectroscopy (BECOLA) facility at National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University (MSU). The ring-dye
laser will provide light that cannot be obtained from the existing BECOLA
Ti:Sapphire laser system over the visible wavelength range from 550 nm to 780
nm, with a line width of less than 250 kHz. The light from the ring-dye laser
can also be combined with the existing frequency doubler to produce deep to near
ultra-violet light in the wavelength range from 275 nm to 390 nm. The addition
of the ring-dye laser will greatly expand the reach of elements and isotopes
accessible to laser spectroscopy and optical pumping with BECOLA. The upgraded
BECOLA laser system will provide a means to extend charge radii and nuclear
moments measurements of key elements to extremely exotic areas in the nuclear
chart. Nuclei in the vicinity of the short-lived radionuclides Ni-78 and Sn-100,
which are not accessible for on-line laser spectroscopy studies at present, are
specifically targeted. Both Ni-78 and Sn-100 have closed-shell proton and
neutron configurations, and such nuclei serve as important cornerstones for
refining present-day nuclear structure theories. The study of exotic couplings
in the beta decays of radioactive Na-21 and Mg-23, to test the fundamental
principles underlying weak interactions, will also be pursued. These
measurements will require highly nuclear-polarized beams, that will be produced
via optical pumping with circularly-polarized light from the new ring-dye laser.
Non-radioactive (stable) ions can be also provided on a daily basis from the
off-line ion source of BECOLA for student training, system improvements, and
identifying new optical transitions to increase the discovery potential with
lasers as a probe of rare isotope beams. The research activities proposed within
the scope of this project span the fields of atomic physics, sub-atomic nuclear
physics, nuclear chemistry, and fundamental symmetries, providing a unique
educational experience for students and post-doctoral research associates at the
forefront of the cutting-edge science. Technical advances realized in research
plan that greatly enhance both the magnitude and retention times for nuclear
polarization may benefit both basic research and imaging applications. The laser
optical pumping methods have strong overlap with, e.g., the cutting-edge
research on the application of highly-polarized noble gases for lung function
imaging.