* 1228320
* Collaborative Research:  "Error Estimation, Data Assimilation and Uncertainty Quantification for  Multiphysics and Multiscale Processes in Geological Media"
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sanjay Srinivasan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2016
* USD 260,952.00

The application of high performance computing to model subsurface processes
occurring over multiple spatial and temporal scales is a science grand challenge
that has important implications to society at large. Research on this grand
challenge is at the confluence of advanced mathematics, computer science, fluid
and solid mechanics and applied probability and statistics. The researchers
propose a fresh new perspective by investigating and formulating rigorous error
estimators for the numerical schemes employed to model multiphysics, multiscale
processes in subsurface media. These error estimators when coupled with advanced
computational methods can significantly speed up the task of uncertainty
assessment and feedback control of subsurface processes. The uncertainty
quantification scheme will use a computer framework that rigorously takes into
account the dynamic and complex communication and coordination patterns
resulting from multiphysics, multinumerics, multiscale and multidomain
couplings. In addition, this project investigates realistic physical models such
as carbon sequestration in saline aquifers with real field data from the
Cranfield Mississippi demonstration site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate
transformative goal is to achieve predictive and decisional simulations, in
which engineers reliably predict, control, and manage human interaction with
geosystems. There are numerous applications that would benefit from a better
understanding and integration of porous flow and solid deformation such as
surface subsidence, pore collapse, cavity generation, hydraulic fracturing,
thermal fracturing, wellbore collapse, sand production and fault reactivation.
Moreover, the underlying computational technology will be available to other
areas of science and engineering for many other applications. Included are the
solver technology, and the algorithms to be developed involving high fidelity
numerical simulation of partial differential equations. In order to foster
collaboration between researchers with diverse backgrounds and technical
expertise, the researchers propose a unique summer research residency program.
Under this program the entire team will come together for a two week period
during the summer and participate in a series of short courses and seminars
presented by the senior researchers on the project. Outreach to high schools is
planned through the sequestration training, outreach, research &amp; education
(STORE) initiative jointly between the Bureau of Economic Geology, UT Institute
of Geophysics and the Center for Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering at UT
Austin.