* 1228035
* BRIGE: Colloidal scavengers for the reversal of drug toxicity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Belinda Akpa, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

PI: Akpa&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1228035&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit Fatalities due to drug intoxication occur frequently and their incidence
rose 145% in the 8 year period from 1999-2007. Sudden death following poisoning
is second only to motor vehicle accidents in causing fatalities within the
category of death due to unintentional injury. The vast majority of these
unintentional poisonings (93%) are due to drug intoxication and the most
frequent culprits are prescription drugs. Most life-threatening intoxicants do
not have a specific pharmacological antidote. As the incidence of unintentional
poisonings continues to rise, there is clearly a need to develop treatment
modalities that mitigate the acute effects of toxic drug concentrations. The
case of local anesthetic overdose has presented a possible "silver bullet" for
the treatment of drug overdoses that are unresponsive to standard resuscitation
measures. Intravenous oil-in-water formulations, commonly used in hospitals as a
source of IV nutrition, have the potential to resuscitate patients suffering
cardiac arrest due to otherwise fatal poisonings. The objective of this proposal
is to identify the factors that determine successful coupling of a lipid
emulsion formulation and a target toxin for the purposes of reducing tissue
exposure to drugs and, consequently, facilitating resuscitation following drug
overdose. In vitro measures of drug-lipid binding characteristics will be
combined with macroscale models of physiological drug distribution and molecular
scale studies of drug-lipid layer interactions to comprehensively probe the
potential of a lipid scavenger to reverse the accumulation of toxins in cardiac
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Broader Impacts An improved
understanding of the nature non-specific binding of lipophilic molecules with
(or transport through) phospholipid layers may be used to develop colloidal
formulations specific to scavenging applications. It is anticipated that a
successful non-specific colloidal scavenger " particularly a highly
biocompatible one " will have broad impacts. Such an agent could, for example,
be exploited as a potential means of reversing toxicity due to chemical warfare
agents such as organophosphates. These same compounds are also used as
pesticides and, in developing nations, are frequent culprits in intentional and
accidental poisonings. Furthermore, there is significant interest in employing
lipid droplets as vehicles for biocompatible delivery of poorly water-soluble
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening participation: The proposed Science
Siblings (S2) program is a multi-level mentoring initiative. The program will
emphasize the positive role engineers play in addressing society's greatest
challenges as a pathway to attracting under-represented groups into engineering
disciplines. Both women and minorities often consider the impact their career
choice will have on their communities when making education and career
decisions. S2 aims to impact awareness of engineering as a multi-faceted,
socially impactful profession amongst participants from the high school to the
graduate level. Participants will include the PI as a leader or parent, graduate
students as elder siblings, and undergraduate students as younger siblings
(engineering students at UIC and science students from local community
colleges). The S2 family will also include K-12 teachers who will act as
pedagogy advisors regarding the integration of our planned Engineer in Society
project modules with Illinois Learning Standards for Science. Each group has a
place in the hierarchy that corresponds to different responsibilities. The
structure will provide opportunities both for downward mentoring and for peer-
to-peer mentoring and should lead to the feeling of "connectedness" that has
been shown to be important in student retention.