* 1228570
* Workshop:   Evolutionary Cell Biology, May 29-31, 2012, Warrenton, Virginia
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Michael Lynch, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 99,950.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The Evolutionary Cell Biology Workshop will be
held at the Airlie Conference Center in Warrenton, Virginia. The goal of this
multi-investigator project is to organize a Workshop that will bring together
investigators from diverse scientific communities and with diverse perspectives
including evolutionary biologists, cell biologists and computational biologists
to define the nascent field of "evolutionary cell biology" and to identify the
key issues and fundamental principles that are in most urgent need to being
addressed in order to foster this exciting and emerging area of research. With
the fact that there are mature fields of molecular evolution, genome evolution
and even developmental evolution, there is no recognizable field of evolutionary
cell biology. With that in mind, this is an opportunity for both cell biologists
and evolutionary biologists alike. Therefore, the potential payoff of organizing
a meeting that focuses on evolutionary biologists and cell biologists is
significant. The development of a field of evolutionary cell biology should have
impacts on disciplines beyond cell and evolutionary biology, e.g., by helping
scientists figure out how to rationally alter cell biological features or even
to invent new ones, thereby contributing to the emerging fields of synthetic
biology and artificial life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
development of a field of evolutionary cell biology is expected to have major
impacts on the disciplines of cell biology and evolutionary biology but it will
influence other fields as well. Establishing an understanding of the principles
of evolutionary cell biology should help scientists establish how to rationally
alter cell biological features or even to invent new ones, thereby contributing
to the emerging fields of synthetic biology and artificial life. The requested
funding will be used to support travel, meals and/or lodging for 35 participants
from US and international locations.