* 1228723
* SBIR Phase II:  Microporous Carbons with Aligned Pores for Supercapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Gene Berdichevsky, Sila Nanotechnologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 499,609.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
novel type of porous carbon materials with aligned pores for applications in
electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs). These devices are serving multiple
applications, such as smart electrical grids, hybrid-electric vehicles, energy-
efficient industrial equipment and personal electronics. Conventional EDLCs
store energy by adsorbing organic electrolyte ions on the internal surface of
activated carbon electrodes under the application of electrical potential. They
commonly take 10 to 100 seconds to charge or discharge. This charge rate is
limited by the diffusion of ions inside the tortuous pores of activated carbons.
The growing numbers of pulse-power applications, however, often need current
boosts for only 1-10 seconds. These applications, therefore, will utilize a
fraction of the energy storage capability of conventional EDLCs, which greatly
increases the total weight and cost of the energy storage system, slowing down
technology adoption. Herein, we propose an innovative low-cost material
synthesis route for the formation of porous carbons with finely controlled
microstructure, tunable pore size, high surface area, and, most importantly,
aligned micropores for rapid ion transport and high power density. These
materials offer a combination of fast charging rate and high specific
capacitance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is the contribution to dramatic improvements in EDLC technology and
reduction of its cost. EDLCs, unlike secondary batteries, exhibit much higher
specific power and demonstrate outstanding cycle life and greatly improved
safety. The use of EDLCs in transportation and industrial equipment could lead
to a major reduction in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. Their
application in electrical grids will make multiple renewable energy
technologies, such as wind and solar, more economical. The rate of adoption of
this important technology could be significantly enhanced if EDLCs could be
produced at a lower cost or if they offered further improved performance. These
device characteristics are linked to the cost and properties of activated carbon
electrodes. Unfortunately, nearly all EDLC manufacturers rely on the existing
manufacturers of activated carbon. The expected improvements in material
properties from this Phase II project are expected to have a major impact on the
EDLC market size and the EDLC technology adoption.