* 1228464
* Two-component Winds from Eye-safe Elastic LIDAR and Optical Flow above the Reach of Most Towers
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Shane Mayor, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 798,696.00

Improved observations of the detailed spatial structure of low-level airflow
over areas on the order of ten square kilometers or more and for extended time
periods are needed to advance research in the atmospheric sciences and related
applications. This project will develop and evaluate the ability of a ground-
based, scanning, eye-safe elastic backscatter LIDAR (LIght Detection And
Ranging) observing system coupled with two candidate numerical motion estimation
algorithms to determine vector wind fields above the reach of typical portable
meteorological towers (i.e., heights of 50-150 m AGL) in the optically-clear
atmosphere and over periods of several months. The project will utilize an NSF-
developed asset, the transportable Raman-shifted Eye-safe Aerosol Lidar (REAL),
as the elastic backscatter lidar. The two numerical wind retrieval techniques
that will ingest image-type lidar data are an existing "cross-correlation"
method as well as a wavelet-based "optical flow" approach. The latter has been
recently developed by French collaborators. Both techniques will be implemented
via software optimized to take advantage of the massively parallel yet compact,
energy efficient, and affordable power of graphical processing units. This will
result in a significant enhancement of the elastic lidar system by enabling it
to produce wind-field observations in real-time. Both modes of airflow
estimation will be compared with independent wind measurements from a small,
eye-safe Doppler lidar operating at the same infrared wavelength as the elastic
lidar. The Intellectual Merit of this project centers on the development and
evaluation of improved and reliable means for retrieving the structure and
evolution of small-scale boundary layer flow features. Broader Impacts of this
effort will include strengthened collaborations for critical characterization of
the resulting flow fields and use of the flow fields to advance understanding of
boundary layer processes (e.g., airflow in stable nocturnal boundary layers) as
well as enhanced undergraduate education involving students drawn from a wide
variety of majors, who will be assigned to tightly-focused tasks in support of
this project's stated goals. Hands-on training for a graduate-student and
mentorship of a post-doctoral research associate will be provided to ensure
successful outcomes. Results will be disseminated via peer-reviewed literature
and a combination of domestic and international conferences.