* 1228399
* SBIR Phase II:  Correlation of Surface Free Energy and Cytocompatibility of Amphiphilic Biomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Joseph Salamone, Rochal Industries LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,189,264.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project pertains to the
development of a spray-on polymer coating using a novel amphiphilic polymer in a
non-stinging, volatile hydrophobic solvent for treatment of first and second
degree burn wounds with reduction of scar formation, wherein a transparent,
flexible substrate for human cell attachment, viability and proliferation is
formed without any added exogenous biological components. No methods currently
exist for treating burns that concurrently reduce pain upon treatment, are
intimately conformal to regular and irregular (face, fingers) wound surfaces,
provide a cell substrate for wound closure and healing, and do not require
dressing removal, such as with the proposed spray-on polymer coating. This
investigation will involve cytocompatibility and wound healing studies of these
novel polymers, in conjunction with a determination of the polymers? physical
and mechanical properties needed for spray-on characteristics. The success of
this investigation will demonstrate that a sophisticated, yet inexpensive,
easily applied, conformal polymer coating can be used for burn treatment with
reduction of scarring.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project pertains to the
commercialization of a novel spray-on transparent polymer coating, delivered
from a non-stinging, volatile hydrophobic solvent, to treat first and second
degree burn injuries, with reduction of scar formation. Burn injuries constitute
one of the most expensive aspects of health care. There are more than 40 million
scar patients worldwide per year, at a treatment cost of $12 billion. Currently,
no commercial burn care product or methodology provides for improved burn
healing with reduced pain and reduced scar formation utilizing a patient and
caregiver-friendly technique such as given by this investigation. Despite
substantial research in tissue engineering for the preparation of scaffolds for
topical wound care, the few commercialized products are costly in preparation,
storage and use, and are subject to degradation and loss of activity. With the
success of this project, a new technology will be developed that significantly
improves burn treatment, is based upon readily synthesized, stable polymers in a
commercially-available solvent, that provides a transparent, water-insoluble,
oxygen- and water-vapor permeable coating suitable for use over large area burn
wounds without forming a patch-work design, and which self-removes as the wound
heals.