* 1228589
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Relationship quality in juvenile probation: Implications on case decision-making and outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jennifer Woolard, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 23,500.00

Probation remains the most common disposition for juvenile offenders. The
current study explores a multi-stakeholder approach to juvenile probation,
highlighting the importance of maintaining positive working relationships among
different individuals. The study hypothesizes that the juvenile probation
officer (JPO)-youth relationship serves as a primary driving force in juvenile
probation and operates as a relationship that can facilitate or impede the
probation process. There has been a dearth of research that examines the quality
of this relationship, the possible mechanisms that influence it, and its
implications for probation outcomes. This study examines how relationship
quality between juvenile probation officers and their supervisees predicts
supervision, decision-making strategies, and case outcomes; and whether this
relationship is moderated by two youth-related variables, namely (a) parent-
youth relationship and parents' perceptions of juvenile probation and/or (b)
mental health and substance use problems among juvenile probationers. Taking an
interdisciplinary approach by bridging theories and practice in psychology, law,
and public policy, this study is the first of its kind to examine the quality of
JPO-probationer relationship (as perceived by juvenile probationers). At
baseline, youth probationers and their parents will participate in a structured
interview and JPOs will complete a survey. Six months after baseline, JPOs will
complete a brief survey regarding youth compliance to probation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this study can potentially inform the
development and improvement of evidence-based probation programs and services
related to diverse needs of youth on probation. The PIs will partner with
juvenile probation programs and will disseminate their findings to both the
academic and professional communities.