* 1228460
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Neuroscience Meets Computer Security: Designing Systems Secure Against Coercion Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Patrick Lincoln, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 414,540.00

Coercion attacks that compel an authorized user to reveal his or her secret
authentication credentials can give attackers access to restricted systems. The
PIs are developing a new approach to preventing coercion attacks using the
concept of implicit learning from cognitive psychology. Implicit learning refers
to learning of patterns without any conscious knowledge of the learned pattern.
Using a carefully crafted keyboard-based computer game the PIs plant a secret
password in the participant's brain without the participant having any conscious
knowledge of the trained password. This planted secret can be used for
authentication, but participants cannot be coerced into revealing their secret
since they have no conscious knowledge of it.

This project explores three directions for using implicit learning in computer
security. First, the PIs are developing implicit learning tasks designed to be
used in challenge-response authentication. Second, the PIs are experimenting
with methods to demonstrate implicit knowledge by measuring electrical activity
along the scalp using off the shelf EEG devices. Third, the PIs are conducting
user experiments to demonstrate that participants are able to properly
authenticate, but cannot consciously recognize the trained secret. This project
is a collaboration between computer security researchers and cognitive
psychologists. Ultimately, the project aims to understand how the brain
represents implicit knowledge. This in turn will lead to new coercion resistant
security mechanisms for high-security applications.