* 1228168
* 2012 Green Chemistry GRC/GRS
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Karen Goldberg, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 04/30/2013
* USD 70,000.00

This award from the NSF Division of Chemistry and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems supports the 2012 Green
Chemistry Inaugural Gordon Research Seminar (GRS; July 21-22, 2012) and the 2012
Green Chemistry Gordon Research Conference (GRC; July 22-27, 2012) to be held in
Barga, Italy. These meetings will bring together an outstanding and diverse
group of scientists who will present their latest research and the most
important advances relevant to sustainable chemistry and chemical processing.
The Green Chemistry GRC/GRS focuses on cutting-edge developments required to
design chemical products and processes that: have a smaller environmental
impact, both in their manufacture and use; are produced in an energy-efficient
manner with the least possible intrinsic hazards; and have been designed for
inherent safety for human health and the environment. The latest research in
innovative synthetic methods, green separations and solvents, sustainable
sources of energy, green chemistry in consumer products, renewable feedstocks,
green materials and nanotechnology and the role of green chemistry in addressing
climate change and other environmental issues will be discussed. A highly
distinguished group of invited speakers will present their unpublished research
on designing greener chemicals, greener approaches to organic synthesis,
catalysis and biocatalysis, polymers and materials, bio-inspired materials,
energy and fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students and postdocs participating
in the GRS will have the opportunity to exchange expertise and ideas across a
broad range of green areas, approaches and methods. In addition, the keynote
talks at the GRS will inform these young scientists further about green
chemistry and sustainability, and facilitate their full participation in the GRC
that directly follows the GRS. As a multidisciplinary showcase, this premier GRS
will be bringing together an outstanding and diverse group of young researchers
pushing the boundaries of green chemistry and engineering for a sustainable
future.