* 1228697
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Foundations of Application-Sensitive Access Control Evaluation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Adam Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 254,524.00

Access control schemes are traditionally compared in terms of raw expressive
power (i.e., the policies they can encode and how those policies can be
changed); however, such comparisons ignore the needs of the application within
which a scheme will be deployed. For some applications, the most expressive
scheme may be overly complex and not necessarily the best fit. To this end, this
project investigates the suitability analysis problem: Given a system's access
control workload, a set of candidate access control schemes, and a set of
application-specific cost metrics, which scheme best meets the needs of the
system?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to create a suitability-analysis
framework that is sufficiently rigorous to be useful to researchers and
theoreticians, while remaining accessible to security practitioners. Such a
framework will help formalize an access control scheme's application-specific
strengths and limitations, enable researchers to precisely describe the
scenarios for which a scheme is best suited, allow assessment of the novelty and
utility of proposed schemes, and help analysts diagnose shortcomings in existing
systems. In particular, the project will develop (1) an application-specific,
workload-based framework for analyzing the suitability of access control schemes
that is sufficiently rich to compare logical, extensional, and hybrid schemes in
both sequential and concurrent systems; (2) a cost analysis component that
quantifies a scheme's suitability using custom metrics; and (3) tools that
automate a range of suitability analysis tasks. A real-world security workload,
PKI-based authentication and authorization on the web, will be used to evaluate
the results.