* 1228971
* GENI Engineering Activities, Phase 2
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Brig 'Chip' Elliott, Raytheon BBN Technologies Corp.
* Continuing Grant
* John Brassil
* 05/31/2016
* USD 18,356,559.00

This project will provide the Phase 2 systems engineering for the Global
Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) project. GENI, a virtual laboratory
for exploring future internet technologies and protocols at scale, creates major
opportunities to understand, innovate and transform global networks and their
interactions with society. Via the flexible and dynamic deployment of
experiments onto common infrastructure, GENI re-imagines the methodology of both
network system research and of potential early deployments and evaluation. It
enables repeatable experiments on large, complex, networked systems At scale
demonstrations of transformational ideas increases the opportunity for
significant socio-economic impact.

At the start of the GENI program it was not clear that GENI was technically
feasible. An early major goal was to show its feasibility. To this end, the GPO
started a series of rapid, community-created prototypes via ?spiral development?
so that hands on experience could drive its evolution. Each GENI spiral is 12
months long, and aims to drive down specific technical and programmatic risks.
This proposal supports the engineering activities of spirals 4, 5 and 6. The
task categories associated with the proposal are: a) Experiment support and
direct aid to the research teams attempting to use the GENI prototype, including
training and tools. b) Continued progress towards full Integration and
Operations of the current GENI prototype including deployment of GENI racks,
enhancing the integration with Internet 2 and National Lambda Rail, additional
WiMax integration, campus expansion with the goal of having between 100 to 200
campuses ?GENI enabled?, and transition for 24x7 operations managed by Indiana
University. c) Formalization and documentation of the GENI architecture. d)
Systems Engineering work including security analysis of the GENI infrastructure,
instrumentation and measurement tools and infrastructure, and subcontract
technical management.

Broader Impact: The engineering process of building GENI has directly engaged
the newest generation of faculty in students in a large-scale systems project.
The experience of building a large-scale system is an educational opportunity
that is providing direct benefit to the US computer research community. GENI is
already being used as an instrument for research. This proposal supports and
broadens the availability and usability of the research instrument.