* 1228903
* TWC: Medium: Title: SDR Shield: A Hardware-based Security Solution for Software Defined Radio
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

Software Defined Radio (SDR) technology has the flexibility of implementing a
large part of physical layer functions in software. It is one of the major
technologies that will provide broadband services to millions of US residences.
However, unlike conventional radio whose RF signals are tightly regulated by
FCC-certified hardware, the software components of SDR can be easily exploited
by hackers to create a wide range of unauthorized waveforms to launch attacks on
many security-critical wireless systems. The existing preventive software-based
security counter measures are not possible to prevent the myriad of potential
software security loopholes and themselves often become targets of the malware.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to design an effective
hardware-based SDR integrity assessment and behavior regulation device named SDR
Shield. SDR Shield resides between the vulnerable SDR software and the security-
critical SDR hardware to detect any malicious configuration of the RF device and
prevent it from being used to attack wireless systems. The SDR Shield uses side
channel and communication channel information from different SDR components to
detect deviations from expected execution status. SDR shield also includes a
regulation circuit to enforce safety-critical properties of SDR operation. A
secure update process is developed to maintain SDR shield?s flexibility and its
own security. The generality of SDR Shield?s design provides a unified security
mechanism for SDR design and hence can ease the burden on FCC or any future SDR
design verification institutes in certifying security measures of SDR products.