* 1228312
* MRI:  Acquisition of High Performance Computing Instrument for Collaborative Data-Enabled Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Walter Ligon, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,024,160.00

Proposal #: 12-28312&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Apon, Amy W.&lt;br/&gt; Gemmill, Jill;
Ligon, Walter B.; Smith, Melissa C.; Stuart, Steven J.&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Clemson University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: High Performance Computing
Instrument for Collaborative Data-Enabled Science&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a high performance computing (HPC)
for collaborative data-enabled science, aims to enable fundamental and applied
research in areas of experimental HPC, including scalable file systems,
accelerator technologies, middleware architectures, and cluster scheduling
policies. The instrument will be used as a production resource to support
several compelling science applications in materials and biomolecular modeling,
bioinformatics (and others) and will contribute a significant new component of
the institution?s well established and managed Palmetto cluster while providing
critically needed file storage, and accelerator systems not currently available.
Supported projects include:&lt;br/&gt;- Scalable file system
implementation,&lt;br/&gt;- Exploiting and analyzing concurrency in
heterogeneous computing environments,&lt;br/&gt;- High performance cluster
modeling, analysis, and characterization,&lt;br/&gt;- File replication and
consistency maintenance,&lt;br/&gt;- Cloud architecture,&lt;br/&gt;- Properties
of advanced materials and biomolecular systems,&lt;br/&gt;- Molecular dynamic
simulation studies of poly-dots, new light-emitting nanoparticles,&lt;br/&gt;-
Biomolecular evolution,&lt;br/&gt;- Optimizing catalysts for direct chemical
remediation from water,&lt;br/&gt;- Protein-surface interactions,&lt;br/&gt;-
Map/Reduce framework for next generation sequencing data assembly,&lt;br/&gt;-
Searching for identification of significantly conserved protein
blocks,&lt;br/&gt;- Digital manufacturing,&lt;br/&gt;- Statistical inference in
nonparametrics models of production,&lt;br/&gt;- Analysis of the structures of
hospital and banking industries,&lt;br/&gt;- Multiple scatter
rendering,&lt;br/&gt;- Digital scholarship, and&lt;br/&gt;- Applications of
computing to the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;Regular planned input from the
scientific team is expected to facilitate the development of policies for use of
the instrument as a test bed for experimental high performance computing systems
research as well as a shared production resource for scientific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrument serves as a
tool for the collaborative team that includes more than 20 faculty from 4
institutions, and more than 250 graduate and undergraduate students. The system
will also be utilized by the already established ?Desktop to Teragrid? program
that reaches more than a dozen universities across South Carolina, an EPSCoR
state, and with regional partners. The proposal team includes 6 women senior
personnel. The institution has outreach, education, and training activities, and
has engaged SC?s only public HBCU, South Carolina State University, as well as
other minority institutions within the region. Development of interdisciplinary
curricula will support computational and data-enabled science and engineering.