* 1228994
* TTP: Medium: Detection and Analysis of Large-Scale Internet Infrastructure Outages
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anita  Nikolich
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,467,103.00

Despite the Internet's status as critical infrastructure, there is little
scientific instrumentation dedicated to monitoring global Internet behavior. In
particular, we have no rigorous framework for measuring, analyzing, or
quantifying the impact of network outages, filtering, or other abnormal
connectivity dynamics on a global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
applies successful research results in analyzing recent macroscopic Internet
connectivity disruptions to the development, testing, and experimental
deployment of an operational capability to detect, monitor, and characterize
such large-scale infrastructure outages. The investigators are seeking to
validate and extend a methodology for identifying not only which networks have
been affected by an outage, but also which mechanisms have been used to effect a
deliberate disruption. The two intellectual themes of the research are: (1)
extracting signal from malware-induced background radiation in Internet traffic
(IBR); and (2) combining multiple types of data (active probing, passive IBR,
routing data, geolocation, and registry databases) to delineate the scope and
progression of the outage. The project will also develop quantitative indicators
to gauge the impact of geophysical disasters on Internet infrastructure,
including the dynamics of loss and restoration of service. A transition of these
research outcomes into practice will yield a system specification,
implementation, and experimental operational deployment to detect and monitor
global connectivity failures on a planetary scale. In addition to improving our
understanding of how measurements yield insights into network behavior, and
strengthening our ability to model large scale complex networks, such a system
will illuminate infrastructure vulnerabilities that derive from architectural,
topological, or economic constraints, suggesting how to mitigate or eliminate
these weaknesses in future Internet architecture and measurement research.