* 1228667
* Collaborative Research: Software Institute for Abstractions and Methodologies for HPC Simulation Codes on Future Architectures
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Brian O'Shea, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 9,218.00

Large, complex, multi-scale, multi-physics simulation codes, running on high
performance computing (HPC) platforms, are essential to advancing science and
engineering research in disciplines such as lattice field theory, astrophysics
and cosmology, computational fluid dynamics/fluid structure interaction,and high
energy density physics. Progress in computational science together with the
adoption of high-level frameworks and modular development have produced widely
used community simulation software specific to individual communities. These
state-of-the-art codes have been under development and optimization for several
years and currently simulate multi-scale, multi-physics phenomena with
unprecedented fidelity on petascale platforms. Currently each of these codes
have solvers with varied performance characteristics, but all face challenges
because of changing hardware architecture. Efforts underway to cope with these
challenges, are largely fragmented. While it is true that the scientific codes
used in various domains differ significantly from one another, many solutions
are likely to be conceptually similar, even if they differ in details. The goal
of the proposed conceptualization project, Software Institute for Methodologies
and Abstractions for Codes (SIMAC) is to find common abstractions and frameworks
applicable across a broad range of applications through cooperation,
coordination and interdisciplinary interactions among the participants. The core
group of participating codes includes FLASH (astrophysics, cosmology, CFD,
HEDP), Cactus (CFD, numerical relativity, and quantum relativity), the code
suite used by the Lattice QCD community, and Enzo (cosmology).

The proposed collaborative research will produce benefit beyond the four
simulation codes and collaborating institutions by exploring: a common software
infrastructure applicable to a broad range of science and engineering
application domains; an engagement model between computer science research and
application development; a multidisciplinary immersion program for research,
education and training of students, postdoctoral fellows and visitors on future
platform architectures.