* 1228967
* TWC: Medium: Towards a Formally Verified Web Browser
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Sorin Lerner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,110,000.00

The web browser is ubiquitous and indispensable. It runs
applications&lt;br/&gt;like social networking, business productivity, and online
banking, and&lt;br/&gt;promises isolation policies that keep these applications
secure when&lt;br/&gt;run side-by-side. Because of its crucial role, we would
like the&lt;br/&gt;browser to be robust and secure against attack; but in fact
browsers&lt;br/&gt;are fragile. They are complex pieces of software with rich
features&lt;br/&gt;that allow for flexibility and programmability, and even
small bugs&lt;br/&gt;can make the browser vulnerable to attack. Indeed,
browser&lt;br/&gt;vulnerabilities have been used to infiltrate the internal
networks of&lt;br/&gt;American defense contractors and leading tech firms.
Attempts to&lt;br/&gt;improve browser security are often ad-hoc engineering
efforts; and&lt;br/&gt;even when formal guarantees are provided, they come in
the form of&lt;br/&gt;proofs over a model or idealization of the browser, not
the browser&lt;br/&gt;itself. A buggy implementation can invalidate intended
guarantees and&lt;br/&gt;leave users open to
attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build a
browser inside the Coq proof&lt;br/&gt;assistant, along with a proof of its
correctness. Unlike previous&lt;br/&gt;research efforts, the proof covers the
actual browser implementation&lt;br/&gt;rather than a model or abstraction. This
provides extremely strong,&lt;br/&gt;precise guarantees about the security
properties of the browser. The&lt;br/&gt;proof is made tractable by focusing the
verification effort to a small&lt;br/&gt;browser kernel, and running legacy code
in a sandbox to render&lt;br/&gt;web pages. In this way, the browser can provide
meaningful isolation&lt;br/&gt;guarantees even when the legacy code that renders
web pages is&lt;br/&gt;untrusted and potentially buggy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide:&lt;br/&gt;* For users of the web, browsers
that are more reliable and secure;&lt;br/&gt;* For software developers, a new
approach for developing high-assurance systems;&lt;br/&gt;* For researchers, a
framework for formally reasoning about security policies;&lt;br/&gt;* For
students, security and formal methods education.