* 1228390
* Participant Support and organization of the  technical demonstrations  for the NSF-GENI GEC13th at UCLA.
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Giovanni Pau, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 02/28/2013
* USD 59,155.00

The Global Environment for Network Innovations 'GENI' is a suite of research
infrastructure supported by the NSF that is rapidly emerging in prototype form
across the United States. GENI aims to transform experimental research in
networking and distributed systems, as well as emerging research into very large
socio-technical systems, by providing a suite of infrastructure for 'at scale'
experiments in future internets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GENI Project Office
organizes three major GENI Engineering conferences (GEC) per year, in which the
entire GENI community meets to review current status, and to decide on
subsequent steps in GENI's evolution. These GECs include community-based working
groups leading GENI's design and planning, and demonstrating progress with live
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCLA is hosting the thirteenth edition of the
GENI Engineering conference. This project supports organizing the demo session
to be held on the UCLA Campus. About 400 leading researchers and Ph.D. students
from diverse US institutions will gather at UCLA to showcase their ideas and
results. The Campus Technology Services will fit the venue to support high speed
networking experiments both wired and wireless. In particular, a 10GB link will
be enabled and each demo will be provided with 1G wired connection. The venue
will be also connected to the National Lambda Rail (NLR) and Internet2
Interoperable On-demand Network (ION) network infrastructures thus enabling
researchers and practitioners to access all the GENI sites nationwide. Each GEC
13th participant will be issued temporary campus-wide wireless credentials that
will grant access to the campus wireless infrastructure and commodity Internet
for the duration of the event. Furthermore, 4G wireless connectivity will be
made available through the GENI-WiMax
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The GEC Demo sessions
provide graduate students with both an opportunity to demonstrate and explain
their work to the GENI community prior to formal publication. It helps new
graduate students understand what is being done with GENI and encourages cross-
university cooperation by providing a method for students and faculty to
discover who amongst their peers at other institutions might be valuable
resources. It also supports outreach to new community members, including the
emerging US Ignite community.