* 1228034
* Teachers Empowered to Advance Change in Mathematics (TEACH MATH): Preparing preK-8 Teachers to Connect Children's Mathematical Thinking and Community-based Funds of Knowledge
* EHR,DRL
* 08/31/2011,08/31/2017
* Corey Drake, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,997,546.00

This research and development project will modify the teacher preparation
program for preK-8 teachers at six universities located in different regions of
the U.S. The new program is designed to help pre-service teachers learn
mathematics well, learn to access students' cultural funds of knowledge in ways
that will help them teach mathematics, and learn to encourage students'
mathematical thinking. By integrating these important bodies of knowledge, pre-
service teachers should be better prepared to teach mathematics to the variety
of students in their classes. The developers are designing (a) modules that can
be used in teacher preparation courses, (b) a mentoring program for new
teachers, and (c) on-line networks to facilitate collaboration among
participating teachers and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
includes a study of how pre-service teachers learn to apply the knowledge they
have gained in the program. The research team has planned a longitudinal
collection of data that will track the pre-service teachers into their careers.
Their goal is to document teachers' understandings of children's mathematical
thinking and children's cultural funds of knowledge and to understand the
relationship between teachers' understandings and the learning and disposition
of preK-8 students. The study will be implemented at all six universities with
staggered start dates allowing for analysis and revisions between
cohorts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research and development efforts have the
potential to impact preK-8 teacher preparation through (1) the development of
modules that integrate several relevant proficiencies in mathematics teaching,
and (2) the research that studies the impact of such a program on the
mathematical learning and disposition of preK-8 students.