* 1228446
* Conference:  FASEB SRC:   Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing Steamboat Springs, Coloroda: July 29-August 3, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Maureen McCall, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

This application requests partial funding for the conference on "Retinal
Neurobiology and Visual Processing", administered by the Federation of American
Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB), to be held in 2012. This is the 11th
meeting of this highly successful biennial conference. The primary goal of this
unique forum is to bring together participants from diverse disciplines
including: neurobiology, computational biology, and vision research to discuss
state-of-the-art techniques and apply creative scientific thinking to
understanding the neurobiological basis of vision, with an emphasis on retinal
processing. Our 200 participants include established and young investigators,
all actively involved in vision research. The meeting provides the opportunity
for them to interact extensively and produces a stimulating and free atmosphere
for the lively exchange of ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program and
data provided in this application clearly demonstrate that this meeting provides
opportunities for pre- and postdoctoral trainees, as well as early-stage
independent investigators, to meet and share their ideas with each other and
with established leaders in the field. Our speakers include a significant number
of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and young investigators. Their
inclusion highlights exciting new topics and promotes them as up and coming
members of the vision research community. Historically, the conference provides
opportunities for graduate students to learn about new areas of research and
explore postdoctoral possibilities and gives our postdoctoral fellows a chance
to show that they are ready to assume junior faculty positions. In addition, the
discussions that arise at this meeting are known to give rise to new
collaborations that bring about publications whose results represent milestones
in our understanding of visual processing. Because the visual system is a
leading model for our understanding of sensory processing in general, the
meeting and its interactions have both short and long-term impact on the field
of Neuroscience.