* 1228207
* Access to Selective Colleges in the Pre- and Post-Grutter Eras among Racial, Ethnic, and Immigrant Groups
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Amy Lutz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The ability of selective colleges to use affirmative action in admissions
changed&lt;br/&gt;dramatically from the mid--1990s into the 2000s due to state
bans and the 2003 Grutter v.&lt;br/&gt;Bollinger Supreme Court decision that
clarified how affirmative action may be used.&lt;br/&gt;Little research has
compared racial-&amp;#8208;ethnic and nativity differences in access to
selective colleges across the two&lt;br/&gt;affirmative action contexts.
Therefore, investigators examine application to, enrollment in,
and&lt;br/&gt;graduation from four--&amp;#8208;year selective institutions,
four--&amp;#8208;year non--&amp;#8208;selective institutions, Historically Black
Colleges and Universities, and two--&amp;#8208;year institutions in the
pre--&amp;#8208; and post--&amp;#8208;Grutter time periods to answer the
following questions: 1) To what extent do native and immigrant black, white,
Asian, and Latino students apply to, attend, and graduate from different types
of colleges? 2) To what extent are racial--&amp;#8208;ethnic and nativity
differences in college destination and graduation explained by SAT scores and
other indicators of merit? 3) To what extent are racial--&amp;#8208;ethnic and
nativity differences in college destination and graduation, SAT scores, and
other indicators of merit explained by social and economic background
characteristics? 4) How do group differences in college destination and
graduation vary nationally across the pre-&amp;#8208; and
post-&amp;#8208;Grutter time periods, and across states that banned and did not
ban affirmative action? Investigators will analyze data from the National
Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS) and the Education Longitudinal Study
of 2002 (ELS). NELS and ELS are nationally--&amp;#8208;representative surveys
collected by the National Center for Education Statistics that reflect high
school graduates' enrollments in college in 1994 and 2006, prior to and after
the 2003 Supreme Court case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding group
differences in access to selective colleges is important to public concern about
higher education because research&lt;br/&gt;suggests that selective colleges
offer myriad advantages over non-Â­&amp;#8208;selective colleges (e.g.,
more&lt;br/&gt;rigorous courses, higher graduation rates, better career
outcomes)