* 1228271
* Solving large-scale eigen-related problems: Efficient and scalable algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Yunkai Zhou, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 155,771.00

The main objectives of this project focus on novel efficient algorithms for
solving large-scale eigen-related problems. The term "eigen-related" refers to
any problem for which a solution can be expressed using certain eigenvalues
and/or eigenvectors. Such eigen-related problems are central to a wide range of
scientific and engineering disciplines, including materials science, statistical
computing, data mining and machine learning. The ever-increasing high dimensions
and complexity of modern scientific problems bring overwhelming computational
burden for eigen-related computations and render existing eigen-algorithms
ineffective. There is great demand for eigen-algorithms that can take into
account the dynamic and nonlinear nature of modern scientific problems, leading
to algorithms that can handle massive datasets more efficiently. The
investigator proposes to systematically study and develop novel scalable
approaches for alleviating the computational bottlenecks related to solving
large-scale eigen-related problems. Approaches to be investigated include global
spectrum filtering as well as multilevel sampling and clustering. Specifically,
the investigator will develop methods (a) to reduce the diagonalization cost for
density functional theory calculations; (b) to accelerate partial SVD
calculations that are used in a significantly broad range of applications; and
(c)to accelerate the low-rank matrix approximations via Nystrom-type
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large eigen-related problems are
ubiquitous in modern science, engineering, and economics applications. This
project will develop efficient scalable algorithms for solving large eigen-
related problems. One important broader impact of the proposed work is that the
resulting methods will accelerate discoveries in a wide range of research
fields, including material science and data mining, which are critical to
national energy security and economic competitiveness. The project will also
provide interesting and challenging topics for Ph.D. dissertation research, for
undergraduate research, and for outreach activities.