* 1228041
* BRIGE:  Novel Quantum Dot Inks For Printed Low Cost Inorganic-Organic Hybrid LEDs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Delaina Amos, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 190,998.00

PI: Amos, Delaina Institution: University of Louisville

Intellectual Merit: The need for innovation in high-efficiency lighting devices
has been recognized for some time. Solid-state lighting devices have the
potential to increase two- or more fold over the efficiencies of the best
conventional lighting technologies available today. Even though there has been
significant progress with solid-state device technology based on single crystal
semiconductors, there is still a large need for developing such technologies
utilizing inexpensive materials and processes. Organic-inorganic composite
lighting technology offers such possibilities in terms of both materials and
processes; however, the current state-of-the-art technology is limited by low
efficiencies. This BRIGE award proposes to develop new materials, processes and
fundamental understanding necessary for transformational advances with light
emitting diode (LED) devices based on organic-inorganic composite materials. The
objective is to develop novel quantum dots (QDs), QD/ligand chemistry and
conductive polymers (CP) for use in hybrid organic-inorganic LEDs. Another
objective of this project is to investigate the use of inkjet printing and other
scalable techniques for the thin film deposition of the multi-layer device.
Specifically, the project will focus on the following four directions: (1)
synthesis of novel QDs made using earth abundant and less toxic elements; (2)
functionalization of QDs and investigation of the QD-CP interface in terms of
device performance; (3) use of inkjet deposition to lay down the QD and polymer
layers in discrete red, green and blue sections to produce white light; and (4)
fabrication and testing of LED devices in terms of energy conversion and light
emission efficiency.

Broader Impacts: The proposed broadening participation plan includes the
following objectives (1) to create and disseminate a traveling history of
lighting display with an accompanying video targeted at regional K-12 students;
(2) to create a half-day Engineering school-wide undergraduate and graduate
research symposium; and (3) to develop curriculum for a new graduate course
entitled "Quantum Dots and Lighting." In addition to research and curricular
integration outcomes, the PI plans to focus on various activities for increasing
graduation and retention rates for underrepresented minorities in the STEM
areas. Long-term societal impacts will be to elevate the awareness of renewable
energy challenges, goals and emerging lighting technologies at the K-12,
undergraduate and graduate levels as well as to increase graduation and
retention rates for this target population. Technological impacts will include
new scalable processing techniques leading to lower cost LED lighting and
significantly improved environmental impact and lighting energy efficiencies
relative to traditional lighting.