* 1228817
* MRI: Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Small Angle X-Ray Scattering (SAXS) Instrument for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* James Cole, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 568,398.00

This award to the University of Connecticut is for the acquisition of a
versatile Small-angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) instrument that can also be used
for wide-angle and grazing-angle scattering measurements. SAXS is a powerful
tool for the characterization of structures at length scales from a few to a few
hundred nanometers. It provides information on the shape, size, molecular
weight, polydispersity, and interparticle interactions of materials. This
instrument will further ongoing research in polymer science, molecular biology,
pharmaceutical science, nanomaterials, and energy research. It will be used to
answers fundamental questions, such as: What is the ordering of inorganic
templates and catalysts? How does the structure of various targeted drug
carriers affect their function? What factors control the associations of bio-
derived building blocks? And, how do structures form in molecular assemblies?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAXS instrument will be housed in a shared user
facility, which provides access to researchers across campus as well as local
industry. It will enable research projects that improve health care, develop
more efficient sources of energy, and produce materials with superior
properties. The instrument will be used to train the next generation of
scientists through hands-on research experiences for undergraduate students,
graduate students, and post-docs, as well as classroom demonstrations in
structural characterization courses.