* 1228155
* Collaborative Research: Leverage Subsampling for Regression and Dimension Reduction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Michael Saunders, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

As a result of rapid advances in information technology, massive datasets are
being generated in all fields of science, engineering, social science, business,
and government. Useful information is often extracted from these data through
statistical model fitting, e.g., through regression models. These models are
useful for describing relationships between predictor variables and a response
variable. Given a set of n data elements and p predictors, p and/or n can be
large in much modern massive data set applications. In these cases, conventional
algorithms often face severe computational challenges. Subsampling of rows
and/or columns of a data matrix have traditionally been employed as a heuristic
to reduce the size of large data sets, thus enabling computations to run more
quickly. Recently, however, an innovative sampling methodology that uses the
empirical statistical leverage scores of the data matrix as a nonuniform
importance sampling distribution has been proposed. This has been applied to the
ordinary least squares (OLS) problem and other related problems, and this
leverage-based nonuniform sampling procedure gives a very good approximation to
the OLS based on full data (when p is small and n is large) more rapidly than
traditional methods, both in worst-case theory and in high-quality numerical
implementations. As of yet, however, the statistical properties of these
algorithms are unexplored. Understanding these properties is of interest for
both fundamental and very practical reasons; and the investigators' work
addresses these problems. The investigators consider both statistical theory as
well as the evaluation of that theory with high-quality numerical
implementations on large real-world data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
proposal consists of two related research thrusts, both of which center around
the common goal of an integrated treatment of statistical and computational
issues. The first research thrust focuses on studying the statistical properties
of the subsampling estimation using the statistical leverage scores in linear
regression. The second research thrust generalizes the theory and methods to
nonlinear regression and dimension reduction models. The proposed theory and
methods serve as an inspiration for new ideas to push statistical methodology
development forward. The research provides new insight into the existing
algorithms, produces innovative methodologies for analyzing large-scale data,
inspires new lines of quantitative investigations in interdisciplinary research
and offers a unique educational experience.