* 1228595
* The oscillatory control of selective attention: leveraging white matter microstructure and electrophysiology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John Foxe, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 758,865.00

The brain's sensory systems are continually bombarded by a flurry of
environmental information, such as shapes, colors, textures, sounds, and smells.
In fact, there is far more information than the brain can process
simultaneously. As a result, there is an ongoing competition for the brain's
limited processing resources. With funding from the National Science Foundation,
Dr. John Foxe and his research team are investigating the link between
oscillatory signatures of selective attention in electroencephalography (EEG)
recordings and the microstructure of long-range connections between brain
networks that have been previously implicated in spatial selective mechanisms.
The most frequently investigated mechanism of selective attention is spatial
selection, where one location in the environment receives preferred processing
relative to other locations. An observable signature of spatial selection is
increased oscillatory amplitude of brain electrical activity within a particular
frequency band, alpha (approximately 10 Hz), over brain regions that process
task-irrelevant locations. These oscillations can be imagined as a sine wave,
with the peaks and troughs of the sine wave representing relative increases and
decreases in neural excitability. Using experimental tasks in which participants
are cued to attend to one region of space, while simultaneously ignoring
distracting stimuli in other regions of space, Dr. Foxe is EEG measures and
structural measure of the brain's long-range connections obtained using
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Dr. Foxe is leveraging the wide variability
across individuals in both oscillatory indices of spatial selection as well as
the microstructure of neuronal circuits connecting far-flung brain networks. The
coordination of these two neuroimaging techniques (EEG and DTI), as well as the
use and exploration of individual differences in brain oscillations and
structure, represent novel approaches to the study of selective attention. This
work aims to help us understand the relevance of neural oscillations in sensory
selection and guide the further development of hypotheses regarding the neural
mechanisms employed by networks of selective attention.

Dr. Foxe's laboratory has a long record of translational research. The results
of the present studies will provide foundational understanding from which to
launch investigations into impairments of attentional selection within clinical
populations. Selective attention is disordered in several clinical populations,
including individuals with spatial neglect after stroke, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and
schizophrenia. In addition, the researchers' use of multiple methodologies (EEG
and DTI) will provide an excellent training opportunity for graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows. An expertise in multiple methodological approaches,
each with their unique strengths and weaknesses, is becoming more and more
important for a successful career in the neurosciences. A thorough understanding
of the increasingly complex questions being addressed in the neurosciences
requires converging findings from more than one experimental tradition.
Comprehensive training in imaging techniques in humans will thus provide a
terrific base from which to build a successful research career.