* 1228472
* Revisiting Roxbury: Crime, Gang Membership and the Life Course
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jacob Young, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This proposal is designed to learn about what happens to individuals who were
involved in crime and gangs as young people as they age into their seventies.
Consistent with life course theory, this research examines changes in people's
lives as they age. This study is based on a population of individuals from the
first federally funded gang intervention, the Boston Special Youth Group, which
was funded from 1953-1958 by the National Institute of Mental Health. Little is
known about how and why involvement in crime declines over the life course. Even
less is known about the long term consequences of gang membership. These
research questions will be addressed with three sources of data. First, the
research team will investigate the criminal records of 532 gang-involved
individuals to assess how their involvement in crime has changed over the life
course. Second, interviews with sixty or more of these former gang members will
be conducted to understand how joining and leaving the gang influenced future
behaviors such as marriage, educational attainment, employment, and criminal
histories. Third, the research team will evaluate more than 78,000 contact cards
completed by case workers that provide details on interactions between gang
members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize that desistance from
crime and a gang is related to significant life events such as marriage,
employment and military service. They will examine the impact of such events for
men and women, whites and African-Americans. There is a large gap in our
understanding of the long term impact of involvement in crime and gangs by
youth. As such, this research may assist with the development of effective
policies and programming in the criminal justice system.