* 1228322
* Second-order correlation learning in infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* David Rakison, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* david moore
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The ability to categorize objects--such as dogs, cats, cars, furniture and
people--is one of the foundations of early perceptual and cognitive development.
Many of the objects in these categories tend to have features that co-occur
together, such that things that have wings and beaks tend also to have claws and
lay eggs. It is now well established that infants in the first year of life are
adept at learning such co-occurrences among static non-moving features, and by
the second year of life they can do so for dynamic features involved in motion
(e.g., things with legs walk and things with wheels roll). It remains to be seen
if infants are able to learn about such co-occurring features if they are
rarely, if ever, observed together. This ability is important because it is
impossible for infants to observe every feature of an object at the same time,
and consequently they must generalize from their experience to develop
expectations about unseen features of objects. The research supported by the
award will use the infant-controlled habituation method to address this issue by
examining whether infants and young children between 18 and 26 months of age are
able to learn that objects that move in different ways tend to have a co-
occurring object part even though they never experience the motion and the part
together. In other words, if infants and young children learn that objects with
legs walk and that things with legs have eyes, will they infer that things with
eyes walk? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will be of direct relevance to
developmental psychology. The results will help researchers to understand how
infants and young children learn about the complex features of object categories
in the world, and they will demonstrate that children possess a potentially
powerful--but as yet unexplored--way to generalize their knowledge in the first
years of life. The project also has the potential for practical application for
early educators because it could help to elucidate a completely novel way to
teach young children how to make broader generalizations from limited data. This
is important because classroom activities aim to promote the transfer of
knowledge from the original instructional context and the kind of learning
examined in this work may help to enable this transfer automatically. In a
similar vein, it is also feasible to use the limits of this kind of learning to
predict which math and science problems are likely to pose difficulty to
children when entering school. In addition to the practical benefits for
society, the proposed work will provide an outstanding training opportunity for
undergraduate students to gain extensive one-on-one experience in conducting
scientific research that will prepare them for graduate programs, and
potentially, a career in science or education.