* 1228074
* BRIGE: Integrating Structural Control and Double Skin Façades for Building Safety and Energy Efficiency
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Tat Fu, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 174,566.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
project aims to utilize double skin façades (DSF) as mass dampers in buildings
for improving both building safety and energy efficiency. A DSF system consists
of two layers of glasses with a cavity between them. Compared to a single glass
skin system, this system is more insulating and its cavity allows airflow to
help ventilate a building. By integrating mass dampers and double skin façades,
structural vibrations can be dampened during earthquakes and strong winds
without adding extra weight (i.e., separate mass dampers) to the structure. The
added mobility of façades can also lead to innovative ways to adjust airflow and
environmental conditions in the building. The proposed research will yield a
new, movable DSF system with actuators installed to affect damper movements for
structural control and the cavity between skins for environmental control. The
DSF-damper attachment configurations and damper parameters will first be studied
and optimized. Active control strategies will be developed to minimize
structural vibrations. Various movements by the DSF-damper system will also be
examined to maximize energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this
research will improve building sustainability by enhancing building safety and
energy efficiency. Accurately understanding the synergy between structural and
environmental controls will provide a transformative shift in building designs
and operations. Integrative, synergistic research between Engineering and
Architecture will prolong building life cycles while improving energy
efficiency, thus achieving the broader goal of ensuring a more sustainable
future for society. The proposed interdisciplinary work will also increase
diversity in Engineering on two fronts. First, it will expose current
Engineering students to different disciplines. Secondly, this research can
attract students with non-Engineering backgrounds. In a cross-College
collaboration (between Civil Engineering and Fine Arts), the PI developed an
Architecture minor program that will help recruit students who are interested in
Architecture into Civil Engineering. In light of the higher percentage of female
and African American students in Architecture than in Engineering, recruiting
students with architectural interests will increase the chances of attracting
underrepresented students to Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;