* 1228843
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Trustworthy Programs Without A Trustworthy Operating System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Emmett Witchel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The operating system (OS) exercises complete control over applications, thus a
compromise of the OS compromises every application. Software developers have
little recourse to improve security in the face of system compromise---they
cannot defend against OS vulnerabilities, nor can they reasonably substitute a
secure version of the millions of lines of code that constitute a modern
OS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than require applications to blindly trust OS
interactions, this project investigates a system architecture that enables
trusted applications to efficiently verify OS interactions with the help of a
small, trusted hypervisor. Most verification work is performed within the C
language runtime, minimizing changes to legacy code and shielding developers
from increased programming complexity.&lt;br/&gt;The prototype system, called
InkTag,improves upon prior work in several key areas: it provides more efficient
techniques to verify system call results, implements usable access control for
resources managed by an untrusted OS, and introduces hardware and software
techniques to further reduce the size of the trusted computing
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing provides energy and economic
efficiencies, but suffers from the inability to give meaningful security
guarantees to hosted applications. This project demonstrates that system
security is possible without trusting the OS---a large part of the hosted
infrastructure. This project is also developing new materials for undergraduate
and graduate curricula that combine core knowledge of systems with an
understanding of how systems provide security properties, equipping future
computer professionals with a better understanding of what security guarantees a
system can meaningfully provide.