* 1228984
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Transformative New Approaches to Efficient Secure Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Amit Sahai, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Susanne Wetzel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Secure Computation is a powerful concept from cryptography that enables
collaboration in the absence of trust. Despite its great potential for solving
practical problems in collaborative situations, it has not yet been widely
adopted in practice. Indeed, until recently there were few practical
implementations of secure computation protocols, and even recent implementations
were forced to restrict themselves to weak forms of security for the sake of
efficiency. This is because the dominant paradigm for achieving strong security,
since the invention of the first such protocols, has relied on zero-knowledge
proofs, and yields protocols that are too inefficient even for simple
computations.

We are developing radically different new architectures for efficient secure
computation protocols that bypass the need for such zero-knowledge proofs. Our
architectures are based on a novel principled approach to developing new secure
computation protocols, with consequences to the theory and practice of modern
cryptography. Our research will identify new (partial) security properties
inherent in simple protocols, and study how such properties can add up to strong
security guarantees through carefully developed methods for composing protocols.

Secure multiparty computation is an idea whose time has come, as evidenced by
the several projects around the world engaged in translating the theoretical
results to practical implementations, and the number of research projects
outside cryptography that seek to exploit it. Widespread availability and
deployment of secure computation protocols has the potential to be a disruptive
technology, enabling new avenues of cooperation in areas with sensitive
information. Apart from the technological impact, we strive to bring the
advances in cryptography to a broader computer science audience, by integrating
our research into graduate and undergraduate education, and outreach efforts.