* 1228432
* MRI: Acquisition of a CHNSO Elemental Determinator to Support  Multidisciplinary Applied Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Lihua Wang, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 70,698.00

It is proposed that a carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, and oxygen (CHNSO)
elemental determinator be procured to augment the chemistry analytical
instrument suite presently in use for research and instruction at Kettering
University. Kettering University, formerly known as General Motors Institute is
located in Flint, Michigan and is a non-PhD granting institution that
specializes in cooperative education and experiential learning in the science,
technology, engineering, and math fields. A CHNSO elemental determinator, if
awarded, would be used by a multidisciplinary group of faculty in the
Biochemistry, Chemistry, and Chemical Engineering programs engaged in applied
and fundamental research in a wide variety of areas including alternative
energy, organic synthesis, pharmaceuticals, and materials research. The
investigators in these programs employ and mentor undergraduate students to aid
in their research efforts. For some students, this work is incorporated into
their undergraduate thesis. In addition, many students become coauthors on peer
reviewed publications and/or presentations at local, regional, and national
meetings. In addition to supporting student/faculty research, a CHNSO would
enhance the educational mission of the department by broadening the educational
background of junior- and senior-level chemistry and chemical engineering
students.