* 1228560
* Collaborative Research: The Use of Narrative Enhancement to Facilitate Children's Productivity in Eyewitness Testimony
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Thomas Lyon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 02/28/2014
* USD 46,543.00

Research concerning children's eyewitness abilities has repeatedly demonstrated
harmful effects of suggestive questioning and superior accuracy of free-recall
reports. However, children's free recall is often incomplete, and new interview
methods are needed that enhance children's productivity without increasing
contamination. In the current research, we are examining whether several very
simple and easily implemented interviewer behaviors can do just this. Such
behaviors include vocatives (e.g., stating the child's name), which focus the
child's attention; and back-channel utterances (e.g., following responses with
"uh huh"), which convey interviewer attentiveness. These behaviors have been
observed in field research of forensic interviews. However, because ground truth
is not known and there is no control over the use of the behaviors in
naturalistic settings, the actual effects of these behaviors on productivity and
accuracy are unknown. We are experimentally testing the effects of these
interviewer behaviors, collectively referred to as facilitative utterances, on
4- to 9-year olds' descriptions of a salient event, namely a laboratory activity
involving a minor transgression (toy breakage). Our procedures will allow us to
determine whether facilitative utterances increase how much children report
about prior experiences, particularly those that include some negative
components, and whether the benefits of facilitative utterances vary with age,
for example, as children become more competent recounting past events without
assistance from others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, our project will advance
science and policy at the interface of developmental psychology and the law.
Considerable uncertainty remains about how best to elicit detailed narrative
reports from suspected child victims. Much of this uncertainty is attributable
to a lack of experimental investigation of interviewer behaviors commonly
observed in field practices. By conducting a systematic assessment of
potentially critical interviewer behaviors, we will be able to decrease some of
this uncertainty, thereby improving the identification of truly abused children
and the legal system's ability to pursue justice in cases involving alleged
abuse.