* 1228458
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Shaping the Content of Majority Opinions on the U.S. Supreme Court
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Ryan Black, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 12/31/2013
* USD 25,200.00

The arguments contained within Supreme Court majority opinions determine legal
policy. However, it remains unclear precisely who the most influential member is
within each majority coalition. Existing research presents competing hypotheses
about the most influential member on the Court, with many models predicting
convergence to a single median member, while others suggest that the opinion
author herself retains significant control. Despite these conflicting
predictions, data to disentangle them do not exist. This project aims to address
this deficiency by obtaining copies of each circulated majority opinion draft on
the U.S. Supreme Court during the seventeen terms of the Burger Court. These
data will supplement the Burger Court Opinion Writing Database, which contains
information on all memoranda and opinion drafts that the justices circulated to
their colleagues between the 1969 and 1985 terms. These data will be the basis
for the creation of a new measure of accommodation on the Court. Using advances
in text analysis software, and coding accommodation by matching explicit
bargaining actions with changes in the content of the majority opinion drafts,
this approach shows whose expressed preferences are incorporated into the
opinion and provides the first empirical test to determine which members of the
Court are influential in shaping the opinion content. As it will provide an
unprecedented look into the opinion writing process, this project promises to
improve our understanding of the collegial interactions that produce the Court's
opinion. Combining these data with information on institutional factors, justice
characteristics, and case facts, this research will provide insight into the
development of the legal opinions that shape national policy. The new data will
advance our understanding of the development of law, while carefully exploring
the strategic actions by members of a collegial body constrained by its own
membership, inter- and intra-branch politics, and legal considerations.

The database from this project will be made available to scholars, allowing wide
scholarly participation in reconsideration of strategies of Supreme Court
decisionmaking.