* 1228657
* Investigating Academic Climates and Institutional Contexts for Science Faculty with Education Specialties (SFES) across the U.S.
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* James Rudd, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 77,054.00

This is an exploratory study of the role of Science Faculty with Education
Specialties (SFES) in traditional STEM departments. These are faculty scientists
who take on specialized roles in science education in their discipline. The
enrichment of university science departments with SFES faculty members has begun
to emerge as a response to critical challenges in three key arenas in U.S.
science education: 1) discipline-based science education research, 2)
undergraduate science education, and 3) K-12 science education. This project is
examining academic climates and institutional contexts for SFES positions
addressing the research question "In what institutional contexts have SFES
positions emerged, what has motivated this, and what is the perceived impact of
SFES?" The study is examining explicitly the various perspectives in different
science disciplines and at different institution types; primarily undergraduate,
MS-granting, and PhD-granting institutions. In addressing the main research
question, the study is focusing on three underlying questions:&lt;br/&gt;- What
are the initial reasons for creating SFES positions? &lt;br/&gt;- How do
departmental stakeholders (including the SFES faculty themselves) conceptualize
the purposes of SFES positions? &lt;br/&gt;- What is the impact and
institutional influence of SFES? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project lies in the need to understand the roles and impacts of SFES
faculty, particularly their contribution to a reform agenda. Data are largely
absent. The cross-disciplinary research team is qualified to examine SFES
nationally because of its work defining the SFES field. It has recently
completed a national survey to determine who are in the national SFES faculty
based on a combination of factors, including self-identification. The national
survey data and this exploratory study of the SFES academic climates in
different departments and institutional contexts are possible indicators of
readiness to engage in evidence based teaching reforms at the departmental
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this study is its potential
value to funders and policymakers seeking to improve undergraduate STEM
education.