* 1228917
* MRI:  Acquisition of a THz Spectroscopic Ellipsometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Nikolas Podraza, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 530,000.00

This award to the University of Toledo is for the acquisition of a Terahertz
Spectroscopic Ellipsometer to measure optical properties and structure of
materials over a range from 0.11 to 1.45 THz. Optical properties in this region
are expected to be sensitive to vibrational modes and absorption due to free
carriers; and spectroscopic ellipsometry can also be used to deduce layer
thicknesses, interfacial formation, and gradients. In the THz regime, optical
properties approach the DC limit, thus they can be used to extrapolate
electrical properties of materials (carrier concentration, mobility, etc.). The
ability to extract electrical properties from a non-contacting optical
measurement is particularly attractive for probing materials in device
structures or where traditional electrical characterization is difficult
including photovoltaic materials and devices; microbolometer materials for
uncooled infrared sensors; structured materials including nanoparticle films,
carbon nanotube films, metamaterials, and engineered thin films; ferroelectrics
and other oxide materials; thin film transistors; and, polymer thin films.

The THz Spectroscopic Ellipsometer at the University of Toledo will assist in
graduate and undergraduate student research, as well as enabling collaborations
between researchers at other universities, government laboratories, and
industry, in uncovering connections between optical, electrical, and structural
properties of materials. It is believed to be the only tool of its kind
available on both a user fee and collaborative basis and is expected to provide
new opportunities and further develop networks of measurement and analytical
expertise. Research resulting from THz spectroscopic ellipsometry has strong
potential to uncover new fundamental information and will enhance the knowledge
base of physical mechanisms in materials and devices for technological
(component layers in electronic circuits), security (chemical and infrared
sensors), and energy (photovoltaics) applications. Simultaneously, it will
enable the research training of the next generation of scientists and engineers,
who will further develop its capabilities and apply them in exploring new
research areas.