* 1228576
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Stability and Trait-based Predictors of Eyewitness Performance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Brian Bornstein, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 02/28/2015
* USD 17,471.00

Are witnesses who are accurate at identifying a suspect?s face in a lineup
consistently accurate at identifying suspects or in saying what happened during
a crime? Given that erroneous eyewitness testimony contributes to wrongful
convictions and that jurors give great weight to eyewitness testimony, knowing
whether witness accuracy is stable would be helpful. Traditional eyewitness
research does not answer these questions, as most studies examine eyewitness
memory for only a single witnessed event. Thus, this project seeks to
investigate: (1) the stability of witness memory performance, both within and
across witness tasks (e.g., lineups, witness reports of criminal events, and
resistance to misinformation) and (2) the strength of a number of individual
difference variables, including personality and cognitive traits, in predicting
eyewitness performance.

The project will examine the stability of witness accuracy both within and
across witness accuracy tasks (lineup identification accuracy; accurate memory
of the events; and resistance to misleading post-event information about the
events) for five brief witnessed events across multiple study sessions. The use
of repeated witness tasks for five separate witness events will permit a more
sensitive, more generalizable measure of witness accuracy than in prior
research.

The stability of witness accuracy has important broader impacts for decision
makers (e.g., jurors, prosecutors, police officers, etc.) in the criminal
justice system in evaluating the probable accuracy of witness statements or
conflicting statements of different witnesses, given that real world witnesses
need to be accurate in both their identifications and their event reports
regarding a crime. Further, the proposed procedure may provide a new paradigm
for investigating witness accuracy. The project will also support the training
of a graduate student and expose undergraduate research assistants to the
research process.