* 1228554
* Law and Social Science Dissertation Fellowship &amp; Mentoring Program 2013-2018
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Carroll Seron, Law and Society Association
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 304,000.00

This project will support the Law and Social Science Pre-Dissertation Fellowship
and Mentoring Program administered through the Law and Society Association (LSA)
and the American Bar Foundation (ABF) in conjunction with a faculty advisory and
mentoring board. NSF funding will support a national search to identify and
recruit eight academically talented graduate students who will complete two-year
fellowships in Law and Social Science in residence at the ABF over the next five
years. In their residence at ABF, fellows will have office space and facilities
and will participate in all the activities in which ABF dissertation fellows
participate. Fellows will receive living stipends to support two years of
graduate study in a Ph.D. program in the social sciences. LSA will match each
fellow with two individual mentors who are established scholars in the law and
social science field. Additionally, LSA will provide collective mentoring in
partnership with ABF through a series of workshops, colloquia, and conferences
for fellows designed to nurture and sustain intellectual networks between
fellows and established scholars in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Fellowships have two broad objectives: to enhance the capacity for rigorous,
interdisciplinary, social scientific research on law and inequality, and to
increase the diversity of scholars in the law and social science field, with
special attention to increasing the number of researchers from underrepresented
racial and ethnic minorities.