* 1228563
* Collaborative Research: Scientific Program Overview--Convective Transport of Active Species in the Tropics (CONTRAST)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Elliot Atlas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 18,736.00

This project will measure the transport of reactive chemical species into the
tropical Tropopause Transition Layer (TTL) over the Western Pacific warm pool
region during boreal winter when tropospheric air masses in this region are
preferentially transported into the lower stratosphere. The sources, chemical
evolution, and transport of trace gases and their degradation products in this
region can substantially impact the chemistry of the lower stratosphere but, to
date, relatively few measurements have been made and, consequently, our
understanding of and ability to predict the associated processes and feedbacks
are uncertain. The extremely low ozone concentrations measured with ozonesondes
are expected to result in very low levels of OH radicals and, thus, longer
lifetimes for reactive gases whose primary sinks are oxidation pathways
involving OH. The simultaneous occurrence of deep convection and prolonged
lifetime of organic compounds in the TTL can significantly impact the
stratospheric halogen budget. Because the chemical and radiative properties of
this region are key factors in the mechanisms that link atmospheric composition
and climate forcing, the CONTRAST experiment will provide measurements necessary
to diagnose, constrain, and improve chemistry-climate models. A suite of gases,
particles, and meteorological parameters will be measured in situ from the NSF
GV aircraft and interpreted to elucidate the roles of active convection and
long-range transport on the vertically resolved chemical composition of the
tropical atmosphere particularly in the altitude region that dominates
convective outflow (12-14 km). Moreover, CONTRAST will be scheduled and
coordinated in collaboration with two other airborne studies planned for the
same time and geographic location: The NASA EV1 project ATTREX (Airborne
Tropical Tropopause Experiment) and the European CAST (Coordinated Airborne
Studies in the Tropics). With complementary instrument payloads, coordinated
flights of the GV, the NASA Global Hawk, and the UK Bae146 will provide an
unprecedented examination of the full atmospheric column, from surface to &gt;19
km, over the tropical western Pacific Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique
suite of benchmark measurements under the auspices of CONTRAST will improve
fundamental understanding of convective transport processes in the tropics and
our ability to model the role of deep convection in chemistry-climate
interactions. The project will train students in atmospheric chemistry who are
directly involved in the deployment and subsequent data analysis and modeling
activities. Broader education and outreach activities will be developed using
web-based tools and media.