* 1228897
* MRI:   Acquisition of X-Ray protein crystallography equipment at Northeastern University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2013
* USD 388,723.00

This grant is for the purchase of X-ray macromolecular crystallography equipment
at Northeastern University. X-ray crystallography provides one of the most
powerful venues for the visualization of proteins and other macromolecules in
three dimensions at near atomic resolution. It is at the heart of structural
biology, giving access to experimental data that allows scientists to make the
connection between what molecules "look like" and how they function. The
HighFlux HomeLab, consisting of the Rigaku MicroMax-007HF X-ray generator, with
state-of-the-art optics, X-ray detector and cryo-system, enables high-quality
crystallographic data collection with secure and automated features that
facilitate access to research groups with diverse scientific interests and
expertise. Until recently the kind of data that reveals molecular details of
biological molecules at atomic resolution, particularly for small and fragile
crystals, required travel to national laboratories such as the Advanced Photon
Source at Argonne National Laboratory and other synchrotron X-ray sources.
Synchrotron facilities are available to a specialized group of scientists with
extensive experience in crystallography. The HighFlux HomeLab at Northeastern
University will provide the venue for expert X-ray crystallographers to perform
cutting edge research with close involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students as well as for non-experts to expand the scope of their research to
include structural biology. This equipment is highly complementary to structural
biology equipment already present at Northeastern in the areas of Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy, Mass Spectrometry, Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance spectroscopy and computational equipment, thus completing the major
set of biophysical approaches used in state of the art structural biology
research. Scientific questions being addressed through this project will help
elucidate fundamental understanding of cell signaling, DNA damage and repair,
enzyme catalysis as well as more practical applications of structural biology to
energy production, human disease and biomolecular engineering, the success of
which is built on understanding fundamental processes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Central to the use of the X-ray equipment will be a course in
Macromolecular Crystallography, staged in the form of a workshop designed to
integrate research, teaching and training in structural biology. Northeastern is
at the forefront of experiential learning, with a Co-op system that places
undergraduates in laboratories across campus, in the Boston area and beyond, for
extended periods of full time research. The workshop will have input and support
from the PI and coPIs, a facility's manager with a Ph.D. and extensive
experience in macromolecular crystallography, an academic specialist and a
graduate teaching assistant. This workshop course will welcome faculty, graduate
and undergraduate students interested in X-ray data collection, structure
refinement and analysis. Students will be encouraged to bring their own
crystals, but projects will also be available associated with the PI's and
coPI's research groups. As research in the 21st century becomes ever more
multidisciplinary, this course will provide "hands on" experience so that
researchers in various areas of expertise can integrate structural biology in
thinking about their science, with the ability to make a critical assessment not
only of structures collected at Northeastern, but also of those deposited in the
Protein Data Bank, along with the associated data. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
highly integrated research, teaching and learning environment enabled by this
project will take place in a very diverse environment in terms of the
researchers involved. In addition to being highly productive scholars the senior
personnel on this project are diverse in terms of race, ethnicity and gender.
Four out of the five are women, one Latina, one Native American and one African
American. Current graduate and undergraduate students in the PI's and coPI's
laboratories include 26 women, 18 men, 5 African Americans, 2 Native Americans
and 1 Latina. Young women and minorities on this project will see the
possibilities of success for themselves as reflected in their role models and
will be encouraged to continue to do science, helping to increase representation
for these groups in our scientific research communities nation wide.