* 1228498
* Student Travel Grants to Attend the Second Networking Networking Women (N2Women) Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Violet Syrotiuk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Networking Networking Women (N2Women) fosters connections among women in
networking and communications research community in which women are
underrepresented. This award supports students from U.S. institutions to attend
the Second N2Women Workshop co-located with IEEE INFOCOM 2012, the 31st Annual
International Conference on Computer Communications. INFOCOM will be held March
25-30, 2012 in Orlando, Florida. The N2Women workshop is scheduled on the day
before the main conference begins (Monday, March 26th, 2012), allowing the
attendees to form connections that can then be strengthened if they also attend
the conference. Priority is given to students who will benefit from attending
the workshop, but are unlikely to attend due to the unavailability of travel
funding. Students attending the workshop are encouraged to stay and attend
INFOCOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposal includes contributions that the student
participants themselves will gain from and make to the N2Women Workshop; the
information and connections that could positively impact their future research,
and the co-location that allows them to participate in INFOCOM 2012, a premier
conference in networking and communications. The exposure to the technical
content of the N2Women Workshop (and to INFOCOM 2012 if they attend) is expected
to inspire students to address challenging research problems in their field and
to help them meet their long-term research goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this proposal is the
professional development of the under-represented graduate students that under
this grant are able to attend the N2Women Workshop. The grant provides these
graduate students the opportunity to attend high-caliber technical presentations
from keynote speakers, be exposed to state-of-the-art research in a poster
session, participate in mentoring sessions with leading researchers, and network
with fellow graduate students. The goal is to make long-term positive impacts on
the students? careers.