* 1228958
* MRI: Acquisition of a Terahertz System for Medical and Biological Imaging and Nanomaterial Characterization Research at the University of Arkansas
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to support non-destructive, non-hazardous and
non-invasive imaging applications in engineering, medical, and biological
sciences. The approach is based on pulsed terahertz spectroscopy and imaging
that has a spectral range from 0.06 to 3 terahertz with high resolution up to 80
Ým. &lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this project lies in its contribution
to our understanding and utilization of terahertz radiation and imaging
techniques in a wide variety of applications. These include investigating breast
tumor margins of excised tissue to help reduce cancer recurrence; guiding the
fabrication of nano-acoustic imaging materials and devices; studying water
content and fungal presence in ecological research, and understanding and
monitoring thermal ablation for cancer therapy. The advantage of terahertz light
over visible light is that scattering is less allowing imaging deep into an
object.&lt;br/&gt; The availability of the terahertz instrument has significant
broader impact through providing access to unique education, research and
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. Underrepresented students will be engaged in training opportunities
through diversity initiatives at the University of Arkansas. Terahertz
technology provides non-destructive and rapid characterization of coating
materials that will impact automobile, aircraft, food, pharmaceutical,
semiconductor, and solar photovoltaic energy industry. The capability of
terahertz medical imaging will advance oral healthcare and skin and breast
cancer detection and treatment. Terahertz technology provides safe imaging and
screening that will advance the identification of hidden explosives and
personnel screening at airports and mail screening for bio-threats, which will
impact national security.