* 1228828
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Deconstructing Encryption
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Benjamin Morris, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 475,001.00

Cryptographers have invented many different types of encryption. The PIs'
research brings many of these under one umbrella, thereby reconceptualizing the
landscape of modern cryptography. In the process, the research puts forward some
entirely new kinds of encryption. The work is motivated by the needs of existing
security practice. Sample questions include how to save space when storing
encrypted copies of the same material in the cloud, and how to encrypt a credit-
card number by reimagining the process as the shuffling of a deck of cards. The
research demonstrates the practical benefits to cryptography and security from
inclusive reinterpretations what encryption does.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, leaky encryption formalizes what it means to divulge some particular
function of the message, unifying notions like blockciphers, online ciphers, and
order-preserving encryption. Shuffle-based encryption creates blockciphers in a
way fundamentally different from the way Feistel and SP networks do. Message-
locked encryption can encrypt with a key derived from the message itself, to
enable secure de-duplication. Password-based encryption incorporates a "salt" to
provide what the PIs call multi-instance security. Circuit encryption can
encrypt a circuit and its input to ciphertexts that permit the evaluation of the
one on the other, but in a way that reveals only correctly computed result.
These are just some of the aims the research encompasses.