* 1228150
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Frontier of the Heartland: Chimu Imperial Strategies in the Sinsicap Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Alicia Boswell, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,200.00

Under Dr. Paul Goldstein, Alicia Boswell will examine how the late prehistoric
Chimu empire interacted with residents in the adjacent Sinsicap Valley in Peru.
The goal is to understand Chimú imperial strategies in the valley. By collecting
data related to site architectural patterns, domestic activities, economics, and
subsistence patterns this excavation strategy allows a comparative study of the
domestic activities of two sites occupied during Chimú
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is relevant to imperial studies
both within and outside the Andes, as its methodological approach emphasizes
subject groups' degree of leeway and the extent to which they can pursue their
own goals. Examining inhabitants' households and how practices changed over time
is an important, but underutilized perspective in imperial studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sinsicap Valley is a tributary of the Moche river
within the chaupiyunga ecological niche. Located between the coast and the
highlands, the chaupiyunga (500-2,000 masl) is the only ecological zone on the
western slope of the Andes that produces coca, a highly valued resource
important for ritual and other traditional Andean strategies of political
economy. Another crucial attribute of the chaupiyunga is its intermediary
location between densely populated coast and highland polities with whom
residents of this region maintained exchange relations throughout prehistory. In
spite of its resources and strategic geographical location little archaeological
investigation has occurred in this zone. Ethnohistoric and preliminary
archaeological evidence collected by Boswell indicate a Chimú presence in the
Sinsicap Valley. An additional consideration in this study is the close
proximity of the Sinsicap Valley to the urban Chimú capital Chan Chan, located
at the mouth of the Moche Valley on the coast. The Sinsicap Valley is only forty
kilometers from Chan Chan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the northern and
southern frontiers of the Chimú Empire have examined administrative centers and
associated sites to understand Chimú expansion, finding the use of diverse
imperial strategies had a transformative impact on conquered territories and
populations. Researchers have focused on how the Chimú interacted with other
coastal polities, overlooking Chimú interaction with populations on its eastern
frontier and its implications for understanding the empire. This project will
further understanding of Chimú imperialism and Andean coastal polities'
interaction with populations in other ecological zones.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project emphasizes international collaboration as
archaeologists and students from Peru and the United States will work together
throughout the project. Project results will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
publications in both English and Spanish, while the raw data will be made
available for public use. Boswell has organized a partnership between MOCHE,
INC, a 501c3 non-profit organization, and the Communidad Campesina Emiliana
Gonzalez Obregoso de Collambay of the Sinsicap Valley. Community members have
agreed to protect local archaeological sites from looting in return for
assistance in development projects. This partnership is an essential component
in developing local awareness of the importance of preserving local
archaeological sites/resources. Boswell will continue to promote the cultural
heritage of the Sinsicap Valley through presentation of her research at
community meetings and schools in the region.