* 1228091
* BRIGE: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Assisted Dynamic Positron Emission Tomography Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Jing Tang, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2015
* USD 174,648.00

PI: Jing Tang Institution: Oakland University Title: BRIGE: Magnetic Resonance
Imaging Assisted Dynamic Positron Emission Tomography Imaging

ABSTRACT

Intellectual Merit: Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging measures
physiological and biological processes of human or animal bodies quantitatively.
Despite its well-demonstrated value in preclinical studies and clinical
diagnostics, PET imaging still faces two major challenges, the inherently noisy
data and limited spatial resolution. These problems especially limit the
accuracy and reliability of the dynamic parameter estimation due to subdivision
of data into shorter frames. The arrival of integrated whole-body PET/magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) provides new opportunities to fully take advantage of
the simultaneously acquired high resolution anatomical information. The research
objective of this BRIGE proposal is to investigate noise control and resolution
recovery simultaneously in dynamic PET imaging using MRI measured anatomical
information. The proposed research focuses on investigating novel 3D and 4D
spatial-temporal PET image reconstruction methods to improve estimating
myocardial blood flow parametric images. The research on anatomy guided 3D
functional image reconstruction will improve the noise versus bias tradeoff
especially for functional regions with no anatomical correspondence. The study
on anatomy guided 4D direct parametric image reconstruction will significantly
improve the capability of dynamic PET imaging to estimate cardiac kinetic
parameters. When successfully completed, the proposal leads the way on
integrating anatomical information in functional image formation of whole-body
PET/MRI. Meanwhile, it will achieve a breakthrough on non-invasively quantifying
myocardial blood flow, especially on detecting reduced regional tracer
transport, contributing to the diagnosis and treatment of coronary artery
disease.

Broader Impacts: Hybrid PET/MRI represents the frontier challenge for molecular
imaging technology. Given the increasing popularity of multimodality imaging, it
is worth noting that no anatomy-assisted functional image formation framework is
provided by any major player in the molecular imaging market. The project will
be an important further incentive beyond the primary motivation to facilitate
anatomical localization of functional abnormalities, improving the clinical
relevance of multimodality imaging. The proposed broadening participation
activities are expected to recruit and retain underrepresented groups in the
engineering discipline. The 'I See You' workshop on Biomedical Imaging for high
school students from the Detroit area will increase the number of historically
under-represented minority students to pursue careers in engineering. The new
Biomedical Engineering curriculum and Biomedical Imaging course will meet the
growing demand of students from the southeastern Michigan area and attract more
female students to engineering. Through this project, the PI will also provide
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students recruited
following procedures that have successfully attracted talented female and
minority students.