* 1228602
* International Human Rights Law and Political Asylum in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Stephen Meili, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 12/31/2013
* USD 75,000.00

The proposed project will develop an empirically-tested theory about when
international human rights law is referenced in asylum cases. It will analyze
asylum decisions by courts and administrative tribunals since 1990 in the United
Kingdom according to the way that judges rely on or otherwise reference human
rights treaties. Decisions will be coded in order to determine whether the
impact of such treaties depends on factors such as incorporation of the treaty
into domestic law, the country of origin of the asylum applicant, and the gender
of the applicant and judge. The project also features semi-structured interviews
with U.K. refugee lawyers to determine the circumstances under which they
believe invoking human rights treaties helps or hurts their clients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances three interrelated branches
of socio-legal scholarship: the efficacy of international human rights treaties;
the human rights approach to refugee law, and cause lawyering. It takes a
nuanced approach toward the efficacy debate, positing that rather than an all or
nothing matter, the impact of human rights treaties depends on several factors,
including those identified above. Rather than assuming that such treaties
invariably benefit refugees, the project asserts that in some cases they may do
more harm than good. And the project examines how cause lawyers representing
non-citizens utilize human rights law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project impacts
legal advocacy, legal training, and legal scholarship. First, it will identify
ways that lawyers representing asylum-seekers might use international human
rights law to more effectively advocate for their clients. Second, it will
educate future lawyers by incorporating law students into a team-based project
that includes training in empirical methods and complex case analysis. And
third, it will contribute to the scholarly debate over principled and strategic
uses of international law, focusing on asylum and human rights.