* 1228359
* A Model Reduction Approach to Stochastic PDEs: Forward Uncertainty Propagation and Stochastic Homogenization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gregory Beylkin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 448,994.00

This project seeks to develop a new theory, algorithms, and computational tools
to enable a linearly scalable characterization and solution of partial
differential equations (PDEs) with high-dimensional random inputs. In realistic
situations where the dynamics of a system is intrinsically variable or
understanding of the underlying physical laws is incomplete, there is a need to
represent and quantify the impact of such uncertainties on quantities of
interest. A fundamental difficulty arises when the number of independent sources
of uncertainty is large. In these situations, standard approaches to the
solution of PDEs with uncertain inputs encounter an exponential growth of
computational complexity, i.e., the so-called curse-of-dimensionality. The
proposed effort tackles this issue through a new approach to stochastic model
reduction based on low-rank separated representation of multi-variate solutions.
Both reduced-order characterization, via numerical homogenization, and forward
propagation of uncertainties will be considered. While this approach is
applicable to a wide variety of stochastic PDE-based models, this project is
primarily focused on the solution of nonlinear, advection-reaction-diffusion
equations with high-dimensional stochastic velocity and diffusion fields.

One of the major problems of interest in science and engineering is the
prediction of multi-scale and multi-physics systems with high-dimensional
uncertainties. Examples are common in combustion, energy storage systems, fusion
energy, among others. The new numerical techniques of this award, based upon
recent ideas from nonlinear, multi-linear, and sparse approximation of functions
with many variables, will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in computer
simulation of such problems. To further broaden the impact of this project, the
PIs will develop graduate level service courses to introduce the new uncertainty
quantification methods to researchers working on complex systems.