* 1228195
* Mixed mode transition
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Durbin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,705.00

1228195 Durbin

The general area of this research is the transition of fluid flow from a laminar
to a turbulent condition. The specific research is into the influence of free-
stream turbulence and instability modes on transition in non-equilibrium
boundary layers. This is particularly relevant to applications in aerodynamics,
most importantly aircraft engines. The research program addresses basic
questions, but it includes development of practical prediction methods that can
be used in engineering design; its scope has benefited from advice from
colleagues in industry.

The present research addresses fundamental aspects of the 'mixed mode'
interaction between effects of disturbances induced in the boundary layer by
ambient turbulence and instability waves that grow on the boundary layer shear.
The research then moves on to more challenging, and practically important
aspects of this subject as such the need for semi-empirical techniques that can
be used for predictive purposes in computational fluid dynamics codes. This
study will extend model capabilities and provide data for developing and testing
such techniques. The modeling is a concrete link to engineering needs for
practical predictive ability. A conceptual framework of theory and computer
simulations of 'bypass transition' under free-stream turbulence has previously
lead to advances in our fundamental under- standing and practical prediction
ability in that area. The present project will contribute an understanding and
extend our modeling capability of the 'mixed mode', where in- stability waves
occur beneath free-stream disturbances. Again, a theoretical perspective can be
developed from linear, and weakly nonlinear, theory. To extend the mathematical
framework for this work, computer simulations and specialized data analysis
techniques will explore the fully non-linear processes at play. Simulation will
also create benchmark data for use in model development. These data will be made
available to the community for transition research. The computer simulations
will provide projects on data processing and visualization to undergraduates in
aerospace engineering. In addition to the experience with large data sets, they
will see fluid dynamics from a perspective quite different from their course
work.