* 1228512
* EAGER: On-Chip Optical Amplifier Using Novel Erbium-Chloride Silicate Single Crystal Nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Cun-Zheng Ning, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to conduct early stage exploratory research to
develop a high-gain on-chip optical amplifier using erbium chloride silicate, a
novel material recently synthesized by the PI's group. The main advantage of the
new material is the high quality of the single crystals with high erbium
density. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits lie in the novelty of
materials, the importance of the fundamental understanding of this important
class of materials, and the potential impact to on-chip nanophotonic systems.
Understanding the fundamental issues such as lifetimes of various states and
linewidths of the transitions would impact many future device applications. The
transformative aspect of this research is the paradigm shift from doped
materials to rare-earth compounds as high gain materials. Optical amplifiers on
the scale of 100 nanometers would provide a game-changing solution for on-chip
nanophotonic systems, allowing for unprecedentedly large-scale integration of
computing and communication functionalities. Such high-risk and high pay-off
research is ideally suited for an EAGER project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposed research includes an array of other applications
such as quantum information at telecomm wavelengths and on-chip atomic clocks.
The enabled photonic capabilities would fundamentally revolutionize and
potentially unify electronics-based computing and photonics-based communication,
impacting information technology and our society in general. The proposed
efforts will also integrate research with education of minority and female
students. The results of the research will be rapidly incorporated into
undergraduate projects and graduate curriculum, so that education can benefit
from the proposed research in a timely fashion.