* 1228453
* Collaborative Research:  The Law and Politics of Antitrust in Open Economies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Anu Bradford, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 08/31/2016
* USD 110,000.00

Antitrust law prohibits cartels and other anti-competitive practices in order to
safeguard consumer interests and promote market efficiency and innovation. Legal
doctrines, theoretical models, and empirical analyses of antitrust traditionally
assume "closed" economies, where the boundaries of the market and the nation
state coincide. Yet today, foreign firms often compete in U.S. markets, and
exports are increasingly important for U.S. firms. This project offers a new
understanding of antitrust in open economies and gathers extensive new data on
antitrust laws and enforcement to allow systematic analyses of the relationship
between trade and antitrust. Two decades ago, less than forty countries had
antitrust laws. Today, more than one hundred thirty countries do. Strikingly,
this rapid proliferation of antitrust laws has coincided with substantial
liberalization of international trade, even though trade openness has
conventionally been thought to reduce the need for antitrust by increasing
market competition. This raises the concern whether governments are enacting and
enforcing antitrust laws with a protectionist bias against foreign producers.
Alternatively, trade openness may require more vigorous enforcement and lead to
increased international enforcement cooperation, because open trade creates
greater opportunities and incentives for international antitrust violations.
This project examines the trade-antitrust relationship theoretically, as well as
empirically by collecting new data on antitrust laws and enforcement (at the
industry level over several decades in the United States and in the aggregate
for numerous other countries). It thus provides a stronger theoretical and
empirical foundation for the important policy debate over an international
antitrust regime. More broadly, it will improve our understanding of how law
mediates the relationship between politics and economics, elucidate the effects
of delegating authority to expert bodies in a crucial issue area, and advance
our understanding of the political and policy consequences of economic
globalization.

The project will also train graduate students and law students in methods of
social science research. In addition, it will create a database that will be
useful to other scholars interested in trade and antitrust, a pressing public
economic issue.