* 1228847
* TTP: Medium: Securing the Wireless Philadelphia Network
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Spiros Mancoridis, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,080,445.00

The Wireless Philadelphia Network (WPN) is a metropolitan?area network (MAN)
consisting of thousands of Tropos 5210 wireless mesh routers distributed across
the entire city of Philadelphia and connected by a fiber backbone. This project
is employing this network as a testbed to investigate three diverse security
challenges facing any large-scale wireless network servicing a heterogeneous
population. The first challenge is in efficient network anomaly detection
algorithms, and the proposed solution is to investigate the efficacy of both
compressive sampling and distributed source coding based approaches in reducing
the amount of data that must be transmitted to the anomaly detector. The second
challenge is physical layer security in wireless networks, and the proposed
solution is to use physical layer based encryption algorithms and user
authentication. The third challenge is anomaly detection at the application
layer, in particular for web servers, and the proposed solution is to develop
software sensors on the hardware, operating system, virtual machine, and
application server, and develop rules for identifying possible anomalies using
these metrics. Besides the intellectual merit of these challenges, the project
has several broader impacts. First, low-income residents gain Internet access
through integration with the Freedom Rings Partnership. Second, students
participate in community service based engineering design projects. Finally,
curricular enhancements and the recruitment of women and minority graduate
students improve the educational and diversity missions at our university.