* 1228813
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Capturing People's Expectations of Privacy with Mobile Apps by Combining Automated Scanning and Crowdsourcing Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joy Ying Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2016
* USD 822,356.00

The goal of our work is to (a) capture people's expectations and surprises in
using mobile apps in a scalable manner, and to (b) summarize these perceptions
in a simple format to help people make better trust decisions. Our main idea is
analyzing privacy in the form of people's expectations about what an app will
and won't do, focusing on where an app breaks people's expectations. We are
building an App Scanner that combines automated scanning techniques with
crowdsourcing. Automated scanning captures the behavior of an app, while
crowdsourcing is used to interpret how expected and acceptable this behavior is.
This information is used as the basis for building a better privacy summary for
apps. We have organized an interdisciplinary team with expertise in mobile
computing, computer security, systems, and human-computer
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in this work will include results in:
(a) the design and implementation of an App Scanner that combines automated
techniques with crowdsourcing techniques for analyzing and interpreting privacy-
related behaviors of mobile apps; (b) a series of evaluations of this app
scanner, showing effectiveness, accuracy, and scalability; (c) the design and
evaluation of better privacy summaries, which prioritize and highlight the most
unexpected behaviors of an app; and (d) demonstration of a new conceptualization
of privacy, namely privacy as expectations. Success will also help end-users,
corporate and government employees manage their privacy better than can be done
today.