* 1228215
* 13th International Conference on Aluminum Alloys (ICAA-13); to be held June 3-7, 2012 at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, PA.
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Anthony Rollett, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Aluminum and its alloys continue to be among the most important materials in use
today. Aluminum in involved in various systems to enhance efficiency and
material conservation in applications as diverse as transportation, electrical
power transmission, electronic packaging, building and construction. NSF funds
are requested for partial support of the 13th International Conference on
Aluminum Alloys (ICAA-13), to be held June 3 to 7, 2012, at Carnegie-Mellon
University (CMU), Pittsburgh, PA. This conference is a specialty conference on
Aluminum and its alloys, which is organized by the ICAA International Committee.
The technical program consists of ten sessions covering a wide range of topics,
which describe scientific breakthroughs in computational modeling, processing
techniques, recycling technologies, and the production of novel materials with
promising combinations of properties and economic viability. ICAA-13 will bring
together researchers from the industrial, national, and university communities,
both experimental and theoretical, to discuss the latest scientific and
technological developments, as well as the future of aluminum. More than 420
abstracts have been received from researchers worldwide, representing a number
of countries across the continents of North and South America, Asia, Europe, and
Australia. This conference will cover the most critical and strongly growing
subject areas in aluminum materials science. The funding is requested to provide
domestic travel and registration for students and postdoctoral researchers, and
registrations for several young faculty members. Support is provided by three
NSF Programs: Metals and Metallic Nanostructures, Materials and Surface
Engineering and Condensed Matter and Materials Theory.