* 1228436
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Automation of Compliance: Techno-Legal Regulation in the United States Trucking Industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Karen Levy, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,327.00

Rules of all types are increasingly enforced by technological mechanisms; from
code-based restrictions on sharing digital files, to red-light cameras at
intersections, to software programs that monitor activity online. Technological
enforcement regimes appeal to policymakers because machines enforce rules more
perfectly than humans do; human enforcement is messier due to the discretion,
incentives, and biases of both enforcers and enforcees. Technological rule
enforcement, then, appears to close the gap between rule and practice by
minimizing the human element and compelling compliance with a rule. This project
explores how technological enforcement regimes may, in fact, relocate and
reshape gaps between "on the books" rules and "on the ground" practices by
creating new sites of social contestation, bringing new parties into negotiation
with one another, and resituating stakeholders'
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of methods, including
interviewing key stakeholders, analyzing documents in archives, and analyzing
regulatory dockets, these dynamics are explored in the context of truck drivers'
work time. For decades, truckers have kept track of their work hours, which are
limited by federal regulations for safety reasons, using easily falsified paper
logs. New regulations would mandate that drivers' time be automatically
monitored by electronic devices integrated into trucks themselves, thus
compelling drivers' compliance with timekeeping rules. This project examines the
co-evolution of legal rules and technological capacities that shape enforcement
practices, and the ways in which social relationships among employees,
employers, and law enforcement are reconfigured when such systems are
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from scholarship in legal studies and
organizational sociology, this project updates and reorients our understanding
of regulation, enforcement, and discretion for the age of ubiquitous computing.
The project contributes to broad social debates about the role of technological
surveillance in legal rulemaking and in social life, and will be of interest to
audiences in multiple academic disciplines, to policymakers, and to
organizations.