* 1229193
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Digital Particle Image Velocimetry System for Studying Fluid Flow Around Organismal, Robotic and Marine Structures
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jason Dahl, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 207,028.00

Funds will be used to purchase a digital particle image velocimetry (DPIV)
system that will enable students and researchers to visualize and quantify fluid
flow around robotic biological, and marine structures using high-resolution
video recordings. DPIV is an experimental technique for quantitatively
visualizing fluid flow. The fluid medium is seeded with neutrally buoyant,
reflective particles that are illuminated by a sheet of laser light. Particle
movement is recorded by a camera, oriented perpendicular to the laser sheet.
Vector fields are calculated by evaluating the cross-correlation between groups
of particles in successive images. The requested DPIV system consists of a low-
speed high-resolution camera (up to 30 frames/s, 1648x1214 pixel resolution, 512
MB onboard memory, 14-bit digital output, 7.4x7.4 µm pixels, LaVision Imager Pro
X2M with PCII Frame Grabber), one high-speed high-resolution camera (1000 f/s at
full resolution, up to 60,000 f/s at reduced resolution, 12 bit digital output,
2GB onboard memory, 1024x1024 pixel resolution, 17x17µm pixels, LaVision
HighSpeedStar 3 GigE), and a high repetition laser (30 mJ/pulse @527nm at 1 kHz
repetition rate, with integrated chiller). Camera lenses include a: 50 mm F/1.8
lens, 50mm F/1.4 lens, variable magnification 12X zoom Navitar lens, and a
close-up zoom lens with an adaptor for microscopic use. Optics include an
adjustable lens with focal length between 300-2000 mm, one -10 mm, and one -20
mm focal length lens with anti-reflection coating. Particles are near neutrally
buoyant, reflective, hollow glass particles at a density of 15 mg/l. A camera is
synchronized to record simultaneously with the laser through a timing unit
managed by a control computer. A separate computer system runs each of the
camera systems (low- and high-speed) and each system is capable of controlling
the laser (quad-core processor PC, 2 GB Ram, 250 GB hard drive, RW DVD, 19"
monitor, software and camera interface, LaVision). DaVis v.7 software,
consisting of processing routines for 2D PIV/PTV (Particle Tracking
Velocimetry), is used for image acquisition, processing, and hardware control.
DaVis software allows calculation of velocity vectors and derivatives of the
flow field along with the visualization of streamlines, jets, vortices and other
fluid structures. The kinematics of flow structures are derived by compiling the
images over time using ProAnalyst software for digitizing and 2D structure
design. Quantitative flow visualization performed in specific projects will
include characterizing fluid flow around shark fins, analyzing advective effects
on plankton swimming and distributions, calculating friction and drag forces on
SONAR components, characterizing flow separation on underwater vehicles and
unsteady renewable energy devices, and determining drag effects due to biofilm
formation and biofouling onsurfaces submerged in marine
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative characterization of fluid
flows is of fundamental importance in both natural and engineered systems, where
the motion of fluid affects the morphology, function and ecology of organisms
and determines the forces exerted on marine structures. The requested system is
designed to enable experiments ranging from microscopic to macroscopic length
scales, in a range of fluid flow regimes and supports research in engineering,
life sciences and oceanography. The DPIV system will enable research projects
studying the flow around robotic, marine structures, sonar components and
biological systems ranging from bacteria and plankton to sharks. An
interdisciplinary team including biologists, engineers and oceanographers at
URI, Providence College, and Roger Williams University proposed an exciting set
of research projects that examine the role of fluid flow in (1) the fluid flow
around shark fins, (2) fluid effects on propulsion and predator prey
interactions of gelatinous zooplankton, (3) fluid effects on the ecology and
distribution of planktonic organisms, (4) tribological studies of friction and
drag on SONR components, 5) drag and energy loss due to microbial growth on
surfaces submerged in marine environments, and (6) local flow detection for
feedback control of underwater vehicles and renewable energy devices.
Acquisition of the DPIV system provides critical capabilities that strengthen RI
higher education institutions' competitiveness in research and education. The
system will be used in undergraduate and graduate courses and both undergraduate
and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained to use the
DPIV system in their research. Students benefit from this hands-on learning
approach that relies on integrating basic scientific disciplines with
mathematical and analytical approaches in a practical and intuitive manner.