* 1229085
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Power, Tunable Diode Laser to Upgrade the Na Lidar System at the Andes Lidar Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Zhuangren Liu, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 02/29/2016
* USD 295,383.00

This is an award for the replacement of an aging master oscillator in the sodium
wind/temperature lidar at the Andes Lidar Observatory (ALO), located in Cerro
Pach√≥n, Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALO is an upper atmosphere observatory
that houses the Na lidar, several airglow instruments, and a nearby meteor
radar. The suite of instruments provides comprehensive measurements of the upper
atmosphere (80-110 km) in a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. The
master oscillator to be replaced is a Ring Dye Laser that has reached the end of
its useful lifetime after 20 years. The new frequency-doubled, high power,
tunable diode laser will be easier to operate, more reliable, and less expensive
to operate. The measurement made by the sodium lidar is a key component for the
investigation of wave dynamics in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere over the
Andes Mountains. With other co-located remote sensing instruments, the ALO will
provide the most detailed study to date of the characteristics of instabilities,
gravity waves, tides, planetary waves and mean winds in the southern hemisphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increased reliability and lower operational cost
directly translate to more data collected, which will enable and enhance these
research activities. The upgrade will not only make it possible to enhance ALO
research projects, but will also provide new education and training
opportunities for students expanding their exposure to upper atmosphere
research. In addition, unique opportunities exist for international
collaborations including El Leoncito, Argentina and the University of Adelaide,
Australia. The data collected at ALO will be available to the scientific
community for research on a wide range of scientific topics.