* 1229271
* Hierarchical Models for the Formation and Evolution of Ensembles of Social Networks
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Andrew Thomas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

This project deals with the development, testing, and deployment of models for
multiple social networks, particularly those with conditionally independent
ties. The project will explore their properties with respect to partial pooling
across networks, a case that includes a single network or ensemble of networks
observed over time. This research is motivated by problems in many sociological
fields, particularly education research, in which multiple groups of people form
their own networks, including students and teachers alike. The project will
build on preliminary constructions of the Hierarchical Latent Space Model and
the Hierarchical Mixed-Membership Stochastic Block Model by focusing on how
information can be pooled across networks, through hierarchical structure
specification, and how model parameters evolve through time, through model-
dependent autoregression or other smoothing methods. Multiple ways in which an
intervention can affect a subset of these networks also will be studied. These
models will use both simulated and real-world data to validate their
effectiveness. Standard methods for fitting these models, such as Markov Chain
Monte Carlo, will be used initially, though wider deployment of these models
will demand the development of quicker inferential procedures based on
Variational Inference and/or Sequential Monte Carlo. Finally, model validation
will be considered in each of these cases, in terms of comparison to other
models as well as the adequacy of a model's fit to
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data on multiple social networks arising
from the same generative mechanisms, and evolving over time together, are
becoming increasingly available in education research, public health, and the
social sciences. Instead of treating each network separately or assuming that
all come from exactly the same model (which is possible only in limited
circumstances), this project will provide a new, clearly formulated methodology
to deal with this type of data. Researchers in related fields will have the
opportunity to use the methods on their own research. Computer code for these
routines also will be made available.