* 1229489
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope Facility for Interdisciplinary Live Cell Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Stuart Dryer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 565,372.00

This Major Research Instrumentation grant will support the acquisition of a
fixed-stage upright confocal microscope and supporting computational
infrastructure for Life Science research at the University of Houston. The
acquired Leica confocal microscope will permit leading edge research into
diverse areas of the life sciences including neurobiology and behavior, cell
signaling, biochemistry and even evolution. Many established and junior
investigators will use the advanced capabilities of the confocal microscope to
address important questions, including: understanding the cellular mechanisms of
memory formation, the dynamics and regulation of cytoskeleton function, and the
biophysics of protein synthesis. This microscope is necessary both to maintain
confocal capabilities of the University of Houston, and to expand the ability
for investigations into new areas in biology and biochemistry. The state-of-the-
art confocal microscope will permit advanced techniques such as uncaging
neurotransmitters, fluorescence resonant energy transfer (FRET), and
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). The microscope will also be
used to establish collaborations with Computer Scientists to develop new
solutions for computer assisted image analysis research. The collaboration
between Life and Computer Scientists will facilitate new solutions for
increasing the quality and quantity of data extracted from imaging experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired confocal microscope and biological image
analysis computer facility will also be used to train postdocs, graduate and
undergraduate students, including many underrepresented minorities. The
University of Houston is the US?s second most ethnically diverse research
university, and the 23rd largest in the United States. The Department of Biology
and Biochemistry is the primary life science department at the University of
Houston and has almost 3,000 undergraduate majors. Approximately 1/3rd of these
majors are underrepresented minorities (11% African Americans, 21.5% Hispanic,
2% Native American). Many more of the Biology and Biochemistry undergraduates
are also first generation college students. The confocal microscope will be used
in undergraduate courses to train more than 400 undergraduate students per year
and two graduate levels courses in cellular neuroscience, providing yearly
training to approximately 20 graduate students in advanced microscopic
techniques. The confocal microscope will be used further in new summer workshops
on biological imaging for ~40 underrepresented minority undergraduate students.
These trained undergraduates will be recruited into faculty labs for research
projects that will use the acquired confocal microscope. The microscope will
provide an attractive focus for engaging students to actively participate in
life science and computer image analysis research programs. The confocal
microscope and computer analysis facility will transform the scientific
education of the Biology &amp; Biochemistry and the Computer Science Students at
the University of Houston.