* 1229956
* Leveraging Untapped Genetic Diversity in Soybean
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Scott Jackson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/29/2016
* USD 3,636,975.00

PI: Scott Jackson (Purdue University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Randy
Shoemaker (Iowa State University/USDA-ARS), Jeremy Schmutz (HudsonAlpha
Institute, Huntsville, Alabama), Jeff Doyle (Cornell University), Perry Cregan
(University of Maryland - College Park/USDA-ARS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Personnel: Jane Grimwood (HudsonAlpha Institute, Huntsville, Alabama), Jianxin
Ma and Jessica Schlueter (Purdue
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soybean (Glycine max) is an
important part of the US fuel and feed economy. However, genetic improvement of
soybean is beset by a lack of genetic diversity leaving soybean open to threats
of pests, pathogens and abiotic stresses. This project will develop a set of
tools that will allow investigators to leverage the recently released draft
soybean genome sequence to exploit genetic diversity in the genus Glycine and to
begin to understand the nature of species/genome diversification in the genus.
Important in this process is an understanding of the cycle of polyploidization
followed by diploidization found in this set of species. The specific objectives
are to: 1) overlay diversity maps onto the soybean genome sequence using genomic
clones from a set of phylogenetically informative Glycine species; 2) explore
genome evolution in the genus Glycine at the chromosomal/sequence level to
understand the polyploidy/diploidization cycle; 3) sequence targeted orthologous
regions across the Glycine species in order to understand levels of linkage
disequilibrium and genetic diversity that can be exploited for genetics and
breeding; and 4) integrate data with other legumes which is necessary to extend
its usefulness to other so-called "orphan" legumes such as common bean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will be the
development of an infrastructure that will be generally accessible by the
broader legume community to exploit diversity and understand genome evolution in
this economically important genus. The project will continue and expand a
successful outreach program targeted toward Native American and Hispanic
undergraduate institutions in the Southwest (primarily New Mexico and Arizona)
to provide summer research training opportunities and further develop
interactions with these faculty and students. All project data and tools will be
accessible though SoyBase at http://soybase.org/. Sequence data will be
deposited and accessible through GenBank and BAC clone resources will be
maintained and distributed on a cost-recovery basis by the Arizona Genome
Institute.