* 1229195
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Magnetic Field and Cryogen-Free Physical Property Measurement System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Gang Xiao, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 02/28/2014
* USD 279,790.00

This award supports the acquisition of a High Magnetic Field and Cryogen-Free
Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) at Brown University. It will enable
experimental studies of the physical properties of materials including
magnetism, electron transport, and thermodynamic properties. The instrument will
provide fundamental information about new materials actively being studied by
scientists from the disciplines of Physics, Chemistry, and Engineering. Proposed
research using the PPMS includes: (1) spintronics based on half-metallic
magnetic nanostructures, (2) magnetic nanoparticles for data storage, energy
storage and biomedical applications, (3) low dimensional superconducting
nanostructures, (4) type-II superconductors, (5) novel superconducting and spin
liquid states, and (6) semiconductor hetero-nanowires. By studying physical
properties over a wide range of temperatures and fields, scientists at Brown
will uncover the quantum mechanical behavior and physical mechanisms underlying
many novel and revolutionary materials. With this new instrument, they will have
the ability to investigate the ground state properties of their materials
directly, rather than rely on mere extrapolations of measurements conducted at
room temperature or low magnetic fields. Since the PPMS provides a myriad of
physical characterizations, they will be able to develop theoretical models that
can then be almost immediately tested by multiple types of measurements and
their correlations. The PPMS will open up new research opportunities for the
materials research programs, and will help to reveal as yet unexplored physical
phenomena while simultaneously producing devices of great practical
significance. The proposed research not only will advance the development of
material science, but also will lead to prototyping the next generations of
spin-based electronics and semiconductor devices, thereby directly influencing
the future development of the semiconductor industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
instrument will be used as an educational tool for graduate and undergraduate
training. With this instrument, they will be able to teach students the
fundamental properties of modern materials, develop a deeper understanding of
physical mechanisms, and also provide invaluable practical experience in
advanced characterization techniques. In particular, undergraduate students will
use this sophisticated instrument for their research projects, thereby offering
a unique opportunity for high-level investigations. These students will form the
next generation of materials scientists in the United States, ensuring the
development of the field and helping the US assume and maintain a preeminent
role. The proposed research will also generate new basic knowledge and data on
novel spintronic, superconducting, and semiconductor materials that can be
leveraged to develop potentially revolutionary devices for widespread
implementation in multiple arenas including information technology, medicine,
and education.