* 1229046
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Illumina HiSeq2000 as a core sequencing instrument for genomics and gene expression research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Claude dePamphilis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2015
* USD 569,419.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the purchase of an Illumina
HiSeq2500 DNA sequencing instrument for the Genomics Core Facility at Penn
State's University Park campus. Sequencing of DNA is a key component of modern
life sciences research. In the last decade, technologies for DNA sequencing have
advanced at an astonishing rate. In that time frame, data output per instrument
"run" has increased by more than a trillion-fold. Consequently, the amount of
DNA information available has skyrocketed, enabling revolutionary advances
across all of the biosciences. The Illumina HiSeq2500 is the most powerful
sequencing instrument available to date, both in terms of data output per unit
time, and cost per DNA-base sequenced. Its very high quality, relatively long
read lengths, and well-established sequencing chemistry allow the maximum
experimental flexibility. It is capable of generating DNA sequence data to allow
de novo genome assemblies, as well as re-sequencing and transcriptome studies.
Installation of this instrument into the Genomics Facility will significantly
enhance life science research at Penn State and beyond, particularly in three
broad areas: Genomics and gene expression of non-model organisms, genomics of
multispecies interactions, and regulation of gene expression. Given the
flexibility and robust performance of this instrument, it is likely that many
additional, as yet unforeseen areas of study will be enhanced by this
instrument.

This instrument's capabilities will dramatically enhance life sciences research
at Penn State. In addition, it will enhance interdisciplinary scientific
training for Penn State researchers at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral levels. It's use and data will be integrated into existing hands-on
graduate training programs and courses, and used as part of the regular series
of workshops offered by the Genomics Core Facility. Access and training will be
provided, through several existing programs, to several populations of students
who are currently under-represented in the scientific enterprise. Experiments
conducted on this instrument will also be used to enhance Penn State's
continuing involvement with a consortium of predominantly undergraduate
institutions for scientific training.