* 1229674
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Intensity Tunable Femtosecond Laser.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Carlos Trallero, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2016
* USD 692,927.00

This NSF-MRI allows generating milli-Joule (mJ) level, few-cycle pulses (10 fs
to 14 fs) in the mid-infrared (1400-2200 nm) spectral region that are carrier-
envelope phase stable. To generate these pulses, a white-light seeded optical
parametric amplifier (OPA) is pumped by a 20 mJ femtosecond laser. The pulses
emerging from the OPA are then spectrally broadened and compressed. Such
capabilities are at the forefront of current ultrafast physics and attosecond
science, opening a window for new and exciting studies in the general area of
laser-matter interaction.

Extending these pulses to the mid-IR should enhance high-harmonic generation --
an effort presently pursued at just a handful of laboratories around the world.
Driving the harmonics with these longer wavelengths will lead to a higher photon
flux and energy. This high photon flux is critical for studies of non-linear
UV/XUV phenomena as well as for extending our studies to the more complex
systems of interest for most applications. The longer wavelength driving laser
will also enable the investigation of electronic dynamics using a very
different, rather unorthodox, approach. Namely, by taking advantage of the fact
that dissociation in some molecules is an almost perfect analog of ionization in
atoms, only few femtosecond laser pulses are required since nuclei move much
slower than electrons. These pulses must, however, have long wavelengths to
produce a measurable signal. In addition to the science advances, technological
advances such as shaping attosecond pulses to eliminate their natural chirp or
tailoring them to drive specific dynamics will be pursued. Such capabilities
would be a substantial accomplishment and would, in turn, enable further
scientific advances since scientific and technological breakthroughs go hand-in-
hand in this field.

Measuring the dynamics of and controlling electrons in matter are major themes
that extend throughout much of atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) physics,
chemistry, materials science, and even biology today. In fact, the first of the
five "Grand Challenges for Basic Energy Science," as identified in the
Department of Energy's special BESAC report in 2007, is "How do we control
material processes at the level of electrons?" This theme appeared again in the
National Research Council's "Physics 2010" report where the AMO contribution was
entitled "Controlling the Quantum World." To accomplish these goals, laser
pulses on the order of tens of attoseconds (1 as = 10^-18 s) are required. Such
pulses are a challenge to produce, but by using high-harmonic generation (HHG),
pulses below 100 as have been obtained in a few leading labs around the world,
including here at the J. R. Macdonald Laboratory (JRML). This technological
breakthrough has given birth to the field of attosecond science, which is
presently one of the hottest in AMO physics.

This project will employ these attosecond UV/XUV pulses to study atomic and
molecular dynamics as well as to probe more complex condensed matter systems. In
addition, by observing the HHG spectra and/or emitted electrons, structural
changes in molecules can be observed as they happen, deepening our understanding
of the underlying dynamics and thereby taking an important step in controlling
chemical reactions at the quantum mechanical level.

Beyond the technical and scientific impacts, this grant significantly impacts a
large number of young scientists through hands-on training of the roughly seven
postdocs, sixteen graduate students, and five undergraduate students hosted by
the JRML. While the training opportunities mainly benefit graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, they also have an impact on undergraduate students
through, for instance, the Physics Department's Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program funded by the NSF. However, this laser source has
also created a very broad collaboration between participants from institutions
in three EPSCoR states who are currently funded primarily by NSF and DOE. The
institutions involved are Kansas State University, Louisiana State University,
Augustana College (an undergraduate institution in South Dakota), and the
University of Kansas. The JRML group will leverage this new laser system to
initiate additional collaborations following this model.