* 1229738
* MRI: Development of New Particle Size Spectrometer for Rugged Deployments from the Surface to the Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Terry Deshler, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2017
* USD 274,866.00

This project is focused on developing an in situ particle size spectrometer for
particles with radii ranging from 0.1 to 10 micrometers, and suitable for short-
and long-term autonomous deployments at remote sites, or on balloon platforms.
Immediate applications of the instrument would be to: 1) Replace current
instrumentation for stratospheric aerosol profile measurements from Laramie,
Wyoming, and 2) Add particle size measurements to equatorial Lagrangian balloons
planned for missions in 2016 to 2018. Such measurements are important since
aerosol play fundamental roles in the chemistry of mid-latitude stratospheric
ozone, and provide one pathway for water to enter the lower stratosphere through
penetrating convection, mainly in the tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
important societal broader impacts from the scientific measurements possible
with new autonomous aerosol spectrometers. Consistent records of stratospheric
size distributions are important to refine past estimates of climate and to
anticipate future variations, due to unpredictable volcanic eruptions, or
possible geo-engineering options. Improving understanding of the flux of species
across the tropical tropopause is important to understand and predict the global
distribution of stratospheric trace gases and particles, both essential
ingredients to climate and chemistry models, which are the primary tools to
anticipate long term anthropogenic impacts on the atmosphere in which we live.
Such knowledge is needed to inform policy decisions related to a variety of air
quality and climate issues. Development of the new instrument and results from
it will be published through the peer reviewed literature. Instrumentation
developed through the proposal will be available to the department and others
for future measurements, in particular the Lagrangian balloon platforms.
Participants in the project will gain valuable instrumental, experimental, and
scientific experience. While one graduate student is included specifically, all
graduate students in the principal investigator's group will participate to some
extent in instrument development and testing. The group's activities will be
extended to the larger community through public presentations, and participation
in the University of Wyoming's Engineering Summer Program for promising high
school students.