* 1229561
* MRI: Acquisition of a CAREN Virtual Reality System for Collaborative Research in Assistive and Rehabilitation Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* William Quillen, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 537,245.00

Proposal #: 12-29561&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Dubey, Rajiv; Diamond, David M; Quillen,
William; Reed, Kyle; Sarkar, Sudeep&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of South
Florida&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: CAREN: Virtual Reality System for
Collaborative Research in Assistive &amp; Rehabilitation
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring an instrument referred to as CAREN (Computer Assisted Rehabilitation
ENvironment), aims to greatly facilitate ongoing interdisciplinary and inter-
and intra-institutional research to analyze human mobility and function and to
improve the quality of life of individuals with disabilities and older adults by
increasing their independence and community reintegration. The instrument, a
turnkey customizable 3D virtual reality system with applications in
complementary research and training experience in the broad areas of
rehabilitation engineering and science, also includes a cylindrical screen
projection system, 12-camera real-time motion-capture system, a six degree-of-
freedom motion base and a control software suite. The team includes about 20 PIs
from various departments at the institution, which currently lacks a shared
virtual reality simulation facility for large collaborative projects. The
instrumentation, to be used for fundamental research in various disciplines,
analysis and creation of innovative technology solutions that can be rapidly
evaluated, tested, prototyped and commercialized, is expected to dramatically
reduce the need for costly physical simulations and allow complex testing not
otherwise possible. The following research projects will be supported by
CAREN:&lt;br/&gt;- Fundamental research: measure effects of sensory inputs
(e.g., visual, auditory, vestibular, tactile);&lt;br/&gt;- Early diagnosis
related research: quantify behavioral indicators for early detection of
disorders;&lt;br/&gt;- Applied rehabilitation research: provide real-time
feedback to the user, thus allowing rapid correction of therapeutic
movements;&lt;br/&gt;- Sports medicine research: optimize training techniques
for peak performance and injury prevention; and&lt;br/&gt;- Research on
rehabilitation transfer to daily life: model environments that allow more real-
life training for enhancing laboratory or clinic based
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The impact
should be felt both regionally and nationally. At the national level, the
proposed system could have great implications for improving the quality of life
of individuals with disabilities and older adults. At the local level, the VR
equipment will be integrated into a number of courses and will engage K-12
students. It is expected that the engagement of students through the REU program
can greatly impact undergraduate research. There is a substantial industrial
partnership and potential for technology transfer.