* 1229776
* MRI:   Acquisition of an integrated telescope system for astrophysical surveys and transient discovery
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* David Trilling, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 09/30/2018
* USD 628,135.00

Astronomers conduct wide-area searches of the night sky to search for new kinds
objects, or to count and characterize known kinds of objects, or to find objects
with specific characteristics. In recent years there have been numerous searches
for "moving objects" in an effort to find near earth objects (NEOs). Objects
that are close to earth will appear to move across the sky fast enough relative
to more distant background objects that their motion can be detected over days
or even hours. These objects are relatively nearby and are located within our
solar system. Most of them are asteroids or comets. Once detected, the objects
can be tracked and their future motion predicted. Of particular interest are
objects whose predicted motion will bring them even closer, perhaps dangerously
close, to earth. Such objects are called PHAs for Potentially Hazardous
Asteroids. The Catalina Sky Survey has been conducting an NEO survey from the Mt
Lemmon Observatory near Tucson and is the most successful survey in terms of
numbers of NEOs discovered - something like 70% of the NEOs that have been
discovered in the past few years have been discovered by
CSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the problems that such surveys encounter is a
"false positive" - finding evidence for what appears to be a moving object on
the sky that turns out to be to be something else, perhaps a flaw in a detector,
or faint electronic "noise" that mimics a real object, or cosmic rays that pass
through the detector leaving marks or streaks that look like objects. If the
incidence of false positives could be reduced, the efficiency of such surveys
could increase significantly. Dr. David Trilling of Northern Arizona University
will acquire a new camera for CSS that covers more sky than its current camera.
He will couple his new camera with another camera on another telescope at Lowell
Observatory in northern Arizona. These two telescopes will work together,
searching the sky for things that move. If a candidate moving object is found
with one camera, the second telescope will point its camera to the same part of
the sky. If the moving object is detected by both cameras then it is almost
surely a real object of interest. Dr. Trilling's work is funded by NSF's
Division of Astronomical Sciences through the Major Research Instrumentation
program.