* 1229284
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Fluorescence and Atomic Force microscope (IF-AFM) for biophysics, biomaterials and nanomedicine studies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Guangzhao Mao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 02/28/2015
* USD 345,517.00

This award to Wayne State University is for the acquisition of an integrated
fluorescence and atomic force microscope to create a new platform to perform
nanoscale measurements of cell-particle interactions. AFM is a force-measuring
and surface imaging technique that can provide very high spatial resolution,
while fluorescence microscopy provides fast, large scale and specific imaging of
cells. By combining the two, (1) single molecule force measurements will be
correlated with biological microenvironments or events, (2) simultaneous
fluorescence and AFM imaging for a fuller picture of biological systems and
their dynamics will be perform, and (3) sophisticated fluorescence techniques,
such as FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer (FRET), can be correlated with AFM to
measure applied forces to changes in structure. The combined instrumental
platform will be used for interdisciplinary projects including single molecule
interactions on live cells, optimization of DNA release from engineered polymer
systems, cell motility studies, interactions of pathogens with cell surfaces,
detection of food-borne bacteria, and dynamics and transport of magnetic
nanoparticles in live cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrumental platform
will be a user facility, available to researchers in physics, materials science,
biomedical engineering, biology, chemistry, the basic medical sciences, and
beyond. The collaborative use of this instrument is expected to foster
interactions between different disciplines, and thus create new opportunities
and ideas. The proposed research has clear potential to lead to new technologies
and benefit human health. The new platform will be integrated into an advanced
biophysics lab course, part of the Wayne State University undergraduate
Biomedical Physics Program, which impacts a significant number of people from
underrepresented groups. As a user facility, this new instrument will help to
train and inspire future scientists and engineers.