* 1229148
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Biplane Fluoroscopy System for Dynamic Imaging of In-Vivo Human Motion
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Peter Laz, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29148 PI(s): Rullkoetter, Paul; Davidson, Bradley; Fitzpatrick,
Clare; Laz, Peter J; Shelburne, Kevin Institution: University of Denver Title:
MRI/Acq.: A Biplane Fluoroscopy System for Dynamic Imaging of In-Vivo Human
Motion

Project Proposed: This project, acquiring an instrument referred to as Biplanar
(2D) Fluoroscopy System, aims to accurately measure kinematics. The instrument,
currently the most advanced commercially available technology to record human
skeletal motion, utilizes specialized software that can translate the measured
data into images of high accuracy and resolution. In collaboration with existing
computational research capabilities at the institution, the Biplanar (2D)
Fuoroscopy System will be mainly used in the Human Dynamics Laboratory, thus
stimulating an important expansion in biomechanics research at the home
institution, along with the five other collaborating institutions and three
clinical centers. The system is expected to be transformative to biomechanics
research, both as a direct measurement instrument of previously unreported joint
kinematics and as input to state-of-the-art computational models. Moreover, the
resulting research is also expected to be comprehensive in the combination of
experimental and modeling capabilities (whole-body motion, electromyography and
force measurements and musculoskeletal, finite element, and probabilistic
modeling). Accurate measurement of kinematics using the instrument should
contribute to create scientific advancements in orthopedics and implant design,
assistive technologies, understanding injury mechanisms, rehabilitation, and
motor control of human movement.

Broader Impacts: The instrument can greatly impact the capability to improve
patient outcomes. Given the clinical nature of the proposed work, new
biomechanical designs and discoveries could translate into improving the quality
of life for those suffering from health injuries. It also contribute to build an
exceptional research and education environment for the institution, partner
universities and the Rocky Mountain West. The acquired system will provide
active learning and research experiences for students in STEM outreach programs,
both undergraduate and graduate students, as well as medical students and
clinical residents.