* 1229045
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3D Terrestrial Laser Scanner for the  Temporal-Morphological Study of Manmade and Natural Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jeff Frolik, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 162,315.00

As imaging technologies have developed, scientists and engineers have leveraged
these advances to remotely sense the environments in which we live to complement
and/or replace in situ measurements of the same. Remote sensing has evolved to
include photography, sonar, radar, radiometry and most recently LiDAR (light
detection and ranging). This award will provide a ground-based LiDAR system,
also known as a 3D terrestrial laser scanner, for use by researchers, research
trainees and students from throughout the University of Vermont (UVM). The
instrument will rapidly produce 3D digital datasets and scans over time will
result in 4D data that can capture the evolution of environments over days,
seasons, and/or years. The instrument will be used to monitor natural
environments such as snowpacks, streambeds, agricultural land and forests. In
addition, the instrument will be used to assess built historic, civil and
transportation infrastructure. The project team comes from diverse fields as
civil, electrical and environmental engineering, geography, geology, forestry
and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3D terrestrial laser scanner will
provide new and unique capabilities to the State of Vermont's only research
University and will enable new interdisciplinary research at UVM and new
collaborations throughout the State. The acquisition is also synergistic with
existing entities at UVM working in the areas of transportation, spatial
analysis and complex systems. Finally, the instrument will provide new
opportunities for UVM students by enhancing the Engineering curriculum and an
existing minor in Geospatial Technologies.