* 1229033
* RUI: Phonetic Convergence in Spoken Communication
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jennifer Pardo, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,098.00

Spoken communication works so well that its efficacy is taken for granted. Two
complete strangers who meet for the first time and speak the same language can
converse with relative ease from the moment of introduction. How is this feat
accomplished? The fact that talkers share a language with similar vocabulary and
grammatical rules is only part of the answer. Because of the enormous
variability in phonetic forms used by speakers of the same language, how an
individual speaks is as important as what he or she says. When talkers converse,
they often adopt some of the phonetic attributes of their conversational
partners, a process termed "phonetic convergence." On other occasions, talkers
diverge from each other or show little change in their phonetic repertoire.
Moreover, some talkers are more adept than others at shedding an accent or
adopting the accent of a foreign language. The current project aims to further
our understanding of these interactive effects by investigating the relationship
between individual perceptual and learning abilities and acoustic-phonetic
variability across both nonsocial and conversational settings. Delineating how
individual speakers adjust to each other is crucial to understanding
communication in interactive, multi-talker settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has the potential for broad impact across many domains that rely on
social interaction of talkers, such as learning a second language, remediation
of speech pathologies, and human-computer interaction through the medium of
speech. The award is for Research in Undergraduate Institutions and incorporates
undergraduate student participation at all levels of the work, from design and
data collection to reporting and presentation of results. The recordings and
transcription data will also be made available online to other qualified
researchers interested in studying the phenomena of conversational interaction
via the Linguistics Data Consortium.