* 1229521
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instruments for 3D Digital Mapping of Historic Structures and Archaeological Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Beverly Chiarulli, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 243,439.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award permits Principal Investigator Dr.
Beverly Chiarulli and Co-Principal Investigators, Drs. Scott Moore, Benjamin
Ford, Sarah Neusius and Phillip Neusius to purchase a 3D Scanner system for
digital documentation of the built environment and a Multiple Array Ground
Penetrating Radar for below ground surveys of archaeological features.
Individually, these instruments create high quality high resolution images of
structures and landscapes as well as below ground archaeological features. Used
together, they can create a digital library of above ground structures to
provide a comparative database for the identification of below ground
archaeological features. Because of this joint usage, they form an integrated
system. The instruments will be employed by IUP faculty and students and our
collaborators and their students from Howard University, the University of
Nevada at Las Vegas, and the University of North Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Among the projects that will use the instruments are:&lt;br/&gt; 1.
Dr. Chiarulli's project on historic cemeteries in western Pennsylvania will use
3D mapping of surface topography and standing gravestones in combination with
the Multiple Array GPR to record forgotten grave sites; &lt;br/&gt; 2. Dr.
Ford's investigation of shipwrecks in frozen lakes will use 3D imaging of
surviving ships similar to wrecked vessels combined with winter surveys of Lake
Ontario using the multiple antenna GPR to record otherwise potentially
inaccessible shipwrecks for identification and protection; &lt;br/&gt; 3. Dr.
Moore's survey of painted churches in the Troodos Mountains, Cyprus will aid in
the preservation of the interior and exterior decoration of these churches by
documenting the manner of construction of these buildings for an increased
understanding of Byzantine Christianity and the development of rural religious
practices; &lt;br/&gt; 4. Drs. Chiarulli and Neusius' investigation of Late
Prehistoric Villages in western Pennsylvania will use the multiple array GPR for
rapid below ground survey of large villages to discover faint prehistoric
features and develop maps of village layouts without excavation; &lt;br/&gt; 5.
Dr. Moore and his collaborators' will use 3D scanning to image above ground
Roman ruins to understand site formation in Cyprus combined with a Multiple
Array GPR survey of the entire coastal settlement for to the definition of the
city's physical layout and provide the data to understand the development of
this midsized Roman settlement and its role in local and regional trade; and
&lt;br/&gt; 6. Drs. Neusius and Ford's Survey of Smicksburg, a 19th Century
Commercial and Industrial Center in Indiana County, Pennsylvania will use 3D
scanning to create a digital library of houses from this period and the multiple
array GPR to produce detailed comparative subsurface information and record
otherwise inaccessible heritage resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While the
instruments provide rapid data collection, they also provide the capability to
survey large landforms so investigations can move beyond the survey and analysis
of single historic buildings or archaeological sites and conduct surveys of
communities and landscapes. The impact of these instruments extends beyond their
direct benefits to the initial projects. They will expand the investigator's
ability to train IUP graduate and undergraduate students in critical and rapidly
developing technologies as well as give students from three other universities
opportunities to use the instruments. No less significant, the instrumentation
would also ensure that the faculty participants themselves remain current in the
use of advanced technology and will be able to incorporate it into their classes
and other research projects.