* 1229439
* Meeting: The Future of Research in Animal Behavior, Airlie Center, Warrenton VA, 27 April - 1 May 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Daniel Rubenstein, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 09/30/2012
* USD 90,140.00

Scientists who study animal behavior ask questions about why and how animals
behave as they do. Because scientists can see what animals do, they can test
theories more easily than they might in other circumstances. Then they can look
for the same kinds of patterns in more difficult circumstances, such as among
microbes inhabiting environments important to humans. Studies of animal behavior
are also important for understanding the role of the brain, the nervous system,
and hormones in influencing actions. An understanding of animal behavior is also
crucial for conservation. Habitat preservation choices depend on understanding
how target organisms live. Studies of animal behavior have also revealed how
conflicts among relatives arise and are controlled. The challenge now is to work
hard to use the power of animal behavior studies to solve human and
environmental problems in new, innovative ways that escape a zero-sum mindset,
instead revealing synergistic, win-win solutions. The workshop will bring
together a diverse set of researchers from animal behavior, systems biology,
genetics and genomics, neurobiology, computational biology, and social science.
This exciting group will combine new ideas from animal behavior with new ideas
from complementary fields to meet grand challenges of biology. This group will
show how animal behavior studies can help with the challenges facing humans on
this planet. The intellectual products of this workshop will be shared widely.