* 1229341
* MRI: Development of Advanced Multiplexed Structural Mass Spectrometer for Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jody May, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,822.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation and support from the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Professor John McLean from Vanderbilt
University and colleagues John Wikswo and Jody May will develop a multiplexed
ion mobility-mass spectrometer (IM-MS) for rapid and comprehensive chemical
analysis of highly complex systems in materials science to biology. The
instrument will consist of eight spatially disparate channels of analysis
including switchable multiplexed nanoelectrospray ionization (nESI) and matrix-
assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) sources. This multiplexed
instrument will integrate the capabilities of eight separate IM-MS instruments
into a single spectrometer platform and represents the first module of a 96
channel instrument that is suitable for extremely high throughput analyses of
either liquids or solids. In addition to increasing analytical throughput, this
IM-MS will improve sensitivity and limits-of-detection through combining the
data from each channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to
identify the chemical composition of a sample and determine its purity by
measuring the mass of the molecular constituents in the sample after they are
ionized and detected by the mass spectrometer. This widely used analytical
technique is used to identify and quantify the chemical composition of a sample.
The unique capabilities of this spatially multiplexed structural mass
spectrometer will have significant and broad-reaching implications in areas
ranging from nanotechnology to biofuels and systems biology. One of the grand
challenges that these nascent fields face is the lack of suitable technologies
capable of obtaining dynamic measurements of materials in both space and time.
Although the primary focus will be instrumentation development, this project
will provide novel interdisciplinary training opportunities for undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, in state-of-the-art mass
spectrometry, ion mobility spectrometry and other allied fields of research.
Additionally, students will be trained as future instrument developers.