* 1229679
* MRI: Acquisition of a Portable Compact Doppler Wind and Aerosol Lidar for Research Enhancements in Boundary Layer Meteorology, Air Quality, and Cloud Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Michael Newchurch, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 237,128.00

This work seeks to acquire a Compact Wind and Aerosol Lidar (CWAL) to enhance
research activities in the general areas of atmospheric boundary layer (ABL)
meteorology, air quality, and cloud physics. We will optimize the utilization of
the CWAL by installing it on three different platforms, depending on the
research application: (i) on the roof of University of Alabama-Huntsville
(UAH)'s Cramer Hall, adjacent to an existing ozone differential absorption lidar
(DIAL), where it will have an excellent view of the horizon in all directions;
(ii) on top of a new van of the Mobile Integrated Profiling System (MIPS), where
it will supplement and enhance measurements from other MIPS instruments; and
(iii) on top of a smaller van, where it will serve as a highly mobile and
independent CWAL lidar facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The CWAL will enhance MIPS wind profile measurements by adding a
high-resolution wind profiling capability within the surface layer below 130 m
AGL, which the existing 915 MHz Doppler wind profiler does not sample. Likewise,
the CWAL will provide co-registered vertical velocity and backscatter intensity
measurements within the lower atmosphere that will facilitate interpretation of
low-level ozone retrievals from the UAH ozone DIAL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to enhancing the measurement capabilities of the MIPS and ozone DIAL,
research projects utilizing this equipment will improve understanding of: a)
boundary layer processes, including convergent boundary zones, gravity wave
phenomena, convective initiation and the impacts of ABL processes on
tornadogenesis; b) boundary layer processes associated with the transport of
ozone and mercury species between the ABL and free atmosphere, and the
development of stratified ozone layers in the lower troposphere; c) variability
of aerosols within the ABL and their impact on the atmosphere, including
degradation of visibility; d) precipitation processes and drop size
distributions within stratiform precipitation associated with MCS's, midlatitude
cyclones, and tropical cyclones. The research group has acquired considerable
experience (14-19 years) in maintaining, deploying and analyzing data from
mobile profiling equipment, radars, and lidars for a wide variety of
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;We
anticipate that numerous atmospheric scientists and students within and outside
of UAH will benefit from the CWAL, and enhanced capabilities of the MIPS and
ozone&lt;br/&gt;DIAL. The comprehensive measurements (and the potential 24/7
capability) increase the probability of serendipitous discoveries, which is an
important component in advancing science. The MIPS (or CWAL individually) will
be available to the atmospheric science community as an advanced mobile
atmospheric profiling platform. Profiling and scanning remote sensing
instruments at UAH are used in graduate level courses to provide students with
hands on experience in conducting scientific experiments involving instrument
operation, experimental design, and analysis of data. Scientific research
stemming from the CWAL will contribute to improvements in forecasting of
convective imitation, severe storms, air quality (including ozone), and
transport and dispersion characteristics (of potentially toxic materials) in
heterogeneous (convective and nocturnal) boundary layers.