* 1229302
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Gun Energy Filtered Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michele Klingbeil, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,050,000.00

This award to the University of Massachusetts at Amherst is for the acquisition
of a 200kV, field emission gun, in-column energy filtered transmission electron
microscope (FEG-EFTEM). Energy filtering enables superior image contrast by
zero-loss filtering and element specific imaging, representing the state-of-the-
art in electron microscopy characterization. The hardware and software
components of the proposed FEG-EFTEM include electron tomography capabilities
for 3D-reconstruction of nanoscale structures. Moreover, the instrument includes
capabilities for examining cryogenically prepared samples from aqueous solution,
appealing for biologically-derived nanostructures and synthetic soft materials
in water. The FEG-EFTEM will impact a broad range of researchers at UMass and
partner institutions, and will be available broadly for U.S. and international
researchers in numerous disciplines, including polymers, nanocomposites, soft
materials, biology, and related topics. Graduate, undergraduate, and
postdoctoral researchers at UMass, representing well over 30 different research
groups, will use the FEG-EFTEM in numerous projects, including: characterizing
ordered block copolymers as templates for nanostructured materials; imaging
polymer aggregation and phase behavior directly in non-volatile ionic liquids;
studying helical morphologies of polymer nanorods and wires; understanding phase
separation in conjugated polymers and nanocomposites for photovoltaics; imaging
bacterial-based fuel cells; and direct imaging of DNA replication. The new FEG-
EFTEM will have extensive impact across numerous communities. The instrument
will be accessible broadly to researchers across the UMass campus, as well as to
the local undergraduate Colleges, including all-women's Mt Holyoke and Smith
Colleges, and to partner institutions such as Howard University and the
University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras. Through the NSF-funded Materials
Research Facilities Network (MRFN), the instrument will be accessible to
researchers across the U.S., significantly enhancing accessible TEM capabilities
of the MRFN. The instrument will enhance education greatly by serving as a
central teaching tool through its integration into core courses in Polymer
Characterization and Polymer Morphology, while allowing expansion of curricula
with the introduction of a graduate course in Electron Microscopy with extensive
hands-on training on the FEG-EFTEM. Moreover, the FEG-EFTEM will benefit K-12
and Research Experience for Teachers (RET) outreach activities of various NSF
and DOE centers at UMass, with electron tomography for 3D-image reconstruction
providing an engaging and instructive view of materials that is suitable for
integration into classroom instruction for young students. ASPIRE (A Student-led
Program In Research and Education), which brings high school students to campus
on Saturdays for a laboratory-based program on polymers, will showcase the
3D-tomographic capabilities of the FEG-EFTEM, thus greatly enhancing the long
standing electron microscopy unit for this program.