* 1229887
* Estimating Forest Productivity Over Regional and Multi-Decadal Time Scales Using Carbon Isotopes in Tree Rings
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Alan Taylor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2016
* USD 213,101.00

Terrestrial ecosystems are a key component of the global carbon cycle and a
better understanding of their role in carbon cycle dynamics is needed to project
the future carbon cycle. Current ecosystem carbon cycle models give highly
variable projections for the response of the terrestrial carbon cycle to
changing climate. Constraining ecosystem carbon-budget projections is an
important issue given the interest in managing forests to increase the strength
of the carbon sink to mitigate anthropogenic carbon emissions. Spatially
explicit data on forest ecosystem productivity and net carbon exchange between
the forest and atmosphere that span multi-decadal to centennial time periods,
are needed to constrain model parameters and to evaluate model performance. But,
such records are sparse. Current observational and remotely sensed data are
limited to the last few decades, and tree-ring width records have shown
relatively poor correlation with contemporary net carbon flux measurements. In
this research project, the investigators postulate that carbon isotopes in tree-
rings represent a proxy of forest ecosystem productivity and net carbon exchange
between forests and the atmosphere. This hypothesis is based on carbon isotope
theory and carbon isotope measurements from tree rings located in the footprint
of an eddy covariance carbon dioxide flux tower. This project will test two
related hypotheses. The first is that carbon isotopes in tree rings provide a
good estimate of forest productivity and net ecosystem carbon exchange. This
will be determined by comparing isotope measurements from trees with
measurements from nearby long-running eddy-covariance flux towers. The second
hypothesis will investigate whether the temporal variability of the carbon
isotope record in the tree ring records representing forest productivity and
ecosystem exchange are coherent between two flux towers separated by several
hundred kilometers. This will be determined by sampling tree rings at nine sites
between two flux towers and analyzing the spatial coherence of the tree-ring
isotope record and several other climate and forest productivity variables
across the sites. If the hypotheses are supported, a network of ecosystem-
specific records of forest ecosystem productivity and net carbon exchange could
be established to parameterize the next generation of earth system and carbon
cycle models. The science education impact of this project will extend beyond
the university by developing learning modules for use in secondary schools that
service underrepresented groups using an established NSF GK-12 project at Penn
State.

This project will determine if carbon isotopes in tree rings record the exchange
of carbon dioxide between forests and the atmosphere. Contemporary forest-
atmosphere exchange measurements are only available for approximately twenty
years, making it difficult to test models used to project the carbon budget of
forests and other ecosystems into the future and to determine their likely
contribution to future climate change. This project will demonstrate the
potential of using carbon isotopes in tree rings to estimate forest productivity
and net carbon storage by forests over time periods of a century or more at
local to regional scales. More accurate estimates of regional century-scale
forest productivity and net carbon storage will inform climate and carbon
management-related policy decisions regarding carbon sequestration efforts to
mitigate anthropogenic carbon emissions.