* 1229404
* MRI: Acquisition of a Mask Aligner for Micro/Nano-Fabrication Research at Arkansas State University
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Brandon Kemp, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 02/28/2015
* USD 298,578.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
mask aligner for micro/nano-fabrication. The instrument will support ongoing and
future micro/nano-scale fabrication-based research and education by multiple
research groups in engineering, physics, chemistry, molecular biology, and food
science at Arkansas State University-Jonesboro (ASU-J). The instrument will be
used to support research focused on energy harvesting devices, sensors and
actuators, induced electromagnetic fields onto photonic matter, and
detection/manipulation of cells and molecular biology. Research in renewable
energy with micro/nano-fabrication will use this system to allow the study of
energy harvesting/efficient devices ? concentrated photovoltaic, thermoelectric,
and photonic displays and crystals ? for enhanced in energy conversion
efficiency and cost-effectiveness. Research will also use this equipment to
study the effects of micro-patterned structures on the cell and molecular
biology. Additionally, the requested mask aligner will be used frequently for
nano-imprinting lithography in more in-depth nano-scaled atomic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will expand and enhance
research projects and opportunities within the Center for Efficient and
Sustainable Use of Resources (CESUR) at ASU-J and provide multi-disciplinary
research experiences for faculty and graduate and undergraduate students in
engineering, physics, chemistry, molecular biology, and food science programs.
Instruction will be impacted via the development of new activities in courses
that make use of the instrument. Students enrolled in the newly developed Master
of Science in Engineering (MSEng) program on ASU-J campus, will utilize this
equipment frequently for both R&amp;D and instructional purposes for micro/nano-
scaled device development. Enhanced research opportunities will also increase
the University?s effort to recruit and retain students and faculty from
traditionally underrepresented groups.