* 1229597
* MRI:  Acquisition of High Performance Compute Cluster for Multivariate Real-time and Whole-brain Correlation Analysis of fMRI Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Nicholas Turk-Browne, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 527,978.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award permits Dr. Jonathan Cohen and four
co-investigators to purchase a high-performance computing instrumentation (3,584
cores; 2TB/core; 100TB flash storage) to be used by faculty, postdocs, graduate
students and undergraduates within the Princeton Neuroscience Institute (PNI).
The instrumentation will allow the analysis of human brain imaging data at a
speed and scale not previously possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborating
researchers are cognitive neuroscientists and computer scientists at Princeton
with complementary expertise in human brain imaging and large scale computing.
Two primary research objectives are proposed, building on recent progress in
applying multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) methods from machine learning to
detect neural signals that correspond to internal mental states, such as
perceptions, memories and intentions that are otherwise not accessible to direct
observation. To date, use of MVPA has been restricted to the "offline" analyses"
after data have been fully collected. However, a growing and powerful use of
brain imaging is to give participants feedback about their brain states in real
time, allowing them to use this information to better control brain function
(e.g., providing feedback about pain areas as a way of learning to control
chronic pain). Such real-time feedback methods could be greatly enhanced by
adding MVPA. However, this has been computationally intractable until now.
Objective 1 addresses this challenge, by inserting a high performance computing
system into the brain scanning pipeline. This will be tested in an experiment
that uses MVPA to detect patterns of brain activity associated with sustained
attention, allowing us to provide real-time brain-based feedback to improve
attentional abilities (with potential educational and health
benefits).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2 focuses on another major advance in
brain imaging, in which correlations between areas of activity are analyzed,
rather than areas of activity in isolation of one another. Such correlations -
often referred to as "functional connectivity" - are likely to reveal more about
how the brain actually functions, by providing critical information about the
interactions between areas. At present, virtually all approaches to functional
connectivity focus on the correlations among a limited set of brain areas of
interest. However, a more powerful approach would be to examine the correlation
of every area with all others. This requires computing the whole-brain
correlation matrix. The analysis of such high dimensional data would be further
enhanced by applying MVPA to patterns of correlation. However, doing this
further increases computational demands. Applying this approach to a routine
brain imaging dataset, using currently available instrumentation, would take 880
years to complete. The work under Objective 2 addresses this challenge, by
coupling massively parallel computing with sophisticated software optimizations.
Doing so can bring previously intractable problems into the range of
practicality. These methods will be tested in an experiment that seeks to
identify neural representations of intentions, and their influence on brain
mechanisms responsible for executing these intentions.