* 1229339
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR to Support the Multidisciplinary Research and Education at University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Emmanuel Ojadi, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 339,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Maolin Guo from University of Massachussetts, Dartmouth and colleagues Emmanuel
Ojadi, Catherine Neto, Sivappa Rasapalli and David Manke will acquire a 400 MHz
NMR spectrometer. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research training and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) bioinorganic chemistry;
(b) natural products; (c) organic synthesis and asymmetric catalysis; (d)
inorganic chemistry including MOFs; and (e) DNA adduct formation in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research at the
University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth and neighboring academic institutions,
industries and local high schools.