* 1229114
* MRI: Acquisition of Stable Isotope Instrumentation for Biogeochemistry Research and Teaching at the University of Cincinnati
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Thomas Algeo, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

MRI: Acquisition of Stable Isotope Instrumentation for Biogeochemistry Research
and Teaching at the University of Cincinnati&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from
the National Science Foundation will allow for the purchase of a stable isotope
ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) and associated peripheral devices for the stable
isotope analysis of plant biomarkers, bioapatite and calcite, organic matter,
water, and atmospheric methane. The IRMS will enable faculty, post-doctoral
researchers, and graduate and undergraduate students - both at the University of
Cincinnati and regionally - to conduct research projects on a broad array of
topics. These topics will include (1) characterizing modern carbon isotope
fractionation patterns in plant terpenoids and n-alkyl lipids (biomarkers) to
better develop paleoclimate and paleoecological applications, (2) using carbon
and hydrogen isotopes of terrestrial plant biomarkers to examine Paleogene and
Neogene paleoclimate and paleovegetation history, (3) assessing patterns in
stable isotope values in mammal tissues to understand foraging ecology and
species interactions, (4) reconstructing diet and habit for extinct mammals with
implications for human-driven extinctions, (5) characterizing Permian-Early
Triassic paleoenvironments in the global ocean and understanding the link to the
contemporaneous marine biotic crisis, (6) investigating the biogeochemistry of
Late Pennsylvanian paleoenvironments associated with extensive black shale
deposits, (7) characterizing atmospheric methane emissions using carbon and
hydrogen isotopes, (8) constraining impacts of shale gas extraction on methane
emissions, (9) characterizing methane biogeochemistry in Arctic ecosystems, and
many other studies planned by the PIs and other users at the University of
Cincinnati and within the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty, staff, and
graduate students within the Departments of Geology, Anthropology, Geography,
and Biology at the University of Cincinnati and from other regional institutions
will use this state-of-the-art stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer to address
a wide array of biogeochemical research questions. This instrumentation will
take highly accurate measurements of the stable isotope ratios of carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen, which will further the PIs research examining
Earth system processes, including unraveling past changes in climate and ecology
and tracking the various pathways of carbon, water, and nutrients through
Earth?s systems. This will provide the tools necessary for the PIs to greatly
improve and expand on current interdisciplinary research activities in
biogeochemistry, spanning scales from biochemical to biospheric and from
geologic to modern time scales. This will be critical for advancing research in
the areas of (1) terrestrial carbon cycling, (2) community ecology and human
impacts, (3) climate and plant paleoecology, (4) marine chemistry and
paleoceanography, and (5) atmospheric methane dynamics in urban and Arctic
ecosystems. The instrumentation will provide training and research opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students and will immediately benefit a new upper
level undergraduate and graduate course on stable isotope ecology. Programs
currently in place in the Department of Geology will use this instrumentation
for training and research purposes including the Women in Science and
Engineering (WISE) program, the Graduate-Undergraduate Mentoring Program, and
the Capstone Experience, required for all undergraduate students. The department
is actively participating in Earth science outreach programs for K-12 students
at Cincinnati Public Schools (50% under-represented minority students). Results
from research projects using this instrumentation will be disseminated through
student and faculty presentations at national and international scientific
meetings, publications in peer-reviewed journals, and online data repositories.