* 1229739
* Conference: Meeting: Molluscan Neuroscience in the Genomic Era: from Gastropods to Cephalopods, in Jupiter, FL on May 16 - 19, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* David Glanzman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,845.00

Historically, many of the most important advances in cellular neurobiology have
been made studying mollusks, such as squid and snails, as model systems because
mollusks have exceptionally large nerve cells. The giant nerve cells of squid
enabled the analysis of the mechanism of the action potentials found in nerve
cells and the mechanisms by which neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, are
released at synapses. Snails, with their very large nerve cells and simple
neural circuitry, have enabled major advances in our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of
molecular mechanisms of learning and memory. Many key cellular and molecular
discoveries in mollusks have proved generalizable to the brains of mammals,
because these mechanisms have been conserved throughout
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will bring together neurobiologists
who work on two important molluscan groups, the simpler gastropods (e.g. snails)
and the more complex cephalopods (e.g.squid and octopus) to freely discuss their
latest findings. Octopus and squid represent advanced forms of intelligence that
evolved entirely independently from vertebrates. These distinct forms of
intelligence have the potential for providing influential models for developing
artificial intelligence and computer-controlled precise motion of artificial
appendages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will generate novel collaborations
among attendees, particularly because this is a unique venue for discussions
between leaders in gastropod and cephalopod neuroscience. Cellular, molecular
and genomic advances in gastropods have the potential for greatly benefiting
research in more complex cephalopods. Abstracts of talks will be available on an
open website, along with new methodologies presented. This will accelerate the
pace of research, leading to new discoveries that can provide insights into the
basic functioning of the brain. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will
present their research to senior scientists in the field, and interact with them
at mentoring sessions, which will benefit their development as researchers.