* 1229103
* NSF-MRI:  Acquisition of a Controller and Software for Scanning Probe Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Stefan Tsonchev, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 109,661.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Kenneth Nicholson from Northeastern Illinois University and colleagues Stefan
Tsonchev and Emina Stojkovic will acquire a nanoscope control station and
software package to be added to a scanning probe microscope (SPM) with
electrochemical capabilities already present at this institution. The proposal
is aimed at enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) structure of bacteriophytochromes (Bphs) in aqueous media,
both wild-type and fluorescent mutant variants in their respective light- and
dark-adapted states; (b) topography and mechanism of fruiting body formation in
myxobacteria, specifically initiated by Bphs in Stigmatella aurantiaca; and (c)
exploration the biosensing capabilities of Bphs as thin
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide a control station to enable
operation of a scanning probe microscope and to provide resolution at the
nanometer scale. Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has become a fundamental
analytical technique to investigate adherence of species, including biological
specimens, on a surface. The data which is obtained provides insights on the
physical structure of the adsorbates and their properties. Applications are
numerous, for example in developing biosensing devices or efficient
photovoltaivc cells. This acquisition will enable faculty and undergraduate
students at Northeastern Illinois University to carry out research on state-of-
the-art instrumentation. Students will receive invaluable multidisciplinary
research training on state-of-the-art instrumentation through a newly developed
cross-department surface chemistry and dynamics course as well as independent
research projects with faculty mentors in areas of growing in importance in the
field of nanoscience.