* 1229702
* MRI:   Acquisition of confocal microscopy system for dynamic imaging and analysis in research and learning at Trinity University
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Frank Healy, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2014
* USD 450,120.00

The NSF-Major Research Instrumentation program will enable Trinity University of
San Antonio, TX to acquire a Nikon A1 confocal microscopy system. Confocal
microscopy technology produces high resolution, three-dimensional, multicolor
images or videos obtained from live or fixed biological specimens. Biological
systems are dynamic and regulated through complex interactions between
molecules. The confocal microscope technology optically sections through the
sample, minimizing out of focus light to yield superior image quality and three-
dimensional image reconstructions. The confocal microscope will allow
investigators to determine spatial and temporal interactions through the use of
multi-color fluorescence labeling. Research by the PI and four coPIs addresses a
diverse array of biological problems, including epithelial cell junction
homeostasis, metabolism and autophagy in the central nervous system, segmental
regeneration, microbial metabolite biosynthesis, oxidant signaling and
mitochondrial function, muscle fiber type analysis and mathematical modeling of
cell migration. High-speed, multicolor, three-dimensional reconstruction with
submicron resolution capability permits discovery and analysis of complex
biological phenomena in all of these areas. The confocal system equipped with
the spectral detector minimizes background signal and allows investigators to
use dyes with overlapping spectral characteristics. Colocalization and molecular
studies require the high-speed resonant scan-head and spectral detector for
accurate, real-time spectral differentiation to resolve transient interactions.
The environmental chamber in combination with the Perfect Focus system enables
live cell research of sub-cellular components and imaging of molecular
interactions in real-time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nikon A1 confocal
microscope system is to be housed in the Imaging Suite within the new Center for
Sciences and Innovation at Trinity University. The Imaging Suite will bring
together Trinity University faculty and student researchers as well as faculty
and student researchers from local institutions, including the University of the
Incarnate Word and St. Phillips Community College, to address a range a
biological questions requiring confocal microscopy. The investigators have an
established record for engaging undergraduate students in their research and
using their research programs to develop innovative learning experiences for the
classroom and teaching laboratory. Undergraduate science courses in Biology,
Neuroscience, Mathematics and Physics will experience how confocal microscopy
may be used in discovery and investigations. Trinity University will host a
series of confocal microscopy workshops for the area that address both
theoretical and practical considerations for this technology. The investigators
are also partnering with local science educators and undergraduate students
planning careers in science education.