* 1229237
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* John Salerno, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 334,632.00

The Zeiss LSM 700 Laser Scanning Confocal Imaging System will be used in
multidisciplinary research and education in the Departments of Biology &amp;
Physics and Chemistry and Biochemistry at Kennesaw State University (KSU) and
will be the anchor instrument of KSU's microscopy core facility in the new
Science Laboratory Building. The LSM 700 and integrated workstation with ZEN
(Zeiss Efficient Navigation) software is capable of covering a broad range of
imaging needs, from multiple fluorescence and co-localization analysis to live
cell imaging to photoactivation of fluorophores. This flexibility will maximize
the number of researchers, and types of research, that can make use of the
microscope. The confocal imaging system will advance KSU research programs,
foster new research directions, and generate data that will complement many
other techniques employed by researchers at KSU, such as: fluorescent and
standard microscopy, cell culture and in vivo assays, gel-shift, equilibrium
saturation and competition assays. The LSM 700 system will enhance the ability
of KSU researchers to generate and interpret data. The integration of confocal
results with experiments already performed at KSU will provide crucial insights
for on-going research in developmental biology, molecular genetics,
neurobiology, botany, ecology, evolutionary biology, biochemistry, and related
fields at KSU and our collaborator institutions. Although the primary use of the
microscope will be for research, it will also be integrated into research
training and course curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confocal microscopy is an
increasingly common research tool for visualizing biological and biochemical
systems. Acquisition of the LSM 700 confocal microscope will have a significant
impact on the research environment at Kennesaw State University (KSU), giving
researchers in the Departments of Biology &amp; Physics and Chemistry &amp;
Biochemistry the ability to more fully describe interactions important to the
systems they study. Publication of innovative research by KSU faculty
incorporating confocal data will provide insights into such fields as cell and
developmental biology, biochemistry, ecology, evolutionary biology, and anatomy.
In addition, the instrument broadens the array of research tools available to
researchers at KSU and makes them more attractive collaborators for scientists
at more research-intensive institutions. Beyond primary research, teaching
experiments will be designed to incorporate confocal microscopy into the
classroom. Bringing a more quantitative approach to bear on research problems
using confocal microscopy will also make faculty better teachers and afford
invaluable research training to undergraduates, including members of
underrepresented groups. Hands-on training in the technology and usage of
confocal imaging will better prepare KSU graduates for STEM careers.