* 1229938
* SBIR Phase II:  Rapid In-Line Detection of Macro Defects in Semiconductor Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Dick de Roover, SC SOLUTIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2015
* USD 607,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
prototype of a software tool for automatic detection of macro defects on
semiconductor wafers based on optical scanning or imaging of the wafer surface,
for use in fabs that manufacture integrated circuit chips. A typical
semiconductor chip fabrication process involves hundreds of complex and
expensive processing steps. With an increase in the number and complexity of
process steps involved, it is of critical importance to detect defects early in
the manufacturing process. Yield would be maximized if such detection is
performed for each and every wafer without affecting throughput. Under this
program an innovative in-line tool will be developed to rapidly detect macro
defects on whole wafers by integrating inexpensive commercially-available
hardware with sophisticated defect detection and classification algorithms. The
tool will inspect every wafer and will have zero false positives. In Phase I,
the feasibility of the proposed approach was conclusively demonstrated. In Phase
II, a prototype of the defect detection and classification software and scanning
hardware will be integrated into commercial wafer processing equipment, and its
effectiveness will be demonstrated. The tool will have a major impact by
reducing inspection cost and increasing yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is substantial. There is great
potential in the semiconductor industry for an inexpensive tool for real-time
detection and classification of macro defects right at the equipment where the
defect is generated. The successful commercialization of the proposed defect
detection tool will assist in significantly increasing manufacturing yields and
thus lowering costs. The product will find use in several secondary markets such
as solar energy devices, light emitting diodes, photonics, etc. Additionally,
with strong relationships with several universities, summer internships will be
provided to students from local universities, and the research findings will be
presented at international conferences. Thus the proposed work will certainly
impact academic research and training and there is a strong commitment to
creating opportunities for women and minorities. Finally, microelectronics
affects almost every aspect of our lives including wireless and mobile internet
technology. Hence, a product that makes a significant contribution to lowering
the cost of manufacturing integrated circuits will positively affect the society
at large.