* 1229306
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Visualization System to Enable Large-Scale Data-Intensive Collaborative Research and Cyber-Learning using Grid Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Akhtar Mahmood, Bellarmine University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2015
* USD 209,347.00

Proposal #: 12-29306&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Mahmood, Akhtar H; &lt;br/&gt; Alam,
Mohammad S; Severini, Horst; Zain, Samya; &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Bellarmine
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: High Resolution Visualization System to
Enable Large-Scale Data-Intensive Collaborative Research and Cyber-Learning
using Grid Computing&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project from an
EPSCoR state and a non-PhD granting institution, acquiring a high resolution
visualization instrument, aims to set up an Advanced Visualization and
Computational Lab (AVCL) to enable large scale data-intensive collaborative
research (data analyses, simulation, and visualization tasks) in high energy
physics. In collaboration with University of Oklahoma, State University of New
York at Albany, and Susquehanna University, the project spans four
geographically dispersed institutions. The acquisition targets a cost-effective
high-resolution tiled display system providing a collaborative visualization
environment. This visualization system will be constructed as a tiled display
wall (16- foot wide by 4.6-foot tall) over an area that fills a user?s field of
view to provide a display that looks nearly borderless. It will be connected to
several Tier-4 data analyses workstations via a wall processor, so that the
scientists can simultaneously display multiple ATLAS data events all at once. 2D
and 3D visualization tasks will be carried out using Atlantis, GraXML and VP1
visualization software package. The studies and research projects in high energy
physics will be enabled, including, but not limited, to the research for new
types of subatomic particles, such as the charged Higgs boson and Supersymmetric
(SUSY) particles at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), and ?Search for Charged
Higgs Boson from tt Production?. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This
instrumentation increases institutional capacity to conduct cutting-edge
research in cost-effective visualization system. Since the large amount of data
cannot be otherwise analyzed and studied, visualization is fundamental for high
energy physics. The acquisition of this visualization system should
significantly increase the research capability within all the participating
institutions. Moreover, the acquisition of this visualization system will serve
as a campus-wide resource and provide an exceptional opportunity to engage
students in research at the forefront of data-intensive computational science,
visualization, and high-energy physics. Through this effort, student training
(including underrepresented groups) will be emphasized, as well as the knowledge
dissemination. Its impact may be significant.