* 1229635
* MRI: Acquisition of A Dual-Beam Focus Ion-Beam (FIB) System for  Nanotechnology Biomedical and Energy Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Peter Hoffmann, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2015
* USD 750,000.00

The objective of this research is acquisition of a dual beam focus ion beam
(FIB) system, which will permit synergistic opportunities for nanotechnology,
biomedical and energy research at Wayne State University (WSU). The approach is
to use the FIB system as a central tool for several current and future projects,
which urgently demand the ability to fabricate novel three-dimensional
nanostructures and nanodevices in situ. This is a capability uniquely offered by
FIB.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellect Merit: The sub-100 nm resolution three-
dimensional patterning capabilities of FIB through milling/deposition will
facilitate many research projects that require custom fabricated complex
nanostructures and nanosystems. Consequently, FIB will significantly improve the
quality and creativity of research at WSU in a broad range of areas from the
development of devices and instrumentation (AFM, NSOM, scanning probe) to
biomedical applications (biophysics, DNA sequencing, nanofluidics, single cell
analysis, imaging, biosensor) to energy research (characterization of battery
materials, catalyst and nanomaterials). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The success of this proposal will significantly enhance WSU capabilities for
nanofabrication and material characterization. FIB will be available to the
entire WSU campus, other universities and local industry. Together, we estimate
that this proposed FIB will impact more than 100 users from 20 research groups.
For local industry, it will serve as a resource for advanced manufacturing,
product prototyping and material characterization. This proposal represents a
unique opportunity for training under-represented groups, which comprise 41% of
WSU?s enrollment. The PIs will integrate FIB in their on-going projects and FIB
in training of students.