* 1229954
* EAGER: Novel prognostic microfluidic systems for cell separation from whole blood
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Gilda Barabino, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Barabino&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 1229954&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed studies
microfluidic technologies are uniquely applied in combination with blood
separation principles to meet a pressing need for simplified prognostic devices
to aid in assessing disease progression and monitoring treatment. The innovation
in this approach is the utilization of dual separation techniques within a
single microfluidic system (chip) and using a single whole blood sample to
isolate blood cells and circulating endothelial cells. In blood disorders, such
as sickle cell disease, these cells hold important information related to
disease pathology. The separation of multiple cell types from peripheral blood
on a single chip represents an advancement in microfluidic technology that has
significant potential for reliable assessment of disease
prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diagnosis and monitoring of disease states is
critically important to health. Engineering tools and systems, such as
microfluidics, provide unparalleled opportunities for the development of simple
systems that can be used by individuals to assess disease prognosis and monitor
treatment. The proposed studies combine existing microfluidic and separation
technologies to separate cellular components from blood and deliver a device
with predictive capabilities for a very complex blood disorder. Separation and
analysis of these cellular components, which are linked to disease pathology,
are likely to lead to prognostically validated biomarkers and enhance strategies
for assessment and treatment. Minorities are underrepresented in translational
research and the proposed project addresses this gap through partnership with
the Biomedical Innovation and Translation Scholars (BITS) program led by the PI.
BITS is designed to provide education and mentoring to underrepresented minority
graduate students and postdocs on innovation, translational research and
entrepreneurship.