* 1229234
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Small Molecule Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Charles Riordan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 315,033.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program that is
also co-funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program, Professor Charles Riordan from
the University of Delaware and colleagues Donald Watson and Joel Rosenthal will
acquire a high-resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS). The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) reaction discovery and surface patterning; (b) bacterial activation
of the innate immune system; (c) microbial energy metabolism; (d) catalytic
upgrading of biomass-derived chemical intermediates;(e) nickel-oxygen chemistry;
(f) solar fuels and renewable energy; (g) preparation, reactivity, and catalytic
activity of low-valent chromium complexes; (h) development of transition metal
catalyzed reactions; and (i) nickel- and copper-catalyzed reactions of acetals
and carboxylates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A high resolution mass spectrometer
analyzes samples by creating ions from it which are injected into the
spectrometer where their mass/charge ratios are measured to high accuracy. The
mass information that is obtained provides qualitative and quantitative
information on the chemical composition of the sample. This instrument uses a
variety of tools to inject the sample and ionize it, which will allow a broad
range of small molecules to be analyzed from liquids to solids. The
instrumentation provided by this award will provide faculty and students in
several departments the opportunity to pursue research projects using state-of-
the-art instrumentation. It will also be used in several laboratory courses to
train undergraduate students in the use of this widely employed analytical tool.
The mass spectrometer facility at the university of Delaware will partner and
share the instrument with a number of institutions in the region including,
Delaware State University, Lincoln University, Washington University, Bryn Mawr
College and Drexel University.