* 1229411
* 2012 Electronic Processes in Organic Materials GRS. To be Held in  II Ciocco Tuscany Resort, Lucca (Barga), Italy June 3-8, 2012
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2012
* Doerthe Eisele, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

Objective: The objective of this Gordon Research Seminar (seminar) is to match
the Gordon Research Conference (conference) to expand the impact to this
conference to graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and other junior
researchers at comparable experience (young scientists).This seminar will focus
on bringing together young scientists from the highly interdisciplinary
community of organic electronics and allow them to discuss recent progress and
new ideas on their own level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit is to contribute to the understanding and, in turn, the
ability to control the basic current- and light-driven processes in organic
materials. The emphasis of the seminar will be on the latest progress and
challenges regarding: artificial light-harvesting systems, organic electronics
devices, inorganic/organic hybrid nanoscale systems, and especially on the
synergy effects between these topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
broader impacts are that this seminar will not only offer opportunities for new
interdisciplinary collaborations among attendees to address future challenges
but also it will provide the opportunity for young scientists to substantially
increase their benefit from their conference experience. The speakers and
discussion leaders will represent the highly interdisciplinary nature of this
field with young scientists from chemistry, physics, material science,
engineering, and chemical engineering, with both experimental and theoretical
approaches. A primary goal of this funding request is to assist young US
scientists to be able to participate the seminar and to join this community. The
seminar will enhance their research programs and proposals by providing
inspiring goals and ideas at the leading edge of the field.