* 1229173
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Computing Cluster for General Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Joshua Faber, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 290,110.00

This award supports the acquisition of a 600-core, high-speed, large-memory
computer cluster, "BlueSky", dedicated to supporting interdisciplinary research
at the frontiers of gravitational physics, relativistic astrophysics, advanced
high-performance computation, and scientific visualization in the Center for
Computational Relativity and Gravitation at the Rochester Institute of
Technology. Research will focus on some of the most extreme phenomena in the
universe, where the strongest gravitational and magnetic fields interact with
ultra-relativistic matter and high-energy radiation, that can only be studied
through advanced, large-scale computation and visualization. These includes: (1)
calculation of accurate gravitational wave signals from intermediate-mass ratio,
highly-spinning black-hole binary inspirals and mergers, (2) the development of
a highly accurate General Relativistic Magnetohydrodynamics code (which will be
made publicly available through the Einstein Toolkit Consortium) for the
modeling of neutron star mergers, accretion disks, and core-collapse supernovae,
(3) calculation of electromagnetic signals from merging supermassive black holes
at the centers of galaxies. Our research will use the enhanced speed of GPUs to
generate fast and accurate hybrid gravitational signatures for LIGO data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research training will involve students across
several programs and colleges at RIT. Visualizations will be used for enhancing
the classroom experience of deaf and hard-of-hearing students in RIT's National
Technical Institute for the Deaf and out-of-class educational activities. The
cluster will be housed in the CCRG "Black-Hole" Lab. The laboratory is cooled
using a state-of-the-art, in-rack, green-cooling solution provided by OptiCool
Technologies. The laboratory has large glass walls along a high-traffic
corridor, making the cluster and its operation highly visible to the public.
Seeing "BlueSky" will stimulate interest in the instrument itself, gravitational
physics, astrophysics in general, and green technologies.