* 1229115
* MRI Acquisition:   Development of a Multi-Institution Microscopy Core Facility at Loyola University Maryland:   Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Rebecca Brogan, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 273,698.00

The funds from this NSF MRI grant will be used to purchase a Zeiss LSM 700 laser
scanning confocal microscope to enhance the 15,000 square-foot Loyola Microscopy
Core Facility (LMCF) and to establish a multi-institution research and training
consortium. It is anticipated that this will dramatically increase the quality
and quantity of faculty and student scholarship at Loyola and at three nearby
institutions (Mount St. Mary?s University, Towson University, and Washington
College). Six faculty from Loyola University Maryland will be using the confocal
microscope to expand their research programs and to augment undergraduate
research opportunities. Specifically, the instrument will be used to assess:
metabolism in human and non-human primate granulosa and luteal cells, modulation
of cellular form and function by herbal supplements, the mechanism of drug
resistance in breast cancer cells, venom-induced cell death in insects, and
disruption of bacterial biofilms by Bdellovibrio predation. Moreover, three
faculty from nearby colleges/universities will be using the LMCF to understand
the mechanism(s) governing: growth of vascular smooth muscle cells, nickel and
cobalt toxicity, and infection by human herpesviruses. In addition to improving
faculty output, providing students with this type of hands-on experience will
afford them the opportunity to understand how current approaches allow
researchers to address molecular mechanisms in complex biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confocal microscopy is far superior to the
widefield fluorescence microscopy already available in the LMCF. It will provide
the opportunity for researchers to determine the location and/or colocalization
of intracellular molecules, to reconstruct a sample or specimen in three
dimensions, and to image dynamic changes in living cells or tissues over time,
all without compromising the integrity of the signal or sample. The creation of
a multi-institution microscopy facility will allow current studies to be
enhanced and expanded while also providing new opportunities for collaboration
between universities. Within 2-3 years, it is expected that faculty and students
from additional schools will join the consortium, thereby dramatically altering
the research profile of predominantly undergraduate institutions in the
Baltimore Metro area. In addition to increasing and extending faculty research
and, therefore, their ability to compete for extramural research/educational
grants, as the consortium grows, the STEM initiatives in place at the
participating schools will be intensified and will provide area students with
advanced training in microscopy that will ultimately make them more competitive
for summer positions, publications, professional school, and careers in the
biological sciences.