* 1229064
* MRI: Acquisition of Computational Resources for Research in Computational and Systems Biology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Carlos Camacho, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29064&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Camacho, Carlos J; Chong, Lillian
T&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.:
Computational Resources for Research in Computational and Systems
Biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring
a computational instrument, fosters interdisciplinary collaborations and
training that promote breakthroughs in the biological sciences. The project is
lead by the Department of Computational and Systems Biology (DCSB) in
conjunction with the joint Ph.D. program between two institutions in the area:
Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon Universities. The acquisition, a state-of-the-art
57-node 3392 core computing cluster, is dedicated to research and development of
applications and the dissemination of new computational methods. The cluster
supports the following research projects:&lt;br/&gt;- Novel molecular methods to
access biological timescales of interest; &lt;br/&gt;- Deep-sequencing
technologies for high throughput ?omic? data collection; and, &lt;br/&gt;-
Methods to leverage high-resolution multi-modal biomedical images/videos in
basic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
should be felt both regionally and nationally. At the involved institutions, the
research initiatives the incorporation of developed applications in teaching
modules for use at local city high schools, as well as in undergraduate and
graduate courses. Access to dedicated computational resources will provide
valuable hands on experiences for students. More broadly, the software developed
exploits the new computational resources that will be made available to other
researchers nationwide.