* 1229456
* MRI: Development of Confocal with Holographic Optical Manipulation in Parallel
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* William Irvine, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 506,130.00

This award to the University of Chicago is for the development of a unique
instrument that will enable simultaneous three-dimensional imaging and optical
manipulation of soft material samples and biological cells. The instrument will
combine hybrid Holographic/scanning optical tweezers with an advanced confocal
microscope endowed with spectral, thermal, and magnetic control. The integration
will be enabled by a novel approach that combines optical design with 3D
printing of instrument parts. The new instrument will make possible research at
the interface of condensed-matter physics, physical chemistry, and biophysics.
Moreover, it will enable new types of investigations in cell biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of this instrument will have a direct
impact on research on the University of Chicago campus, providing previously
unavailable capability. Crucially it will have an impact well beyond the local
area. A significant effort will be dedicated to the integration of optics with
three-dimensionally printed support structures that will hold the holographic
optical tweezing unit in position on the microscope. The design will be made
available online, enabling the immediate transfer of large portions of the
finished instrument via download and printing (in 3D), thus significantly
lowering the barrier for reproduction of this instrument at other institutions
throughout the world. In addition, the lessons learned in the technological
development of this instrument will be applied, through a combination of high-
school and REU outreach, to the design, printing and assembly of both a lower-
cost alternative for research and a very low-cost printable microscope kit aimed
at bringing advanced science into classrooms.