* 1229742
* MRI:   Acquisition of controlled-environment chambers for integrative botanical research and training at UT-Tyler
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Blake Bextine, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 253,649.00

This award funds the acquisition of a set of walk-in controlled-environment
chambers for plant experimentation. They are equipped with temperature,
humidity, photoperiod, lighting, and CO2 controls. Up to 13,500 plants will
efficiently fit into these chambers, allowing experiments at all times of the
year, including the hot Texas summers. The integrative plant research programs
enabled by these chambers will span many sub-disciplines in biology, including
cellular biology, molecular biology, developmental biology, physiology, ecology,
evolution, and genetics. These chambers will have a stimulating effect on plant
biology research throughout Northeast Texas, a region with over one million
people that has several universities and colleges but that has almost no
facilities for environmentally controlled plant experiments. The primary users
for these chambers work with agriculturally important plant families, and their
work has either direct or indirect implications for agriculture. Furthermore,
the research in these chambers can be conducted under different climate
scenarios, including increased CO2 levels and temperatures.

Undergraduates and graduate students will be allocated space in the chambers to
work on these and other projects, providing invaluable training opportunities
for future scientists, farmers, and land managers. These findings will be
publicized by scientific publications, faculty and student presentations at
regional and national meetings, and press releases to local media outlets, which
have low barriers to news coverage and large audiences.