* 1229576
* MRI: Acquisition of GatorCloud: Enabling High-Impact Scientific Research and Collaboration via Software Defined Networks and Cloud Services
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Erik Deumens, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,172,354.00

MRI: Acquisition of GatorCloud: Enabling High-Impact Scientific Research and
Collaboration via Software-Defined Networks and Cloud
Services&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyberinfrastructure
has fundamentally transformed the landscape of many disciplines, becoming the
engine of change for the next revolution. We propose the GatorCloud
cyberinfrastructure to dramatically boost the Campus Research Network (CRN) to
over 100Gb/s backbone networks connecting multiple primary sites of data centers
across the campus and further enhance it with the cutting-edge software-defined
networking (SDN) capabilities and novel cloud services. Additional SDN switches
will be deployed across multiple sites of the Florida LambdaRail
(FLR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GatorCloud will strengthen Florida's participation
in high-impact national and international projects, such as the CMS experiment
that recently discovered the Higgs boson, the Open Science Grid, the Global
Environment for Network Innovations (GENI), Kepler, and FutureGrid. These
projects involve terabyte to petabyte storage and require terascale to petascale
computations. With GatorCloud, UF can serve the needs of terabyte data
throughput around the world for researchers and their collaborators with
transformative capabilities and services. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;GatorCloud is
the first SDN-enabled campus cloud initiative, offering novel cloud services,
such as HPC as a Service (HPCaaS), Network as a Service (NaaS), and Cloud-in-
Cloud as a Service (CCaaS). It will have transformative impact on shaping the
future of cyberinfrastructure. It provides a production-level environment for
research in the forefront of computer science and engineering, e.g., cloud
computing and storage, networking, bioinformatics, multimedia, data mining,
cyber-physical systems, and parallel and distributed computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It offers a unique interdisciplinary resource for UF and
its partners to train and educate graduate and undergraduate students in many
related courses and research projects.