* 1229941
* SBIR Phase II:  Crowd Sourcing Apprenticeship Learning:  LawMeets - A Web Platform for Teaching Entrepreneurial Lawyering
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Karl Okamoto, ApprenNet LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2016
* USD 703,517.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is directed to
the development of LawMeets, a web-based platform for teaching lawyering skills
through virtual apprenticeships. LawMeets use an innovative pedagogical method
that combines performance-based learning, algorithm-based peer-to-peer review
and expert video demonstrations to replicate the benefits of high-cost, one-on-
one apprenticeship learning but at low-cost and at scale. The target market for
LawMeets is the quarter million novice lawyers who need to develop practical
skills to become valuable members of the profession. In beta tests with hundreds
of students at dozens of different law schools, LawMeets have proven to be
engaging, effective and easy to use.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the role
transactional lawyers play in society. Skilled "deal" lawyers are a critical
ingredient in the entrepreneurial process and, therefore, essential to the
economic growth that relies on a vibrant entrepreneurial eco-system. Both law
schools and legal employers have long struggled with how to teach the lawyering
skills that mark an entrepreneurial lawyer as a master. Law schools have
launched various experiential learning initiatives, including clinical offerings
and simulations. Law firms have experimented with similar training programs.
While improving learning on the margin, none of these efforts has had a
fundamental impact. All rely at their core on the traditional model of student-
teacher interaction. Various on-line tools offer resources for acquiring
substantive knowledge but lack the interactive component that leads to the
development of the cognitive capacities that make up true expertise. None of the
solutions offers a low-cost, scalable vehicle for tapping the reservoir of
expertise found among the community of senior practitioners. The goal for
LawMeets is to provide low cost "hands-on" learning at scale and to become the
dominant vehicle for practical skills instruction in both law schools and law
firms.