* 1229370
* MRI: Acquisition of SIMS Instrument
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Ernst Zinner, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,071,491.00

This award will fund the acquisition of a Cameca ims7f-geo, a state-of-the-art
secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) instrument, and partial salary support
for an instrument technician at Washington University in St. Louis. The new
instrument will provide a unique research environment for comprehensive
elemental and isotopic studies across a range of spatial scales and from diverse
scientific fields. This, in turn, will allow us to provide high-level research
and research-training capabilities to a broad range of local and external users.
At the same time, this new instrument will catalyze new research directions in
the SIMS group at Washington University in the areas of modern
(micro-)biological systems and sedimentary processes, the operation and temporal
evolution of global biogeochemical cycling, mineral transformations and trace
element distributions crucial for understanding a variety of processes spanning
the geological, environmental, biological, and space
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new SIMS instrument will provide ample
learning opportunities about the fundamentals of mass spectrometry, ion optics,
and microanalysis, as well as hands-on research experience for students and
post-docs at different levels, allowing us to train the next generation of SIMS
users. The new instrument and full-time technician will enable users to pursue a
diverse range of research applications. We are committed to providing subsidized
access (and the necessary technical know-how) to new local and external users
for "proof-of-concept" measurements necessary for successful grant applications.
This will ensure access for a wide range of instrument users. The diverse
internal and external users of this new SIMS will catalyze new collaborations
and research directions here at Washington University and throughout the region,
supporting the scientific aims of NSF and other federal funding agencies.
Finally, we will work with the manufacturer to incorporate our custom-made trace
element analysis routine into their software package, which will be made
available to the SIMS community at large.