* 1229129
* Acquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope for  Multidisciplinary Nanotechnology Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Johanna Krontiris-Litowitz, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 444,555.00

This award to Youngstown State University (YSU) is for the acquisition of a
variable pressure scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with high
resolution imaging detectors, an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer, nanometer
pattern generation system, electron backscatter diffraction, and remote control
capabilities. This instrument will enhance existing novel materials research
programs, promote STEM education at regional northeast Ohio and northwest
Pennsylvania institutions, facilitate and enhance multidisciplinary research,
and expand academic-industrial collaborations at YSU. The proposed SEM will be
used for multidisciplinary research from several science and engineering
disciplines, including: Material Science, Mechanical and Electrical Engineering,
Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Geology, and Forensic Sciences. The instrument will
be used in more than 10 research projects involving over 30 graduate students
and postdocs, and more than 300 undergraduate students per year will have access
to it. Proposed interdisciplinary research projects include: mono-crystalline
ferromagnetic shape memory alloy micro-particles for energy and micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS) applications; synthesis and characterization of rear-
earth oxide nanocatalysts; grain orientation and grain boundary microstructure
in ceramic-metal composites; nanolayered ceramic precursors; nanofabrication and
study of wide bandgap semiconductor devices; e-beam lithography of polymer
microlenses and 2-D/3-D photonic crystals on multilayer polymeric systems;
characterization of collagen deposition in scar tissue; design of commercially
important rare earth materials; fuel cell electrolyte membranes; and, bio-
chemical detection properties of carbon nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
SEM will support the educational and outreach goals of the university and will
be fully integrated into undergraduate and graduate research programs, and into
modules and dedicated courses in electron microscopy. The integration of the
instrument with the YSU CyberInstrumentation Consortium (STaRBURSTT@YSU) will
ensure sophisticated access to the SEM and other lab instruments for a large
number of external users, most of whom are at community colleges (CC), or other
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUI) - an outreach activity for which YSU
is well known. The SEM will provide training and education opportunities to
K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, to high school science teachers, and
to CC and PUI faculty through: (1) collaborative STEM projects between YSU,
Westminster College, Eastern Gateway Community College, Poland Seminary High
School and LaBrae High School, Trumbull Career &amp; Technical Center, and
Mahoning Valley Historical Society; (2) Summer Materials Camp for High School
Science Teachers; and (3) YSU Engineering Explorers and related programs. Thanks
to its relative ease of use and impressive imaging capabilities at nanoscale
resolution, the SEM will be one of the core attractors in YSU's outreach
programs for K-12 &amp; community college students and teachers, especially
those at minority serving institutions that often have the desire but lack
opportunities to pursue STEM careers.