* 1229744
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computer Cluster for Multidisciplinary Computational Research at Prairie View A&M University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Dhadesugoor Vaman, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2018
* USD 394,222.00

This work provides a High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster at Prairie View
A&M University to support a broad array of multidisciplinary computing-intensive
research and research training. The proposed cluster features Ethernet ports
connection between nodes, shared network storage and massive parallel
computation on graphics processor cores. Moreover, the on board Gigabit Ethernet
ports with switch connection can support large data sets transmission to enable
the research in real time multimedia network simulation.

Demonstrating compressive sensing (CS) on real time multi-view video application
requires considerable computational capability but is critical for surveillance
camera and sensor networks. The impacts are nontrivial in homeland security
applications especially on the battlefield where sensors and hand-held radios
are mobile. Video sensors detect physical properties and rapidly transmit the
data to a command control center for remote executable actions. A High
Performance Computing cluster makes it possible to explore parallel processing
of CS sampling and rendering and the Prairie View cluster is ideally suited for
high-speed, parallel video processing in the research of these applications.
This cluster enables new research in simulating cognitive radio networks with
more complicated situations The real time simulation will help not only
understanding how real time processing affects the cognitive radio applications,
but also designing algorithms for applications in real world environment.

This research includes the integration of research and education. The most
direct and immediate impact is that research data, source code, and curriculum
materials obtained from the research projects supported by this HPC cluster are
freely accessible across the research communities. Strengthening the real time
multimedia signal reconstruction, analysis and modeling research impacts
homeland security needs and efficient usage of network resources. Additionally,
the development of new courses, expanded research experiences for Graduate and
undergraduate students, and outreach to high school and middle school students
are an integral part of planned use of the Prairie View HPC Cluster.