* 1229598
* MRI: Acquisition of Real-Time Digital Simulator for Real-Time Studies in Next Generation Power Grid Infrastructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Sukumar Kamalasadan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2016
* USD 368,887.00

The objectives of this research are to develop a smart grid laboratory for
modeling the power grid as integrated system of systems and analyzing its
capability to transform into next generation sustainable energy infrastructure.
The approach is to develop a research laboratory centered on the acquired real-
time digital simulator that can perform scalable hardware-in-the-loop
simulations with real-time power grid data and provide a platform for, device
functionality and system integration testing, real-time power system studies,
and conducting educational activities to develop next-generation workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is that this instrument acquisition
will advance science and technology in the field, and enable students to grasp
the physics behind power system dynamic phenomena. For example, real-time
modeling and simulation can help to identify the effect of increased penetration
of renewables on power system dynamics and methodology for improving power
system reliability. The test bed provides rapid prototyping capability and
allows hands-on research and training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
is that this instrument acquisition will stand as backbone for a unique
infrastructure for research and education, enabling sustainable and resilient
modern smart power grid studies in the region, nationally and internationally.
This acquisition will enhance economic growth, stimulating interdisciplinary
research opportunities with increase participation of women and underrepresented
groups, efficient transfer of research to the shop floor, and by developing
highly trained workforce through real-time training of power grid professionals.
Also, the proposed research and training activities will contribute to the power
system security and strongly benefit our national agenda of power grid
modernization.