* 1229745
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Parallel Computing Cluster for Astrophysics Research at the University of California, Santa Cruz
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Stanford Woosley, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 08/31/2014
* USD 910,000.00

Astronomers don't just use telescopes in their attempts to unravel the mysteries
of the universe. Many problems require heavy analytic computation and the use of
computer simulations to understand how planets, stars, and galaxies form, grow,
evolve, and die. The simulations can include a huge number of objects, embedded
in a complex environment of dust, gases, magnetic fields as well as the unknown
dark matter, and follow these objects as they interact, coalesce, or disrupt.
Today's computers have become massively parallel - that is to say that they have
many "processing units" working in parallel to solve these highly complex
problems. One noted and successful team at the University of California Santa
Cruz proposes to acquire a new computer "cluster" to attack difficult unsolved
problems in astrophysics. The Principal Investigator, Dr. Piero Madau, and his
team will use their new computing power to try to answer many questions in
astrophysics from the very early days of the universe up to the present time and
beyond. This new computer cluster will consist of hundreds of multiple
processors, both conventional computer processors as well as graphical
processors. It will have one petabyte of disk storage capacity (that is one
million gigabytes!). The acquisition of this important research tool is funded
by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through the Major Research
Instrumentation program.