* 1229298
* MRI: Acquisition of a Soot-Particle Aerosol Mass Spectrometer for the Measurement of Submicron Particulate Chemical Composition
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* David Miller, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 467,925.00

This project involves acquisition of an Aerodyne soot particle aerosol mass
spectrometer (SP-AMS), a newly-developed instrument that allows the measurement
of size resolved chemical composition of sub-micrometer aerosols in real time.
The SP-AMS is similar to the Aerodyne high-resolution time-of-flight aerosol
mass spectrometer but adds an infrared laser and single particle soot photometer
for the measurement of black carbon, a measurement that was not obtainable in
earlier generations of the AMS. There is also the promise of trace element
measurement in some applications. The instrument will provide a cutting-edge
analytical tool for scientists at Drexel University who study atmospheric
chemistry, indoor air quality, combustion, and public health impacts of
particulates. The instrument will also be made available to and foster
collaborative research interactions with groups from other universities in the
Mid-Atlantic region such as Rutgers University, the University of Delaware,
Columbia University, and Bucknell University.

Many young scientists will benefit from training and research projects that
utilize this instrument. One source of such students, the Drexel School of
Public Health, has a grant program (R25 from the National Inst. on Minority
Health and Health Disparities) for supporting graduate researchers from
underrepresented groups, which will immediately encourage the diversity of
researchers using the SP-AMS. Impacts to the broader research community will
involve the dissemination of research products (e.g., datasets and software
tools) for use by other researchers. Positive impacts on society at large will
stem from improvements to the understanding of how aerosol chemistry affects
climate change, quality of life, and health.