* 1229108
* MRI: Acquisition of Eye Tracking System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Amanda Holland-Minkley, Washington and Jefferson College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 72,533.00

Proposal #: 12-29108 PI(s): Holland-Minkley, Amanda Institution: Washington and
Jefferson College Title: MRI/Acq.: Acquisition of Eye Tracking System Project
Proposed: This project from an undergraduate-serving institution, acquiring an
Eye Tracking system, aims to add quantitative measures of changes in problem-
solving techniques to more traditional outcomes-based assessments of student
learning. The eye tracking system enables pursuing further work and greater
quantitative analysis in design and usability research focused on issues such as
the effect of the interface design of security-focused software on the secure
behaviors and awareness of security features of the software users. Current work
at the institution focuses on the particular application of these methods in an
introductory programming course. The Information Technology Leadership (ITL)
faculty have broaden their research to encompass more mobile computing that has
contributed in developing a collaboration with Biology faculty. In turn, this
collaboration has given rise to a mobile application used when collecting
ecological data in the field. A beta version, now under assessment, has been
created and deployed where the eye tracking methods will be used to confirm that
mobile technologies enable not only more accurate data collection, but better
learning and retention on the part of the student researchers in the field.
Broader Impacts: This solely undergraduate institution core mission focuses on
research involving significant undergraduate collaboration. In particular, the
ITL Department is committed to enabling its majors to take part in significant
research projects that allow them to act as true collaborators and not simply as
coders or lab technicians. Thus, with an existing history of engaging
undergraduates in design and usability research, a modern eye tracking system
will strengthen the program making it accessible to more students. The system
will play a role in classroom activities, labs, and independent projects.
Students should gain fluency with the tool and with appropriate methods for
using it in regular coursework. A service management course will be required for
all seniors to partner with local non-profits to provide technical consulting or
development. The system provides a platform for continued interdisciplinary
research, including ongoing work in Biology and potential projects that involve
Political Science, Gender and Women?s Studies, Sociology, and Psychology.