* 1229405
* MRI: Development of nano-CT-based elastography system for three-dimensional deformation field and elastic characterization of heterogeneous materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Timothy Rupert, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 555,505.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the development of a
nano-CT-based elastography system that will permit three-dimensional (3-D)
reconstruction of deeply embedded local details of a deformation field with sub-
micron resolution and the associated characterization of images to generate
anisotropic modulus elastograms. With the integration of a nano-CT adaptive
compression wave generator, the system can unveil a significant amount of hidden
information regarding the localized deformation and mechanical distribution
within materials. The unique combination of milimeter-scale penetration length
with sub-micron resolution offered by nano-CT makes it an ideal tool for
noninvasive 3-D mechanical deformation imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the development for the elastography system will enhance the overall
capabilities for micro-/nano-systems development and materials characterization.
Furthermore, the proposed development will enable exciting educational
activities both at the undergraduate and graduate level, in all five engineering
departments at UC Irvine. This interdisciplinary nature of the project will also
help attract and retain students from underrepresented groups and expose them to
the state-of-the-art research. The project will disseminate its findings broadly
through submission of publications, presentations in conferences, and non-
technical publications through the internet.