* 1229559
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra High Pressure Liquid Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometer for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research and Teaching in Chemistry and Related Fields
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vijay Vulava, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 277,191.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Wendy Cory from the College of Charleston and colleagues Vijay Vulava, Marcello
Forconi, Brooke Van Horn and Jennifer Fox will acquire a mass spectrometer with
an ultra high pressure liquid chromatograph (UHPLC-MS). The award will enhance
research training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
studying the environmental fate of pharmaceutically active compounds; (b)
quantifying relative amounts of target proteins present in wild-type and mutant
yeast mitochondria; (c) determining the kinetics of hydrolysis of sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS) and similar substrates by the SdsA1 enzyme; and (d) examining
hydrolytically degraded co-polyesters with incorporated synthetic monomers.

A UHPLC-MS combines the physical separation capability of liquid chromatography
with the mass analysis ability of mass spectrometry. The liquid chromatograph
under pressure separates a mixture into its molecular components. These
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into a parent
ion and fragment ions and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows the identity of the substances in a complex mixture to be
determined and their structures and quantities. This instrumentation will
provide faculty and students in two departments the opportunity to pursue
research projects using modern, more sensitive instrumentation. It will also be
used in several laboratory courses to train significant numbers of students in
the use of this important analytical technique.