* 1229250
* MRI Collaborative: Development of an Intelligent, Autonomous, Unmanned, Mobile Sensor
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Helen Boussalis, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,999.00

Proposal #: 12- 29236 Collaborative Proposal #: 12-29250&lt;br/&gt;PI(s):
Valavanis, Kimon P.; Gao,David Wenzhong; Mahoor,Mohammad;Rutherford,Matthew
J;Yi,Yun-Bo and Collab PI(s): Boussalis, Helen R.;Guillaume, Darrell; Wu,
Chivey&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Denver and Collab Institution:
California State-LA University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI: Collaborative: Dev. of an
Integrated, Intelligent, Autonomous, Unmanned, Mobile
Sensor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the development of an integrated, intelligent, autonomous unmanned
mobile sensor will enable research into the foundations of the next generation
of autonomous Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS). The objective of this proposal is
to develop an unmanned helicopter (about 150 kg weight) along with a mobile
landing platform for refueling purposes. The aircraft would be able to operate
with both electric and fuel. The instrument will be composed of two tightly
coupled components, a&lt;br/&gt;(i) Novel light-weight unmanned helicopter
(&lt;150 Kg), and,&lt;br/&gt;(ii) General purpose landing platform that will
also serve as a refueling/recharging station and data relay/repository.
&lt;br/&gt;This composition of the instrument is expected to pave the way for
the next generation of multi-purpose/cost-effective UAS into civilian and public
domain applications. The proposed integrated two component instrument
development is not considered as an extension of existing technology. It will
enable heterogeneous networked unmanned systems operating in unison in
traditional/extreme environment. The following specific research projects will
be enabled through the instrument: &lt;br/&gt;- Fault-Tolerant and Emergency
Landing Navigation and Control Systems&lt;br/&gt;- RADAR-based Sense-and-Avoid
System&lt;br/&gt;- Prognosis and Structural Health Monitoring of
UAVs&lt;br/&gt;- Networked Unmanned Systems (NUS)&lt;br/&gt;- Integration:
Software Reliability and Security&lt;br/&gt;- Unmanned Helicopters for
Civilian/Public and Industrial Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Denver (DU) and California State University Los Angeles (CalStU-LA), a
predominantly minority-serving institution, collaborate in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact should
be felt both regionally and nationally. At the national level, the instrument
should initiate transformative advances in the computational algorithms
proposed. The results will be made available to the broader research community
in the form of open-source codes. Simulations made possible by these algorithms
will have broad national and societal impact ranging from climate change
scenarios to wind power generation to plant biotechnology and improved animal
breeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the institutional and regional levels, DU
faculty/students will collaborate with CalStU-LA faculty/students to enhance the
ethnic and gender diversity of the student population, especially recruiting
minority students. Project goal include increasing the educational/training
opportunities for underrepresented students, and the number of graduates in STEM
fields.