* 1229261
* Faster Mixing Markov Chain Monte Carlo for Multidimensional IRT and Cognitive Diagnosis Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Yves Atchade, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 196,000.00

Fitting complex item-response theory (IRT) models has become increasingly
important in educational assessment, psychological assessment, and patient-
reported health assessment. The use of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
for fitting these models has surged in recent years, particularly for
multidimensional IRT and cognitive diagnosis models where standard methods such
as maximum likelihood estimation are difficult to apply. Unfortunately, slow
mixing of the Markov chains is often a severe problem, limiting the ability of
researchers to draw valid inferences from the MCMC output. This project will
develop fast-mixing MCMC algorithms applied to complex IRT models including
multidimensional IRT models and cognitive diagnosis/diagnostic classification
models. Specifically, the improved algorithms will include rescaling and re-
centering approaches such as Meng and van Dyk's conditional and marginal
augmentation, methods using gradient information, and adaptive MCMC methods. The
project will extend the analytical reach of advanced MCMC methods in the
psychometric literature, focus the attention of the psychometric community on
MCMC mixing, and provide the basis for effective MCMC implementation in complex
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient and accurate fitting of IRT models is of
profound importance. The high-stakes nature of most educational assessments
demands valid estimation procedures. Therefore, slow mixing, leading to either
slow or non-convergence of MCMC estimation procedures, can profoundly affect
inference, leading to incorrect ranking of individuals. The methods developed by
this project will address a critical problem in applications of MCMC in the
psychometric literature. The project also will develop free, open-source
software with which to implement the new methods.