* 1229931
* Workshop: Identification of Fundamental Interfacial and Transport Phenomena for the Sustainable Deployment of Hydraulic Shale Fracturing - Role of Chemical..., May 2012, Wash, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Alberto Striolo, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 01/31/2013
* USD 57,849.00

1229931-Striolo &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural gas, an abundant resource in the United
States, offers significant advantages compared to other fossil fuels in terms of
both environmental impact and economic security. The technology of hydraulic
fracturing, pioneered in the 1940?s, has been recently transformed, leading to
the economical production of stranded natural gas. An economical and reliable
source of natural gas is essential for the energy sector as well as the chemical
industry. Unfortunately, the public opinion is concerned about the possibility
of environmental issues that might be traced back to the unregulated practice of
hydraulic fracturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support to
organize a two-day workshop in Washington, D.C. to identify fundamental research
needs of hydraulic fracturing in the general areas of interfacial and transport
phenomena that could potentially enable the sustainable deployment of shale gas
extraction. Researchers from academia, industry, and government will address
this topic in an open forum and provide recommendations on how to employ current
and future research capabilities. Topics include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a)
General observations (details concerning the fracture technology, current and
future utilization of natural gas, seismic technologies to probe shale
formations, the effect of carbon dioxide on rock formations, water quality where
hydraulic fracturing is practiced)&lt;br/&gt;b) Methane hydrates&lt;br/&gt;c)
Transport in dual-permeability media&lt;br/&gt;d) Role and fate of the fracture
fluids chemicals&lt;br/&gt;e) Thermodynamic properties of compounds used in
fracture fluids, including complex mixtures containing water, natural gas, and
carbon dioxide&lt;br/&gt;f) Water usage and disposal&lt;br/&gt;g) Simultaneous
natural gas extraction and carbon dioxide
sequestration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary outcomes expected from the proposed workshop are recommendations for
future research needs that will benefit the economical and environmentally-
benign extraction of natural gas from shale formations. This workshop will bring
together scientists from industry, academia, and the government. The PI will
broadcast recommendations to the community via one review article that will be
submitted for publication in a scientific journal. A summary of the workshop
discussion will be published on the World Wide Web. An executive report will be
submitted to NSF within two months of the workshop. A detailed report will be
submitted to NSF within six months from the end of the workshop.