* 1229928
* RAPID: Stakeholder Alignment for EarthCube
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 02/28/2014
* USD 129,030.00

Large-scale collaborative science is of increasing importance, but relatively
little empirical evidence is available to guide the creation and operation of
these multi-stakeholder efforts. Previous social science research on stakeholder
alignment in industrial relations and organizational studies is only now
beginning to be applied to scientific consortia. Early results indicate that
social science tools and methods can play a key role in enabling coordinated,
cross-organizational alignment. New techniques for identifying stakeholders,
assessing interests, and visualizing alignment are beginning to emerge, but
require additional refinement. This is a time-bound, demonstration case for
applying stakeholder alignment methods initially advanced under the NSF study of
'Stakeholder Alignment in Socio-Technical Systems' (NSF-VOSS 0956472). This case
will demonstrate new ways for stakeholders in complex systems to better
visualize and analyze core interests (common and conflicting) in order to more
quickly and more comprehensively achieve the alignment needed for understanding
and action. It is anticipated that this application of the methods will
highlight needed areas for further instrumentation, validation, and
enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF EarthCube initiative represents a
novel approach to rapid development of community-guided cyber infrastructure to
integrate data and information for knowledge management across the Geosciences.
Optimizing these activities will require a deep understanding of stakeholder
interests, including points of alignment (or misalignment). This project will
identify EarthCube stakeholders and their interests and develop, administer, and
analyze the results of an initial stakeholder alignment survey to assess the
state of the EarthCube cyber infrastructure, geoscience, and computer science
communities prior to the planned June community meeting. Timely feedback on this
survey will be central to the success of the overall EarthCube effort, and
enable longitudinal analysis of changes as the EarthCube process moves from
separate communities, through the initial organization of emergent
interdisciplinary teams and eventual community integration. Stakeholder
alignment is hypothesized to play an important role in community coalescence and
team development and to affect the likelihood of successfully defining system
requirements and building prototypes. This project provides an opportunity to
test the applicability of innovative stakeholder alignment techniques to
emerging geo-sciences, cyber infrastructure and computer science partnerships
focused on developing common frameworks for sharing research
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved stakeholder alignment will substantially
enhance the success and impact of EarthCube. The resulting cyber infrastructure
will create value and mitigate risk in domains touched by the geosciences.
Further, based on this demonstration case, applications to a wide range of NSF
investments may be appropriate. These tools and methods for stakeholder
alignment represent potentially high impact enablers across our societal
institutions that are of ever greater importance in an era of accelerating
change.