* 1229170
* MRI: Development of Instrumentation for Dynamic Nuclear Polarization of Organic Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* William Brey, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,352,735.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Stephen Hill from Florida State University (FSU) and the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory (NHMFL) and colleagues William Brey and Johan van Tol will
develop a custom spectrometer equipped with a magnet and probes capable of
supporting both high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) at relatively high fields and frequencies. The main
idea is to combine these methodologies, resulting in a high-field dynamic
nuclear polarization (DNP) instrument for organic solutions that would allow the
study of samples that are mass limited and thus can only be prepared in very low
concentrations. The target is to operate at 14.1 T, requiring nuclear and
electron irradiation at 600 MHz and 395 GHz, respectively. The design is based
on rapid shuttling inside the NMR magnet between the homogeneity sweet spot,
which will be used for the NMR experiments, and a location just above, where the
DNP will be performed by microwave irradiation. The new instrument will lead to
an enhancement in sensitivity of the typical organic NMR experiment (including
essentially any NMR experiment implemented today on molecules dissolved in
organic solvent) by over two orders of magnitude. A 50-fold enhancement in
sensitivity is expected with successful DNP implementation, with further gains
coming from adapting existing NHMFL-based orthogonal technologies utilizing
cryogenic high temperature superconducting NMR probe platforms. Such
enhancements will open wide new fields of applications in many of areas of
interest to NMR spectroscopists. Examples are organic structure determinations,
synthesis and screening of pharmaceuticals, elucidation of natural product
structures, and metabolomics analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
instrument will combine three techniques: nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP).
NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. Similarly, an EPR spectrometer yields detailed information on
the geometric and electronic structure of molecular and solid state materials.
It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes of short-lived,
highly reactive species involved in important chemical and biochemical
processes. DNP utilizes EPR in order to overcome one of NMR's main drawbacks -
its inherent low sensitivity. By irradiating stable electron radicals that have
been co-mixed with molecular targets of interest with high-power microwaves
tuned to the appropriate EPR frequency (395 GHz in this case), polarization can
be transferred to the target nuclei via the electron spins. The increased
nuclear polarization results in increased sensitivity in NMR experiments and
thus improves the chances of using samples that can only be prepared in very low
concentrations, e.g., from rare natural products or bioproducts. This research
will have a major impact in improving NMR screening capabilities and will
catalyze pharmaceutical development, while also training the next generation of
instrumentalists by combining the expertise of chemists, physicists and
biochemists.