* 1229197
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hybrid Mass Spectrometry System for the Next Generation of Multidisciplinary Geosciences Research, Student Education and Training
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* H. Rodger Harvey, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2015
* USD 517,631.00

The PI's request funding to acquire a state-of-the-art, high-resolution, hybrid
mass spectrometry system and associated peripherals (LC-MSn). The proposed
instrumentation represents a strategic expansion of ODU research capabilities in
marine ecosystem studies and will provide new critical research tools for a team
of faculty, researchers and students. The LC-MSn instrumentation will be used
for structural characterization and quantitative analysis of a diverse suite of
polar molecules, most of which are biotic in origin and represent living
materials and metabolites, including those of emerging environmental and
ecological health concerns. A range of interdisciplinary research activities
will benefit from the proposed instrumentation, include: elucidating
biogeochemical cycling of organic matter in the Arctic Ocean by analysis of
molecular organic markers; utilizing environmental proteomics to understand
marine nitrogen cycling and geochemical processes; analyzing transformations of
organic nitrogen in coastal systems; characterizing organic molecules associated
with marine protists; and addressing the roles of dissolved organic ligands in
the sorption and bioavailability of trace metals. This new instrumentation will
facilitate further development of ongoing and future research projects that
require new levels of analytical sophistication for characterization of organic
compounds present in marine and estuarine ecosystems and their environmental
context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
requested instrumentation will help the continued development of infrastructure
for research. Graduate students as well as undergraduate students will benefit
from this state-of-the-art facility. ODU has an outreach program through the
Virginia Aquarium and Marine Science Center which provides excellent
opportunities for public outreach. The research derived from the use of the
instrument is to be highlighted through the aquarium and public lectures.