* 1229566
* MRI: Equipment Development: Bimanual Robotic Manipulation and Sensory Workspace
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2016
* J. Edward Colgate, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 03/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29566&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Lynch, Kevin M; Argall, Brenna; Colgate,
J. Edward; Murphey, Todd D; Wu, Ying&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Bimanual Robotic Manipulation and Sensory
Workspace &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
developing an instrument consisting of robot arms/arms and vision-related
equipment, aims to advance research in dexterous dynamic robot manipulation. The
major components of the system are a two-arm manipulation system consisting of
two 7-DOF WAM arms and three-finger hands with tactile and force-torque sensors;
a sensory workspace consisting of high-speed vision for object tracking and
color-depth cameras for lower-speed color imaging and occupancy maps; and a user
command and control workstation, all integrated using software running under the
Robot Operating System (ROS). The instrument enables research in various areas,
such as manipulation, haptics, learning-by-demonstration, gesture recognition,
rehabilitation, prosthetics, and novel sensing modalities (e.g., active
electrosense).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The area of
human-robot interaction should gain much from this instrument. An active area of
research, dual-arm manipulation is extremely relevant in the context of
manufacturing, which constitutes an important and urgent national concern. In
terms of outreach and the involvement of under-represented groups, the team?s
track record is evidenced by institutional programs, like summer research
opportunities and partnerships to Girl Scout troops and local science museums.
This project aims to place PhD students involved in the project as interns at
Barrett Technologies, thus providing opportunities to closely collaborate with
the robot arm/hand designer. Such collaboration transcends the traditional
vendor-buyer relationship to possibly co-design and co-publish material and
software components.