* 1229181
* MRI:   Development of a Mobile Thermodynamic and Dynamic Profiling Facility for the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* David Turner, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 663,268.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award effort will support development of a
unique mobile thermodynamic and dynamic profiling system for meteorological and
engineering research. This portable platform will combine (1) a passive remote-
sensing Atmospheric Emitted Radiance Interferometer; (2) a microwave radiometer;
and (3) a surface meteorological system, including both standard meteorological
and turbulence sensors on a deployable mast. These components will be integrated
with an existing University of Oklahoma-provided Doppler wind lidar (light
detection and ranging system) adapted for mobile use so as to provide
observations of cloud base, characteristics of optically-thin clouds, and
airflow via range-height type scanning. These observations are to be
supplemented by periodic in-situ radiosonde measurements via co-location of
existing mobile sounding systems. This development will be unique, as passive-
infrared and microwave radiometers have not been previously combined in a mobile
observing system. Moreover, synergistic opportunities exist to improve
temperature and humidity retrievals from combination of these measurements along
with lidar specification of cloud base height. Scientists, engineers, students
and a technician will work together to design, test and implement this mobile
platform and harden systems as required for travel. Preheating/temperature
controls will be incorporated as necessary to foster rapid deployment, and
potential electromagnetic interference issues will also be addressed. A common
software display, analysis and robust data storage system that integrates remote
communication capabilities will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit of this effort will come through improvements in the ability
to more fully characterize of the pre-convective environment and relevant
mesoscale dynamics involved in thunderstorm formation, boundary layer and urban
meteorological processes, as well as through contributions to data assimilation,
understanding of regional climate, and improved sensor synergies. Broader
Impacts will include substantial extension of capabilities already resident in
NSF's lower atmosphere observing facility deployment pool, contributions toward
key atmospheric research objectives identified in recent National Research
Council reports, potential improvements to numerical simulation of high-impact
weather events, both hands-on and classroom education of students at
undergraduate and graduate levels (including participants in an NSF-supported
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program), and involvement of
underrepresented groups in both education and supported research.