* 1229081
* MRI: Acquisition of a HPC System for Data-Driven Discovery in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,841,346.00

Proposal #: 12-29081&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Somani, Arun K; Aluru, Srinivas; Fox,
Rodney O; Gordon, Mark S; Takle, Eugene S&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI: Acquisition of a HPC System for Data-Driven
Discovery in Science and Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, acquire an HPC instrument (HPC cluster with large storage and a fast
Infiniband network), aims to support 17 projects from 8 departments in a broad
range of computational disciplines, including bioscience, ecology, fluid
dynamics, earth and atmospheric science, materials science, and energy systems.
The inclusion of GPUs and emphasis on large-scale memory units constitutes the
key novelty of the proposed instrument. The proposed research involves a mix of
algorithm development for parallel architectures and computational modeling,
while pursuing compelling applications in biological, material, energy and
climate sciences, i.e.:&lt;br/&gt;- Biosciences. Bioinformatics tools will be
developed to focus on research such as error-correcting algorithms for next-gen
sequencers, resequencing, genome assembly, genome-wide association, biological
network interference analysis, and metabolomics.&lt;br/&gt;- Multiscale methods
for grand challenge problems. Methods that can address ?grand challenge?
problems, such as simulation of atmospheric aerosol formation and design of new
materials. Coarse-graining will be used, starting with high-level quantum
mechanics methods that are computationally expensive and mapping the high-level
potential onto a new potential is much simpler.&lt;br/&gt;- Computational fluid
dynamics modeling. The new HPC platform will enable cutting edge research in
fluid mechanics and multiphase flows. Particle-resolved direct numerical
simulations of multiphase flow with fluid and surface reactions will be first-
of-its-kind simulations. Algorithmic developments will have broad applications
in sprays, bubbly flows and device-scale simulations of gas-solid flow
applications that employ quadrature-based moment methods to treat the solid
phase.&lt;br/&gt;- Coupled dynamics of land use change and regional climate
extremes. The long-term goal is to integrate policy and climate projection
models to capture dynamic coupling between policy-driven agricultural land use
change and regional climate, including the novel climate and regional
agricultural projection systems and simulations. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The impact should be felt both regionally and nationally. At the
national level, the instrument should initiate transformative advances in
computational algorithms proposed and will be made available to the broader
research community in the form of open-source codes. Simulations made possible
by these algorithms will have broad national and societal impact ranging from
climate change scenarios to wind power generation to plant biotechnology and
improved animal breeding. At the regional level the proposed HPC cluster will
greatly enrich the institution?s research infrastructure. Use of the instrument
will be incorporated into advanced courses and time will be allocated to train
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in computational
modeling and algorithm development. The HPC cluster will make time available to
primarily undergraduate institutions and, coupled with active recruitment plans,
should help attract women, underrepresented minorities, and first generation
college students, who might otherwise not be encouraged to attend the
institution.