* 1229663
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis Microprobe to Enhance Multidisciplinary Research and Education at Portland State University and Beyond
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Jun Jiao, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2014
* USD 580,000.00

The objective of this project is to acquire a scanning electron spectroscopy for
chemical analysis (ESCA) microprobe to fill a critical gap in surface analysis
capabilities and greatly expand research possibilities in surface science,
biosensor, nanodevices etc. at Portland State University (PSU) and beyond. The
approach is to install such a state-of-the-art surface characterization
instrument at the Center for Electron Microscopy and Nanofabrication, a multi-
user core research facility at PSU, subsequently offer professional training and
research support to internal and external researchers and students as well as
technical personnel from high-tech industry, expand existing and develop new
courses.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the unique
integration of the scanning ESCA microprobe with a low-surface-damage C60
sputtering source to provide high-resolution surface analysis capabilities, not
currently available at the greater Portland Area. It will allow academic
researchers and industrial technical personnel to accurately identify the
chemical state and composition, band structures and further understand the
surface nature of inorganic and organic nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;The broad
impact of this project is that it will significantly 1) Enable research
activities in over 18 NSF, DOD, DOE etc. projects totaling over $10M; 2) Expand
the scientific impact of planned research proposals; 3) Provide unique
opportunities for the interdisciplinary research training and education via
existing and newly developed courses and training programs; 4) Facilitate new
faculty recruitment and advance junior faculty career development; 5) Increase
inter /intra university and industry collaborations with current partners, while
stimulating new collaborations with potential partners.