* 1229749
* MRI:   Acquisition of Instrumentation for Spatially Relevant Plant Metabolomics and Proteomics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Norman Lewis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 730,944.00

This project uses funds to add an integrated mass spectrometry-based tissue
imaging system, including a tissue sectioning station and a new generation
MALDI-based quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometry (Q-TOFMS) system that
incorporates integrated ion mobility spectrometry, to the M.J. Murdock
Metabolomics Laboratory (MML, http://www.murdockmetabolomics.wsu.edu, co-
directed by three of the PIs) at Washington State University. Addition of this
integrated instrumentation system to the MML enables researchers in the IBC and
the WSU campus as a whole to acquire tissue imaging data that incorporates not
only high mass accuracy and high resolution MS and MS/MS-based identification of
proteins and metabolites, but also ion mobility spectrometric characterization
of such compounds, increasing confidence in compound identification and
quantification, while reducing noise in data acquisition. A critical missing
link in past research has been the ability to identify, at the cellular or sub-
tissue level, where biochemical processes occur or how pathways are regulated,
especially in complex organs such as plant stems, roots, rhizomes and leaves.
Acquisition of this integrated instrumentation enables fundamental mechanistic
questions to be addressed that have remained unanswered for decades due to
inadequate spatial resolution of previous analytical approaches. The integrated
tissue imaging system will be housed in a newly renovated lab within the MML
designed to accommodate such instrumentation, and expands the MML's current
strengths in metabolomics and proteomics, furthering the goal of developing the
MML as a world premier plant metabolomics facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
produce a fantastic diversity of compounds and substances that are used in
pollination, plant defense, communication within individual plants and between
plants and other organisms, among many other functions. Many of these highly
specialized substances, such as flavors, fragrances, gums, resins, toxins,
structural components, and nutritional and medicinal compounds, are produced in
very few cell types or even in individual cells in plants. The ability to detect
and measure various metabolites and the proteins that produce them in distinct
single cell types in plant tissues has long been near impossible, even though
this ability is vital in the long run to obtain a complete understanding of
plant metabolism. It is generally considered that such knowledge is critical to
future efforts to improve plants for human use. Regulation of these processes at
the individual cellular level in plants is poorly understood, largely as a
result of inability to detect and measure metabolites in specific plant cells.
The new tissue imaging technology allows for detection and measurement of
metabolites and proteins in specific cells in complex biological tissues such as
stems, roots, rhizomes, flowers and leaves, and other specialized cell types in
plants, or other tissues in other organisms (fungi, animals, insects, etc.).
This new technology thus enables researchers to test hypotheses about important
and fundamental biological processes related to medicinal plant metabolism,
biofuel production, plant-insect interactions and basic plant biochemistry,
among other areas. Data acquired with this instrument system will be part of the
research projects of graduate students, undergraduate students and post-doctoral
fellows in the fields of plant biochemistry, chemistry, interdisciplinary omics,
and metabolic engineering. In addition, the new instrument system will be
integrated into two specific efforts to attract current and future students to
the fields of plant biochemistry and metabolomics particularly and to science in
general and to provide educational advantages to the students at WSU. First,
plant tissue imaging will be incorporated into the Advanced Plant Biochemistry
course taught by CoPI Lange. Second, PI Gang will participate in CoPI Weller's
"Pumping-Up the Math and Science Pipeline: Grade School to College" program that
focuses on Native American and Hispanic populations on the Colville Reservation
(largest in the Pacific Northwest) and in non-tribal regions surrounding Omak,
WA, which hosts high school seniors for summer research internships.