* 1229408
* MRI: Aquisition of Computer Cluster for Heliophysics, Plasma, and Turbulence Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 534,977.00

This project involves the acquisition of a 4,300 core computer cluster to enable
leading-edge research in solar physics, the solar wind and its properties, both
fluid and plasma turbulence, magnetic reconnection and plasma instabilities, and
magnetospheric physics. The cluster will be located in the University of New
Hampshire Research Computation and Instrumentation (RCI) core facility and
operated by its staff. The installation of the cluster will take advantage of
the recent modernization and expansion of the RCI machine room, which provides a
stable infrastructure and efficient power supply and cooling to minimize the
carbon footprint. The cluster replaces an older one, Zaphod, which is now in its
eighth year of operation. While Zaphod has enabled numerous studies and some
breakthroughs in computational physics, the new cluster will be at least 15
times more powerful and thus enable more leading-edge
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster will significantly enhance our ability
to simulate plasma and fluid systems, benefiting research projects with more
than $3.5M in combined yearly expenditures. Progress will not be just
incremental, but we have good reason to believe that in many cases our progress
will open up new physical regimes. Most of the simulation codes that will be
used are already mature, thus the impact of the cluster on scientific
productivity will be immediate. Over its lifetime, the computer cluster will
enable leading-edge research for at least a dozen faculty, and many more
researchers, post-docs, graduate, and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the research to be performed on the
cluster is directly related to space weather. Our progress in modeling the solar
corona, solar wind, and geospace has an immediate effect on the Nation's ability
to forecast and nowcast space weather, and to understand and to mitigate its
effects. The National Space Weather Program explicitly calls for the development
of such capabilities. One of the projects supported addresses fundamental issues
related to climate change, which is also a topic of great societal concern. The
cluster will also make an impact on the education of students in all physical
disciplines at UNH by giving them access to a state-of-the art computing
facility. It will thus help us to attract the most qualified faculty, post-docs,
and students, and it will be an extremely valuable resource for educating the
next generation of computational scientists.