* 1229024
* MRI:   Acquisition of a FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN Transmission Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Richard Dillaman, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 631,505.00

The transmission electron microscope (TEM) enables visualization of cells and
sub cellular structures that goes far beyond the resolving power of a
conventional light microscope. Such microscopes are now a standard in the
natural sciences, especially in cell and molecular biology. The advanced TEM
capability offered by the Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN is essential for the
University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) to maintain and expand its
longstanding contribution to microscopic analysis. The UNCW Microscopy Lab is a
multi-user facility that has a long history of serving the departments of
Biology and Marine Biology, Chemistry and Biochemistry, Psychology,
Anthropology, Geology and Geography and Center for Marine Science. TEM-based
analyses are a particularly critical component in the interdisciplinary
portfolio of research in the Department of Biology and Marine Biology (DBMB)
where the Tecnai will support the UNCW Microscopy Lab?s missions of teaching,
research and service. With a faculty of over 40, delivering 3 Bachelor?s
degrees, 2 Master?s and a Ph.D. program in Marine Biology, DBMB is the most
significant user of the facility, especially the TEM. Three thematic clusters of
research, representing the research of 10 faculty members, will be specifically
enhanced by the acquisition of a Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN: (1) marine microbial
cell biology, (2) biomineralization and (3) biomedical-related research. The
first theme includes research on the biology of harmful algae that contribute to
harmful algal blooms as well as examination of non-toxic species of marine
phytoplankton. Also investigated will be bacterial marine microbes that play a
key role in the nitrogen cycle in soils and marine aquatic systems. The second
highlighted theme is biomineralization, which examines how organisms such as
crustaceans, unicellular phytoplankton and foraminifera initiate and build their
external calcified structures. TEM analyses will allow investigation of sub-
cellular processes that direct CaCO3 deposition, which is increasingly important
as the effect of ocean acidification on marine calcification is becoming a major
environmental concern and a focus of national and international research. The
third research theme supported by the new TEM is biomedical related research
including an investigation into the mechanisms of action of equine herpes virus
(EHV) a highly contagious pathogen whose mechanisms of infection and
transmission are poorly understood. Neuroscience related research will address
the sensory biology of hearing in mammals and movement and swimming in marine
invertebrates. In both these research areas the Tecnai will allow the
determination of neuronal pathways critical in hearing loss, head orientation
and stabilization of visual fields. Finally, the Tecnai will be used to
investigate how reaction-diffusion processes control muscle cell design, by
combining a detailed ultrastructural analysis of muscle with mathematical
modeling of the metabolic and structural demands of red and white skeletal
muscle.

The Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN will support a broad portfolio of basic and applied
research and, equally important, the Tecnai and supporting facility will also be
a cornerstone of the undergraduate curriculum in introductory and advanced cell
biology teaching, as well as supporting independent undergraduate and graduate
research. The educational benefits will be further extended to pre-college
students since the ability to visualize and explore the surface and internal
structure of microorganisms, tissues and cells is one of the most powerful
experiences that can be provided to students as they are challenged to connect
biological concepts to cellular life. Likewise, teachers need effective
resources to support their efforts. The Tecnai, together with the associated
facilities at UNCW, will enable the Department of Biology and Marine Biology to
develop and implement outreach and education activities that are crosscutting,
from K-12 through Master?s and Ph.D. Specifically, the UNCW microscopy facility
will support a long-standing commitment to outreach including activities that
engage K-12 and pre-college students from under-represented communities. These
efforts will include developing internship opportunities in high resolution
microscopy, summer microscopy workshops and teacher training opportunities. Such
activities will be delivered through existing public outreach platforms
including the UNCW Center for Education in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics and the Issac Bear Early College High School that is associated with
UNCW.