* 1229312
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced E-Beam Evaporation Thin Film Deposition System for Research in Micro and Nanofabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Mohammad Alim, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2014
* USD 212,375.00

The objective of this research is to acquire a state-of-the-art e-beam
evaporation thin-film deposition system to enable researchers at the Alabama
A&amp;M University to fabricate the micro- and nanoscale devices. The approach
is to combine the thin-film deposition capability with the state-of-the-art UV
and e-beam lithography tools to enable expanded research efforts in the
fabrication of micro- and nanoscale devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Multiple research projects at Alabama A&amp;M University require an
advanced thin film deposition capability. The acquisition of the advanced
deposition instrument will make these projects to be completed successfully. The
research projects include carbon nanotube field-effect transistors and logic
circuits, thermoelectric devices, phase shifter and nano antennas, metal-
insulator-semiconductor structures, nanostructured solar cells, single
crsytalline tin oxide nanowires, and magnetic properties of Co/Cu. The research
accomplishments will greatly benefit the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Acquisition of the e-beam system
will greatly enhance educational opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students. The use of the state-of-the-art instrument provides
essential training to the majority underrepresented students who will become
tomorrow?s researchers in government, academia, and industries. Undergraduates
will be exposed to the exciting and rich possibilities of nanofabrication
through the research projects. High school teachers and students will be trained
on the instrument. Collaboration between the researchers and local industrials
will be enhanced by the instrument. This project will further promote the
development of local and national economy, and contribute to meeting the
Congress? goals for enhancing national education, research, and economy.