* 1229945
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficient Separation of Hydrogen From Reformate
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Trent Molter, Sustainable Innovations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 669,973.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project investigates the
viability of an electrochemical device for separation and compression of
hydrogen from low-pressure mixed gas streams that are critical for industrial
gas and energy applications. Previous studies have shown that hydrogen derived
from reformation of hydrocarbons produces a gas stream rich in CO2, CO and H2.
It has been well- documented that low-temperature electrodes similar to those
used in these devices are often contaminated by carbon monoxide, negatively
affecting their operation. While state-of-the-art solutions rely upon
implementation of advanced catalysts or high temperature membranes, these
solutions are not viable for systems having significant levels of CO in the feed
stream. Specifically the project will focus on solving electrode contamination
issues through a series of design modifications; allowing the system to operate
continually at high efficiency. Research efforts will leverage results from a
fluids transport model to optimize the cell and system design. Laboratory cells
will be constructed and evaluated over a range of operational parameters to
develop a better understanding of the performance improvement associated with
this approach. This program will culminate in the construction of a fully-
integrated system package that will be tested and validated with real-world
reformate chemistries.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates to the fact that
depletion of fossil fuel reserves and a global requirement for the development
of a sustainable economy, the prospect of hydrogen-based energy is of growing
importance. Production, purification and compression of hydrogen represent key
technical challenges for the implementation of a hydrogen economy, especially in
the transportation sector where new sources and modes of delivery of hydrogen
are needed. These technologies must be robust, efficient, and cost effective in
order to have value in meeting our energy needs. Since hydrogen energy markets
are emerging, viable product solutions must meet near-term industrial needs as a
commercial bridge toward low-cost energy products. The current market for
hydrogen is large and growing, with the vast majority of hydrogen produced from
hydrocarbon sources resulting in gas streams containing appreciable quantities
of CO and CO2 and hydrogen. Current methods for separation and compression of
hydrogen are very expensive and these costs are passed to the end-user.
Successful development of the proposed technology will integrate the separation
and compression functions, and expand the applicability of this device to
separation of reformate and other mixed gas streams in a low-cost configuration
which offers significant commercial appeal.