* 1229400
* MRI: Acquisition of a single-crystal diffractometer for the University of Minnesota
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Connie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 255,850.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor John Ellis from University of Minnesota-Twin Cities and colleagues
Lawrence Que, William Tolman, Calvin Sun and Connie Lu will acquire a single
crystal diffractometer with a compact copper radiation source, photon detector
and a top-of-the-line cryostat capable of collecting high-resolution diffraction
data on very small specimens. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
hydrocarbon-stabilized metal-atom reagents; (b) electron-transfer molecular
catalysts; (c) bioinorganic studies of metallo-copper enzymes and synthesis of
sustainable polymeric materials; (d) study and optimization of the physico-
mechanical properties of drugs; (e) model complexes of non-heme iron
metalloenzymes; (f) design of biologically active agents; (g) synthetic routes
to biologically active compounds; (h) Pro-Leu-Gly-NH2 and dopamine receptor
modulation study and anthrax toxin lethal factor inhibition; and (i) study of
parthenolide and helenalin analogues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here will impact a
number of areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry
and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well
as research not only at the University of Minnesota but also at neighboring
colleges and universities in the Twin Cities area.