* 1229471
* MRI:  Development of Pneumatic Water Wave Genesis, a versatile wavemaker for the UNC Joint Fluids Lab
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Brian White, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 655,401.00

The goal of this project is to develop a potentially transformative new surface
and internal wave-making method, based on a novel pneumatic concept with no
mechanical actuators, and use it to dramatically extend the range of scientific
research activities taking place in the UNC Joint Fluids Lab modular wavetank.
The investigators intend to demonstrate feasibility of a method for excitation
of a general family of gravity waves in non-uniform incompressible fluids. The
method uses an array of independently controlled monopole flux sources arranged
to provide a flux boundary condition over an arbitrary 2D manifold. The tangible
results of the development will be a wave generating apparatus for use in an
existing 0.75[m] wide by 36[m] long wave tank containing water with prescribed
salt-stratified density profiles. The generator will excite a 1[m] by 0.75[m]
rectangular boundary comprising N independent rectangular flux sources, each
being 0.75[m] wide by 1/N[m] high, stacked up vertically. This boundary is
inserted into a wave tank to form one end of an active flume. Each source will
drive a near-spatially-uniform volume velocity over its aperture. Wave modes of
zeroth horizontal order and up to (N-1)th vertical order can thereby be excited.
The proposed design was inspired by a recently developed mechanical actuator
system designed at ENS-Lyon (Gostiaux et al. 2007) to produce monochromatic
plane waves. However, the proposed apparatus will go well beyond this design, by
doing away with the mechanical moving parts, and substituting displacement
chambers driven with air pressures generated by feedback-controlled pneumatic
exciters capable of following arbitrary band-limited control signals. This
allows generation of arbitrary vertical excitation profiles, including but not
limited to superpositions of monochromatic plane waves of differing periods and
directions. This design will further enable other interesting excitations,
including non-periodic or even non repetitive impulse profiles. In the future,
this general excitation method can in principle extend these capabilities to
fully 2D boundary flux conditions, by tessellating an arbitrarily shaped
boundary surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both surface waves and their less widely
known internal counterparts, which can occur for example in layers between fresh
and salt water, have properties of more significant consequences than are
generally appreciated. To name a few, the spontaneous development of a rogue
wave can sink a ship; the formation and development of a Tsunami as it
propagates in open water and upon landfall such as in a harbor can wreak havoc
in some places while leaving others relatively unscathed; and the effects of
internal waves on mixing stratified salt and fresh water layers contributes to
the ecological health of an estuary and the well being of the species inhabiting
it. A substantial body of theory continues to be developed to understand these
so-called gravity wave behaviors and to render them predictable, by turning
guesswork into solid physical and engineering mathematical models useful in
naval architecture, disaster prediction, environmental impact, among many other
areas of application. But precisely how good are these theories? Fundamental to
the Scientific Method is experimental verification, and gravity wave mechanics
is no exception. The problem addressed by this project is that of finding a
method to repeatably generate and controllably vary the conditions in a
laboratory environment equivalent to natural phenomena such as rogue waves.
Often, theories pertaining to such phenomena undergo only limited testing,
leaving the naval, environmental and ecological engineering decisions based
thereon vulnerable to error. Making waves is easy: drop a stone in a wavetank.
Creating the exact conditions to excite a rogue wave in a tank, and exploring
how varying parameters affects the behavior or even the existence of such a wave
requires an exquisite degree of finesse in controlling these conditions. The aim
of this project is to develop a wavemaker for excitation of a general family of
gravity waves in non-uniform incompressible fluids, thereby enabling
experimental exploration in a controlled laboratory environment of real world
phenomena having social and engineering relevance.