* 1229585
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Benchtop Next Generation Sequencing Platform to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Education at Hope College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Aaron Best, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 171,877.00

Advances in sequencing technology have dramatically shifted the way science is
performed in many fields of Biology, which has also shifted the way education of
the next generation of scientists must be conducted. However, the generation of
sequencing data has been restricted to large laboratories, consortia of
laboratories, and core sequencing facilities, limiting the exposure of
undergraduates to these technologies. The recent introduction of benchtop next
generation sequencing platforms promises to make moderately high throughput
sequencing available to many individual research laboratories and smaller
institutions. This Major Research Instrumentation grant supports the acquisition
of an Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (Ion PGM) sequencing platform by Hope
College. The Ion PGM will have significant impact on undergraduate research and
training at Hope College by making affordable, high throughput sequencing
capacity available to faculty and undergraduate researchers for use in
established and emerging research and education programs. These programs include
research focusing on: 1) the genome sequences of viruses that infect bacteria
(Mycobacteriophage) that are discovered by first year college students as part
of introductory biology laboratory courses; 2) long-term environmental studies
of the local Lake Macatawa Watershed to identify and track microbial sources of
contamination through whole genome sequencing of novel bacterial isolates; 3)
advancing understanding of fundamental gene expression mechanisms of the
mammalian parasite Giardia lamblia; 4) understanding phylogenetic and
biogeographic relationships among maples found across the World; and 5) testing
potential horizontal gene transfers of plastid genes between parasitic plants
and their photosynthetic hosts. The projects advance scientific understanding of
a wide range of biological and environmental problems that can be addressed
through DNA sequencing at different scales. Each project will be made more
effective by the in house availability of the Ion PGM, which is uniquely
versatile in being able to generate sequence data at vastly different scales in
a cost effective manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This sequencing platform will
allow Hope College to effectively train undergraduates in the design of
experiments requiring sequencing data; usage of next generation sequencing
technology to generate necessary data; and analysis, interpretation, and
dissemination of large scale data sets in both research laboratory and classroom
laboratory settings. The Ion PGM will immediately enhance projects and programs
that impact over 100 undergraduates during each academic year. First year
students will be impacted through Hope College's highly successful yearlong
course in phage genomics research, which is designed to retain high quality
students in STEM fields. Students at all levels will participate in the research
laboratories of the PI?s and their collaborators. Students in upper level
Biology courses will use the technology in classroom laboratory-based research
projects. Hope College?s established summer research programs will allow us to
broaden exposure of students across the nation and of students from
underrepresented groups in sciences in the use of leading edge sequencing
technology. Faculty will be impacted through their ability to take advantage of
next generation sequencing technology to advance projects into new and
innovative areas and generate preliminary data for sustaining extramurally
funded research programs. Student-faculty collaborative research will be
disseminated to the scientific community through local, regional, and
national/international scientific conferences and peer-reviewed publications and
to the general public through community-based popular seminars. Sequence data
will be deposited to appropriate openly accessible databases. Regional and
national collaborators will use the Ion PGM, broadening its impact beyond Hope
College to students in West Michigan and throughout the nation.