* 1229361
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Illumina HiSeq 2000
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* William Thomas, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 814,482.00

A high throughput (HTP) sequencing system will be acquired by the University of
New Hampshire (UNH) to enable Northern New England research groups using genome-
enabled technologies to explore basic questions in ecology, evolution, and
biodiversity. This research will catalyze the generation of new
interdisciplinary knowledge of fundamental biological processes and advance the
role of genomics and bioinformatics across traditional biological disciplines.
The instrument, an Illumina HiSeq 2500, is both fast and flexible, suited to a
large array of applications. It will support the research and training programs
of 16 existing laboratories at UNH, four new UNH Assistant Professors, and 8
research groups at regional undergraduate institutions using genomics to address
the basic biological question: ?How do organisms respond to changes in their
environment?? Users will benefit from this local, well-managed, shared
instrument through (1) dramatic reductions in wait times for sample analyses,
(2) intensive sample management to contain costs and maximize data output, and
(3) comprehensive onsite technical and bioinformatics support. The Illumina
HiSeq 2500 will be housed in the UNH Hubbard Center for Genome Studies (HCGS),
an established DNA core facility with a service-driven technical, management,
and bioinformatics team. The HCGS also serves as a regional bioinformatics core
facility, meeting the bioinformatics and connectivity needs of scientists
throughout northern New England. Management, storage, and security of the data
generated by the HTP sequencing system will be provided by a dedicated IT team
and infrastructure in the UNH Research Computing and Instrumentation Core
Facility. To interpret and utilize the data effectively, two full-time
Ph.D.-level bioinformatics staff will be dedicated to HTP sequence analysis. In
addition, the HCGS works extensively with computer science faculty and students
to promote the cross-disciplinary development of bioinformatics expertise. This
team approach and infrastructure will ensure the efficient operation of the
sequencing platform and will allow its use by the broadest number of research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNH is a national leader in promoting research
experiences for undergraduates; the anticipated major users of this HTP
sequencing system exemplify this commitment in their own research programs. The
new sequencing system will support such research experiences for undergraduate
students, and also provide research opportunities for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows. To complement and support the research activities, a
series of workshops will be held to provide training for students (and faculty)
in HTP sequencing applications and the associated bioinformatics tools. In
addition, data generated by this system will be integrated into courses in the
biology curricula of participating institutions, supporting the adoption of
these technologies in diverse fields. The research programs that will use this
instrument already have a strong record of participation by diverse students and
faculty, attracting students through programs such as the McNair Scholars, UNH
Project SMART, and UNH REAP, and building faculty partnerships through
collaborative research projects with historically black colleges and
universities. This participation is expected to continue, and grow, as the new
HTP sequencing system facilitates exploration of new areas of genomics and the
application of informatics to answering a wider range of research questions.