* 1229541
* MRI:   Development of a Synchronous Direct Digital Receiver System for Geospace Imaging Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Allan Weatherwax, Siena College
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2016
* USD 564,807.00

The investigators will build a facility for imaging high-energy electron
precipitation and remote sensing high-energy particle dynamics in near-Earth
space. They will design, test, and build a synchronous direct digital receiver
that will form the foundation of the next-generation VLF-HF (Very Low
Frequency/High Frequency) receivers/riometers. Using this technology and in
collaboration with Canadian investigators, the researchers will deploy an array
of these receivers to establish a comprehensive network of digital imaging
riometers that will build international partnerships, take advantage of existing
(and planned) networks of complementary instruments, and enable new and exciting
science. The timely deployment of the riometer network will also be enhanced by
synergies with space-based observations of the near-Earth geospace environment,
such as NASA's Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) and Radiation Belt Storm Probes
(RBSP) missions, as well as ESA's Swarm. The data and engineering study results
from this effort will be made available to all researchers. All design
documentation will be posted on the project website so that duplicate systems
can be easily constructed. The engineering design work will be integrated into
undergraduate curriculum, including independent studies and experimental
courses.