* 1229316
* MRI: Acquisition of Data-Intensive Cyberinfrastructure for Research and Education (DICRE) at North Dakota State University
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Dinesh Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29316&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Katti, Dinesh R; Denton, Anne M; Khan,
Samee U; Ossowski, Martin M; Sun, Wenfang;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Dakota
State University Fargo&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Data-Intensive
Cyberinfrastructure for Research and Education (DICRE) at NDStU
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project from an EPSCoR
state, acquiring a storage-heavy Beowulf cluster with an HDD storage appliance
and a tape storage subsystem for archival purposes, enables a variety of
research projects in experimental HPC and applications in bioinformatics, data-
aware materials modeling, and others, all of which will both increase the
institution?s resources for scientific computing and build a dataset to assist
their HPC research projects. Within the state and beyond, the proposed
instrument is expected to break barriers to research in the areas of
computational materials science and chemistry, computational mechanics and
biomechanics, data informatics, and data-aware scalable computational sciences
where ?big-data? increasingly complicates traditional computational workflows
and paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Due to a
convincing educational and outreach plans, as well as expected scientific
discoveries in the areas of science proposed, the proposal showcases strong
broader impacts. The programs to enrich broader impact aspects will not only be
felt locally, but will also help ensure that the nation maintains leadership and
innovation within the addressed research domains.