* 1229523
* MRI: Acquisition of a Sputtering System for Device and Material Research (SDMR) at Hispanic Gateway Institutions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Hasina Huq, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2015
* USD 215,000.00

The objective of this research is to support ongoing multidisciplinary research
and provide student training in semiconductor and thin film research through the
acquisition of a Sputtering System for Device and Material Research at The
University of Texas-Pan American and at The University of Texas at Brownsville.
This approach is being taken to enrich the multidisciplinary research
partnership and strengthen the collaboration between professors and students
from the two institutions, attract new sources of research support, and elevate
device and material education to a competitive level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit is focused on finding solutions to multidisciplinary issues
such as higher reliability, easier thermal management, and simpler manufacturing
processes in semiconductor materials and devices. The project supports and
promotes a hands-on, entrepreneurial, educational experience in micro-
fabrication to enhance research infrastructure through characterization,
improvement and development of thin films and electronics
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact includes academic enrichment in
a historically underrepresented region of south Texas with a population of 1.5
million. The investigators will work to find out the key issues behind the low
number of women entering the engineering discipline and to explain the necessity
of having more women involved in this technology-related field. The acquisition
will also help to prepare qualified and skilled graduate and undergraduate
students and lays the foundation for strong integrated research and education
initiatives centered on devices and materials at Minority Serving Institutions.