* 1229131
* MRI: Acquisition of a spark plasma sintering system for engineering advanced energy materials and materials science education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 202,580.00

This award to the University of Texas at Austin is for the acquisition of a
Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS) system. Spark plasma sintering is an innovative
technique that emerged in recent years for material syntheses and consolidation.
In SPS both external pressure and pulsed current are applied simultaneously to
enhance the consolidation of a wide range of ceramic, metallic, and composite
powders. Local heating occurs primarily at gaps between particles where the
applied electric field induces sparks and the formation of a high-energy plasma.
As a result the consolidation can be completed within a shorter time, which
allows grain growth and ion diffusion to be efficiently controlled and
prevented. These unique features makes SPS suitable to fabricate more complex
materials such as heterogeneous materials with specifically defined interface
structure, nanostructured materials, and composite materials. The SPS system
will be used to develop novel materials for energy applications such as
thermoelectrics to recover waste heat, high-temperature solid oxide fuel cells
to efficiently convert chemical energy directly into electricity, solid-state
electrolytes for high-voltage lithium ion batteries, and low temperature
polymer-electrolyte fuel cell plates with high corrosion resistance and low
electrical contact resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPS system will be one
of the major facilities for materials fabrication at the University of Texas at
Austin. The system will be managed through the Materials Science and Engineering
Program and will be accessible to researchers across campus. The SPS technique
adds a new capability to explore a much broader range of materials that cannot
be made using conventional sintering. Research activities with the SPS technique
will be integrated into the graduate curriculum in the Texas Materials
Institute. In addition to lectures on the SPS technique, the availability of
this new equipment will offer students in the materials science program an
excellent hands-on experience with an advanced materials synthesis techniques.
The PIs and their students will give lectures and/or demonstrations of clean
energy experiments to students at middle and high schools as well as to the
general public and K-12 students at Explore UT, a campus-wide open house.