* 1229677
* MRI: Development of Engineering testbed: Universal chip scale photonic testing instrument (UCPTI)
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Andrew Kahng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,060,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a state-of-the-art photonic chip-
scale probing solution for integrated Si-photonics testing and to enable new
multidisciplinary collaborative projects in nano-photonics and opto-electronics.
The approach exploits a universal electronic-photonic probing station that
integrates electrical, optical far-field, and optical near-field probes for
electrical and optical interfacing to integrated circuits and to individual
elements within such circuits, together with a full set of external optical and
electronic instrumentation to provide an affordable, zero-capital-investment
testing capability for Research and Development by academic, industry and
government laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
versatile and user friendly Si-Photonics testing instrument includes basic
research to identify new phenomena, inventing new photonic technology and
creating new applications, as well as providing tremendous benefit to small
businesses, various research institutions and government laboratories in their
product development efforts. Moreover, it can serve as a testbed for development
and reduction to practice of new approaches for efficiently probing and testing
Si-photonic chips, gradually evolving to become industry
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the instrument spans
multiple fields, including information systems, high speed electronics and
photonics, and future computer science and engineering to create wealth for 21st
century economy by advancing integration of nanoscale photonic, electronic and
biomedical science and technology. It will provide service to industry in
Southern California and play a significant role in the education and development
of human resources in science and engineering at the graduate and undergraduate
levels helping to train future engineers.