* 1229123
* MRI: Acquisition of a Biosemi Event Related Potentials Active Two Acquisition System to Enhance Research and Training at Texas A&amp;M International University
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Monica Munoz, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 98,394.00

With Major Research Instrumentation support, Dr. Anna B. Cieslicka and her
collaborators will purchase a Biosemi Electroencephalography/Event Related
Potentials (EEG/ERP) Active Two Acquisition System for the Psychology and
Communication Department at Texas A&amp;M International University (TAMIU), a
Hispanic serving institution in South Texas. Event-related potentials (ERPs)
have been critical in investigating language representation and processing since
they provide a unique opportunity to "watch" language processing as it unfolds
in real-time. The instrument provides a noninvasive technique for measuring
electrical activity in the brain, localizing it in both time and space. This is
recorded through a set of sensors which are placed on the surface of the
scalp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating researchers are all active
researchers in the study of bilingualism and bilingual cognitive processing.
Five collaborative research projects are proposed. Project 1 will explore
hemispheric asymmetries (differences between the activation of the left and
right cerebral hemispheres) in processing salient (highly familiar) and
nonsalient (less familiar) meanings of idiomatic expressions by Spanish-English
bilinguals. Findings from PI's earlier research will be verified with greater
accuracy due to the superiority of the electroencephalography (EEG) methodology.
Project 2 will investigate code-switching in bilinguals and explore how the
factors of the direction of switching and language dominance affect fluent
bilinguals' comprehension. A second goal of this project will be to address
idiom decomposability, or the extent to which idioms are stored and processed as
single linguistic units or assembled through linguistic and semantic analysis of
their individual constituents. Overall, data obtained from Projects 1 and 2 will
allow the PI and collaborators to start a pioneering research program into the
electrophysiological correlates of bilingual figurative comprehension. Project 3
will examine the effects of valence and arousal on the mental representation of
emotion words. The project will address the ways in which emotion words are
distinct from each other, and how valence (positive versus negative) and arousal
(low versus high) influence the overall representation of these words in human
memory. This work will have implications for the development of methods of
learning different word classes and also for aiding memory improvement
techniques by means of using emotion-related stimuli. Project 4 will further
explore differences in the processing of positively and negatively valenced
words in bilinguals' native and nonnative languages and will additionally
explore the extent to which individual differences factors (e.g., perspective
taking) modulate emotional word processing. Project 5 will address the question
of whether linguistic perceivers rely on world knowledge and lexical information
to comprehend linguistic statements. Using mono- and bilingual speakers, it will
apply an EEG/ERP paradigm in combination with eye-tracking, to investigate
whether the bilingual speakers' brain responses engage similar neural structures
to understand ironic statements in both languages. This research will further
understanding of the neural circuitries underlying language comprehension
abilities in bilingual speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and training
program enabled by the equipment will foster intramural and extramural
collaborations and increase TAMIU's competitiveness for extramural research
funding and publishing. The instrumentation will provide training and access to
mainstream electrophysiological methodologies to students that are historically
underrepresented in psychology/ neuropsychology doctoral programs. In addition,
the requested equipment will improve the university's research infrastructure by
advancing numerous research programs in the cognitive sciences and related
areas, and will enhance the educational experience of several
undergraduate/graduate classes by enabling the creation of new courses in
psychology and cognitive neuroscience.