* 1229534
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hyper-Frequency Viscoelastic Spectroscopy Instrument for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Alisha Sarang-Sieminski, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 112,000.00

This NSF MRI award funds the acquisition of a hyper-frequency
viscoelastic&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy (HFVS) instrument for materials
characterization. It is especially well suited for&lt;br/&gt;measuring
viscoelastic properties of biological tissues and artificial polymers because it
can&lt;br/&gt;make non-contacting, non-destructive measurements on small-sized
samples over a wide&lt;br/&gt;excitation frequency range. The HFVS instrument
will be immediately used in five current&lt;br/&gt;research projects: 1)
computational simulation of traumatic brain injury; 2) determining the
role&lt;br/&gt;of active and passive forces in microvascular network formation;
3) dynamic characterization of&lt;br/&gt;underactuated legged locomotion, 4)
design and fabrication of perching landing gear for
microaerial&lt;br/&gt;vehicles, and 5) characterization of a biodegradable,
biocompatible co-polymer. The most&lt;br/&gt;significant contribution resulting
from use of the instrument on each project is: 1) constitutive&lt;br/&gt;models
for human brain tissue at high strain rates appropriate for blast-response
simulation and&lt;br/&gt;analysis; 2) characterization of a new extra-cellular
matrix biomimetics for studying the effects&lt;br/&gt;of both active and passive
mechanical environments on cells, 3) material-tunable, dynamic&lt;br/&gt;models
of underactuated legged locomotion for milli-scale robots, 4) tunable-stiffness
and ?&lt;br/&gt;damping, polymer fabrication processes for perching landing gear
mechanisms, and 5)&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing processes for controlling the
properties of a class of environmentally-friendly, copolymers&lt;br/&gt;for
medical applications. In addition to supporting ongoing research, the
instrument&lt;br/&gt;will enable future research involving related materials and
will open new research areas in&lt;br/&gt;bioengineering, material science, and
mechanical engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HFVS instrument will
substantially enhance metrology capabilities at Olin College
enabling&lt;br/&gt;the characterization of materials ranging in stiffness from
very compliant, nearly liquid (e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;gels) to very rigid by
quantitative measurement of mechanical stiffness and energy
dissipation&lt;br/&gt;related properties. The characterization of materials
plays an integral part in a wide range of&lt;br/&gt;research problems especially
those including computer simulations and the custom design
and&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing of components or structures involving the given
materials. The acquisition of a&lt;br/&gt;HFVS instrument will have significant
positive impact on Olin College?s research capability,&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
research training efforts, and curriculum. The instrument will directly support
the&lt;br/&gt;training and education of undergraduates at Olin College where
approximately 45% of students&lt;br/&gt;and 55% of the bioengineering, material
science, and mechanical engineering majors are women.&lt;br/&gt;Research
training is incorporated throughout the curriculum directly into project-based
and&lt;br/&gt;laboratory-based coursework. Students have numerous individual
research opportunities to work&lt;br/&gt;with faculty during the academic year
and in the summer. The instrument will be specifically&lt;br/&gt;utilized in a
number of courses and will be particularly useful in the senior-year,
engineering&lt;br/&gt;capstone course in which student teams tackle industry-
sponsored projects.