* 1229693
* MRI: Development of a Cryogenic Sample-Preparation Instrument (NU CRYOCLUSTER)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gayle Woloschak, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 799,533.00

This award to Northwestern University is for the development of a versatile,
high-throughput instrument for sample preparation of frozen-hydrated soft, bio,
and hybrid materials for imaging. The new instrument called CRYOTIGM for cryo-
triple broad-beam ion gun milling and freeze-etching/coating will be developed
in collaboration with Leica Microsystems. The history of microscopy is a history
of human progress fueled by the ability to image, imagine, and then create at
ever-smaller length scale. As man-made materials become more similar to the
biological structures that inspire them, they increasingly combine nano-sized
hard and soft, synthetic and biological components. The multi-disciplinary
project team at Northwestern University is tackling cross-cutting research
ranging from complex fluids to self-assembling hybrid nanostructures and from
inorganic pollutants in the environment to chemical imaging of living tissues.
Their objective is to solve a critical roadblock encountered in these research
projects, namely, that these samples cannot be dried for imaging without
changing the very structures they try to understand and control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new CRYOTIGM instrument will become the centerpiece of
the Northwestern University CRYOCLUSTER, a comprehensive cryogenic sample
preparation facility embedded in the open-access NUANCE shared instrumentation
facility. The instrument will be used in sample preparation for a broad range of
imaging instrumentation at Northwestern University and the Advanced Photon
Source. The collaboration with Leica will speed commercialization of the next
generation of cryogenic sample preparation instruments. The Northwestern
CRYOCLUSTER will be at the core of multiple educational and outreach programs,
including a novel, hands-on undergraduate level class titled 'Multiscale
Hierarchy in Physical and Life Sciences', and an outreach program developed
together with the Chicago Botanic Garden.