* 1229028
* MRI: Acquisition of a multi chamber hybrid organic/inorganic thin film deposition system
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Janice Hudgings, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2015
* USD 294,750.00

The objective of this research is to achieve photon to electron energy
conversion efficiencies in nanostructured donor-acceptor photovoltaics that
exceed the seemingly intractable constraint imposed by the donor-acceptor
molecular orbital energy level structure. This is a serious limitation that
restricts the theoretical power efficiency of organic molecular, conjugated
polymer, metal-oxide and quantum dot photovoltaics. The approach is to acquire
an integrated deposition system that will be used to fabricate nanostructured
photovoltaics consisting of multi-step energy gradients and optically-thin
interstitial layers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
instrumentation will enable a cross-disciplinary team from three institutions in
the Five College area to focus their efforts toward making lasting contributions
to the field of next-generation photovoltaics. New high-performance organic
molecular and polymer semiconductors with unique frontier orbital tunability
will be synthesized to serve as energy gradients. Electric force microscopy and
time-resolved spectroscopy will be employed to uncover the elusive fundamental
physics of charge dynamics at the donor-acceptor interface. Excessive leakage
currents that often plague nanostructured devices will be identified using a
non-destructive thermoreflectance imaging technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Nanostructured donor-acceptor
photovoltaics offer tremendous processing advantages over conventional
photovoltaics, potentially affording large-area manufacturability, unparalleled
low cost, flexibility (even stretch ability), and dramatically lighter-weight
module arrays, all at unprecedented scales. Fabrication and analysis of
inorganic/organic optoelectronic devices offer a wealth of learning
opportunities for students, both to explore fundamental science and to gain
hands-on experience that often encourages undergraduates to continue with
careers in the sciences.