* 1229223
* Assessing the Statistical Quality of Eigenvector Spatial Filter-Based Estimators
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Daniel Griffith, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 114,998.00

This project investigates the qualities of eigenvector spatial filtering (ESF)
methodology in a linear regression context. Although ESF has become more popular
as a technique for addressing spatial autocorrelation latent in georeferenced
data, the quality of ESF-based estimators for regression models has not been
thoroughly investigated. The statistical qualities of ESF-based estimators
needing assessment include unbiasedness, efficiency, consistency, and
robustness. Such a quality assessment of ESF-based estimators can bolster the
efficacy of ESF methodology, documenting that it furnishes a solid foundation
for analyzing georeferenced data with linear regression. Multiple testing
corrections in ESF-based estimation is another area that has not been adequately
investigated. The will help fill this gap in the literature and advance the
utility of eigenvector spatial filtering for linear
regression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge and
understanding of ESF, which is a recently developed method for statistical
modeling of georeferenced data. The assessment of unbiasedness, efficiency,
consistency, and robustness is essential to determine the usability of the ESF-
based estimators. This project will furnish sound fundamentals of the ESF
methodology for linear regression techniques. This will permit ESF methodology
to be extended to modeling non-normal georeferenced data. Project results will
facilitate research capabilities across the range of fields that have adopted
ESF methodology, including economics, regional science, epidemiology, and
ecology.