* 1229205
* Collaborative Research: MRI Consortium: Development of a Novel Telescope for Very High-Energy Gamma-Ray Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Reshmi Mukherjee, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2018
* USD 959,000.00

Very high-energy (VHE) gamma-ray astrophysics has been transformed by a number
of stunning discoveries made by the current-generation, ground-based gamma-ray
observatories operating in the 100 GeV - 10 TeV energy range. These
observatories are arrays of 2-4 imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes (IACTs)
that detect VHE gamma-rays via Cherenkov light from secondary electrons in
electromagnetic cascades initiated by gamma-rays in the atmosphere. Developing
new instruments with significantly better sensitivity is not possible by a
simple replication or upgrade of existing devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award, the proponents will build a novel gamma-ray telescope that has the
potential to transform the field, based on work by Schwarzschild and Couder. It
incorporates original ideas for the optics, mechanics, and electronics to
achieve substantial gains in angular resolution and field of view at costs
comparable to existing instruments. The international Cherenkov Telescope Array
(CTA) Consortium is preparing for a future IACT array with ten times better
sensitivity and broader energy coverage to exploit the evident scientific
potential of VHE gamma-ray observations. Some examples of new types of gamma-ray
discoveries are searching extremely deeply for dark matter in the Galactic
center and halo, testing cosmology with extragalactic background light
measurements, resolving the details of shock acceleration in supernova remnants
and pulsar winds, and advancing the physics of extragalactic jets by population
studies and observations of short-term variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
new telescope overcomes the fundamental limitations in angular resolution and
field of view of current prime-focus IACTs. At the same time, it allows the
application of new, lower-cost technologies for the camera focal plane sensors.
This work will demonstrate the enhanced performance and improved reliability of
the SCT design, and the location adjacent to VERITAS will allow the performance
to be evaluated against an instrument of known sensitivity. The results from
this effort will enable informed choices to be made for the construction of CTA
or other future instruments. It will also enhance the capabilities of the
VERITAS Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Working with industry,
this work will foster emerging technologies for the mass production of
relatively inexpensive, light, aspheric mirror segments that will both enable
future instruments to deliver unique science capabilities and encourage use of
the design in the other fields of astronomy. This project will provide a unique
opportunity for integrated research and education for a substantial number of
young scientists.