* 1229290
* MRI: Acquisition of an FEI Helios Focused Ion Beam and Scanning Electron Microscope Workstation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Robert Sinclair, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,232,726.00

This award to Stanford University is for the acquisition of a Helios NanoLab
600i dual-beam Focused Ion Beam / Scanning Electron microscope manufactured by
the FEI Company. The Helios offers unprecedented capabilities for fabricating
and characterizing two- and three-dimensional nanoscale objects. It will enable
more than thirty Stanford research groups to address grand challenges in
nanoscience and nanotechnology. For example, the Helios will support research
efforts to: create plasmonic optical tweezers that can trap single atoms; detect
cancer in its earliest stages; create the first integrated circuit that can
serve as an efficient source of terahertz radiation; develop organic solar cells
with higher efficiency and organic transistors with higher mobility; determine
how neurons communicate with each other in the brain; and, elucidate the quantum
mechanical phenomena that determine the behavior of topological insulators. The
Helios will also enable a broad range of scientists to prepare higher-quality
samples for transmission electron microscopy because it prepares lamellae with a
low-energy (500 eV) ion beam. As a result, researchers will be able to take full
advantage of state-of-the-art aberration-corrected transmission electron
microscopes that can image samples with sub-Ã…ngstrom resolution. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Helios will reside within the Stanford Nano Center (SNC), a
shared user facility, where external users from corporations, national
laboratories, and other academic institutions will have access. In addition, it
will be part of the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network(NNIN). No
open laboratory in northern California contains a Focused Ion Beam instrument as
advanced as the Helios. Researchers at Stanford will collaborate with the FEI
Company to implement full remote control by domestic and international users of
the Helios. The Helios will be featured in public outreach events such as
Stanford Days and Nanodays, and its capabilities will be shared with minority-
serving institutions in an effort to catalyze future collaborations.