* 1229036
* MRI: Development of Radio Array of Portable Interferometric Detectors (RAPID)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Colin Lonsdale, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,104,842.00

The investigators will develop a Radio Array of Portable Interferometric
Detectors (RAPID) investigations of ionospheric phenomena, solar radio emission,
the Galactic synchrotron background, and ultra-high energy cosmic rays via
airshower emission. The array will consist of 50-100 small, low-gain broadband
antennas operating below 500 MHz. Unlike existing arrays, RAPID can be operated
without any cabling between the antennas and a central location, and can be
shipped, deployed and physically reconfigured quickly and easily with zero site
infrastructure. This creates a unique capability to locate and configure an
imaging radio interferometer array, highly customized to the specific science
goal of any given field campaign, thereby supporting science investigations that
hitherto have not been feasible. The system is based on voltage data capture
with all processing performed offline in software at the home institutions of
investigators, simplifying field operations and reducing equipment
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAPID will revolutionize a range of ionospheric
studies through high resolution interferometric imaging of ionospheric
structures in equatorial and/or auroral regions, via coherent and enhanced
scatter of signals from existing transmitters, both commercial (TV and radio)
and scientific (incoherent scatter radar installations),. With its broad
frequency coverage and the ability to customize the array layout to match the
spatial scales in powerful solar coronal emissions of various kinds, RAPID will
greatly advance solar imaging capabilities at these frequencies, shedding new
light on a region intimately linked with space weather phenomena. The
reconfigurability and excellent imaging properties of RAPID will enable all-sky
maps of the Galactic synchrotron background emission with superior angular
resolution compared to current data, while also incorporating high precision
broadband spectral data spanning a decade in frequency. The RAPID system also
offers the capability of studying intense nanosecond-scale pulses from cosmic
ray airshowers, capturing full amplitude and phase information in response to
external triggers, with user-selected aperture sampling, and with easy
portability to the location of existing particle observatories. The project will
introduce important innovations to the radio measurement community, and provide
a technical foundation for subsequent development of larger, more powerful
instruments of this type. We will bring together leading edge technologies and
techniques from multiple branches of radio astronomy, the geospace radar
community, and a rapidly advancing high-tech industry to create a truly portable
system with unique capabilities for the detailed study of strong radio signals.
The project also features extensive education and training opportunities for
students and teachers through the NSF REU and RET programs, and the diverse
science topics it addresses which can be communicated to the general public with
a connecting theme of radio signals. The RAPID system elements are ideal as
educational tools to demonstrate the principles of radio measurement at schools
and colleges around the country.