* 1229286
* MRI: Instrument Development of the South Pole, Antarctica, Solar Radio Telescope (SPASRT): Advancing Our Understanding of the Solar-Terrestrial Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Louis Lanzerotti, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2016
* USD 788,118.00

The primary purpose of the proposed SPASRT telescope is uninterrupted 24-hour
radio coverage of the Sun from a single location that would provide unique data
for potential transformational studies in solar physics and solar-terrestrial
environment. The Antarctic continent, and specifically the South Pole, provides
the only practical location on Earth to measure the radio Sun 24/7 for nearly
six months of every year. Such continuous 24-hour studies of the radio-emitting
Sun, across a wide range of frequencies, would fundamentally advance our
knowledge of solar processes that are concurrently observed in the X-ray, UV,
and visible regions of the spectrum from both ground and space. This proposal is
seeking funds for the development, construction, installation, and testing of
SPASRT at South Pole across the 0.5-18 GHz frequency band. The radio telescope
design is mature and based on similar telescopes currently in use by the NJIT at
the Owens Valley Solar Array in California and by the Korea Astronomy and Space
Science Institute in South Korea; all built by the assembled team on this
proposal. The SPASRT antenna mount would allow for the 2.1-m solar radio dish,
housed in a Radom, to turn 380-deg around to follow the Sun, with a daily,
randomly determined, "unwrapping" period of 60-sec or less. The entire system is
designed to withstand the difficult operating conditions of the South Pole and
to operate autonomously during the austral summer season. The SPARTS
construction and installation will enable immediate studies of (a) solar radio
bursts, and (b) a sensitive search for p-mode activity transmitted through the
solar atmosphere. Solar radio bursts can dramatically impact technological
systems on Earth and in space, both as an indirect consequence of a large source
and consequent Coronal Mass Ejections (CME), or as a large source of "noise" in
radio systems such as GPS, cell phones, and satellite receivers. 24/7 coverage
of burst-prone active regions will yield significant new knowledge. Continuous
radio data streams will address the issue of how solar modes, such as p-modes,
"propagate" through the solar atmosphere and, potentially, couple into the solar
wind, and then cause near-Earth space weather events. The SPASRT system is
envisioned as a community-wide instrument with the open data access. SPASRT will
make continuous solar radiation measurements for the space weather community and
will provide complimentary observing support for other non-polar solar telescope
facilities. The project will continue contributing significantly to the training
of next generation of scientists by integrating undergraduate education with
technology and instrumentation development, field observations, and scientific
analysis.