* 1229354
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Computers for the Molecular Education and Research Consortium in Undergraduate computational chemistRY (MERCURY)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* George Shields, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
George Shields from Bucknell University and collaborators from a variety of
primarily undergraduate institutions that include Maria Gomez (Mount Holyoke),
Carol Parish (U of Richmond), George Shields (Hamilton), Marc Zimmer
(Connecticut), Maria Nagan (Truman State), Tricia Shepherd (Westminster),
Mauricio Cafiero (Rhodes), Kelling Donald (Richmond), Becky Eggimann (Wheaton),
Daqing Gao (Central State), Clifford Padgett (Armstrong Atlantic State U), Eric
Patterson (Truman State), Adam Van Wynsberghe (Hamilton), Kelly Anderson
(Roanoke College), Sudeep Bhattacharyay (U. Wisconsin-Eau Clare), Jim Phillips
(U. Wisconsin-Eau Clare), and Aimee Tomlinson (North Georgia College) will
acquire a computer cluster with an estimated 8 teraFLOPS of processing power and
14 terabytes of additional disk space. The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as
materials science, biochemistry, clusters, and physical organic chemistry.

Computer systems and clusters of computers are used by chemists and biochemists
to investigate reactions and the properties of chemicals and materials using
theoretical models and programs. The computer calculations are used, often along
with experimental data, to model and better understand many types of complex
chemical and biological phenomena. They are also used to predict results and
guide experiments. This resource will be used in research and in course work by
undergraduate students and faculty at several institutions training them in
computational chemistry methodology with a modern computer system. Besides the
home institution there will be participation of students and faculty from a
Molecular Education and Research Consortium in Undergraduate computational
chemistRY commonly denominated as MERCURY.