* 1229133
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Field NMR Spectrometer to Advance Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ram Mohan, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 248,800.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor Ram
Mohan from Illinois Wesleyan University and colleagues Rebecca Roesner and Brian
Brennan will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) so-called environmentally friendly organic synthesis using bismuth
and iron compounds as catalysts; (b) therapeutics for sickle cell disease; and
(c) development of azamacrocyclic receptors for
polyoxometalates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research at
Illinois Wesleyan University and neighboring institutions such as the local
community college (Heartland Community College).