* 1229628
* MRI: Development of a Near-Real-Time High-Accuracy Musculoskeletal System Measurement and Analysis Instrument (SKELETALMI)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,111,040.00

This project, developing an instrument for near-real-time high-accuracy
musculoskeletal system analysis named SKELETALMI, aims to enable timely and
accurate measurement, analysis, and characterization of in vivo combined joint
movement, whole body kinematics, skeletal muscle activity, and body reaction
forces. The instrument consist of hardware components that include devices for
fluoroscopic X-ray image acquisition, for measuring whole body movement, for
skeletal muscle activity, for measuring lower and upper body reaction forces,
and a high performance computer system; as well as software to analyze and
characterize jointly in vivo joint kinematics, joint kinetics, and muscle
activation.&lt;br/&gt;SKELETALMI is expected to &lt;br/&gt;- Allow real-time
calibration through overlay between fluoroscopic images and optical
images;&lt;br/&gt;- Automatically reconstruct 3D bone models from CT and MRI
scans in real-time;&lt;br/&gt;- Automatically estimate 3D in vivo bone movement
through 2D/3D registration; &lt;br/&gt;- Automatically establish 3D bone
coordinated systems and convert the 3D in vivo movement into 3D joint
kinematics;&lt;br/&gt;- Fuse the accurate joint kinematics, whole body
kinematics, muscle activation, and body reaction forces and visualize all the
information on digital human models.&lt;br/&gt;This development has a strong
multidisciplinary component that involves algorithms, biomechanics, biomedical
imaging, HCI, and computer graphics. The project constitutes a joint
collaborative effort of Rutgers with the State University of NJ and Kessler
Foundation Research Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation impacts many application domains such as shoe design, athletic
training, injury prevention, aging, design of movement-related medical device,
and surgical/rehabilitation technique innovation. Underpinned by the
capabilities of the instrument and the new related data collected, new courses
will be developed in musculoskeletal biomechanics, graphics simulation, movement
analysis, and biomedical image analysis. Consequently, the instrument also
influences the educational programs at the institution that should generate
graduates with a comprehensive knowledge of computational sciences, medical
science, and product design.