* 1229564
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance CPU-GPU Computer Cluster for  Scientific Computing at U Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Bruist, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Preston Moore from University of the Sciences in Philadelphia and colleagues
Michael Bruist, Randy Zauhar, Vojislava Pophristic and Zhijun Li will acquire a
high performance CPU-GPU computer cluster. The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
coarse grain molecular dynamics models to investigate complex interfacial
systems such as solid/liquid interface and protein/lipid systems; (b)
methodology and parameters for the prediction of arylamide foldamer structure to
aid the design of foldamers; (c) molecular database and web accessible interface
for computer aided drug design (CADD); (d) homology modeling of membrane
proteins with low sequence identity; and (e) noncanonical base pairs in RNA
loops and the role of conformational changes in protein-DNA
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer systems and clusters of computers are
used by chemists and biochemists to investigate reactions and the properties of
chemicals and materials using theoretical models and programs. The computer
calculations are used, often along with experimental data, to model and better
understand many types of complex chemical and biological phenomena. They are
also used to predict results and guide experiments. This resource will be used
in research and in course work by undergraduate and graduate students as well as
faculty training them in computational chemistry methodology with a modern
computer system. Collaborations with local industries such as Y-Carbon will
enhance the manufacturing of nanomaterials by design, which is essential to
improving the U.S. manufacturing base of advanced materials. In addition,
outreach programs for Philadelphia high schools and the community, which is
predominately composed of underrepresented groups, will also use the cluster.