* 1229396
* NSF Workshop on Micro, Nano, Bio Systems: Building on the Past and Planning for the Future,March 30-31,2012, Arlington, VA
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2013
* Reza Ghodssi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2013
* USD 96,665.00

Objective: The objective of this workshop is to discuss the major
accomplishments in the last 15-20 years and the grand challenges that lie ahead
in the field of micro/nanotechnology. An emphasis will be on the development of
bio-and healthcare systems that will help the rapidly increasing world
population and improve quality of life. This objective will be accomplished
through presentations by the invited distinguished speakers, as well as,
presentations by the NSF junior and mid-career researchers, who were CAREER
Grantees in the last 15-20 years. The NSF CAREER Grantees will also present
their accomplishments and thoughts via two Poster sessions. Furthermore, a panel
session consisting of the distinguished speakers and grantees will be held at
the conclusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The outcome of the
workshop will help the participants to develop new system programs and encourage
them to submit unsolicited proposals. The outcome will also be very useful to
the members of the NSF, in making decisions for future funding for micro/nano-
systems in Bio and Health areas. It would also provide useful information for
the future EFRI Programs in the Directorate for Engineering, Cyber-Physical
Systems, the STC and the ERC programs in the NSF. It is hoped that the outcome
of this workshop will bridge the gap between the areas of research in
nanotechnology and biology. It is expected that this workshop will lay the
foundations for the emerging areas of nano-medicine including targeted drug
delivery and implantable devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
plenary speakers? presentations, the Grantees presentation, their poster
sessions and the outcome of the panel discussions will be videotaped and
documented. The outcome and the discussions at the workshop will be widely
disseminated through the web. It is anticipated that the workshop will have a
long term impact on a broader group of researchers and educators in the physical
science, biology, and health sciences. It will also be useful to those who
consider entering into the new interdisciplinary areas of research in
micro/nanosystems for health and nanomedicine. This will also encourage the
development of new interdisciplinary courses and curriculum for undergraduate
and graduate students.