* 1229236
* MRI Collaborative: Development of an Intelligent, Autonomous, Unmanned, Mobile Sensor
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kimon Valavanis, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,645,350.00

Proposal #:12- 29236 Collaborative Proposal #: 12-29250 PI(s): Valavanis, Kimon
P.; Gao,David Wenzhong; Mahoor,Mohammad;Rutherford,Matthew J;Yi,Yun-Bo and
Collab PI(s): Boussalis, Helen R.; Guillaume, Darrell; Wu, Chivey
Institution:University of Denver & and Collab Institution: California State-LA
University Title: MRI: Collaborative: Dev. of an Integrated, Intelligent,
Autonomous, Unmanned, Mobile Sensor

Project Proposed: This project focuses on the development of an integrated,
intelligent, autonomous unmanned mobile sensor will enable research into the
foundations of the next generation of autonomous Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS).
The objective of this proposal is to develop an unmanned helicopter (about 150
kg weight) along with a mobile landing platform for refueling purposes. The
aircraft would be able to operate with both electric and fuel. The instrument
will be composed of two tightly coupled components, a (i) Novel light-weight
unmanned helicopter (<150 Kg), and, (ii) General purpose landing platform that
will also serve as a refueling/recharging station and data relay/repository.
This composition of the instrument is expected to pave the way for the next
generation of multi-purpose/cost-effective UAS into civilian and public domain
applications. The proposed integrated two component instrument development is
not considered as an extension of existing technology. It will enable
heterogeneous networked unmanned systems operating in unison in
traditional/extreme environment. The following specific research projects will
be enabled through the instrument: - Fault-Tolerant and Emergency Landing
Navigation and Control Systems - RADAR-based Sense-and-Avoid System - Prognosis
and Structural Health Monitoring of UAVs - Networked Unmanned Systems (NUS) -
Integration: Software Reliability and Security - Unmanned Helicopters for
Civilian/Public and Industrial Applications The University of Denver (DU) and
California State University Los Angeles (CalStU-LA), a predominantly minority-
serving institution, collaborate in the project.

Broader Impacts: The impact should be felt both regionally and nationally. At
the national level, the instrument should initiate transformative advances in
the computational algorithms proposed. The results will be made available to the
broader research community in the form of open-source codes. Simulations made
possible by these algorithms will have broad national and societal impact
ranging from climate change scenarios to wind power generation to plant
biotechnology and improved animal breeding. At the institutional and regional
levels, DU faculty/students will collaborate with CalStU-LA faculty/students to
enhance the ethnic and gender diversity of the student population, especially
recruiting minority students. Project goal include increasing the
educational/training opportunities for underrepresented students, and the number
of graduates in STEM fields.