* 1229652
* MRI:  Development of an Instrument for Assured Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29652&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Kahn, Latifur R.; Hamlen, Kevin;
Kantarcioglu, Murat&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas -
Dallas&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: An Instrument for Assured Cloud
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, building an assured cloud computing instrument, serves as an assured
cloud to store, manage, query, and analyze massive amounts of relational, as
well as textual, imagery, and video data. &lt;br/&gt;The instrument, consisting
of secure virtual machine monitoring, secure storage management, and secure data
management services, provides support for scaling applications such as
&lt;br/&gt;- Secure social networking, &lt;br/&gt;- Malware detection,
&lt;br/&gt;- Data provenance management, &lt;br/&gt;- Policy management,
&lt;br/&gt;- Privacy preserving analysis, &lt;br/&gt;- Ontology alignment, and
&lt;br/&gt;- Assured information sharing. &lt;br/&gt;It supports fine-grained
access control, storage of encrypted and sensitive data, complex query
processing for massive data sets, and authentication mechanisms. The
instrumentation will be mainly utilized by research projects on privacy, assured
information sharing, and reference monitoring in the School of Engineering and
Computer Science in collaboration with scientist from Economics, Policy and
Political Science, Management, Natural Science, and Mathematics at the
institution. Additionally, the instrument will be available for use by
researchers in the combined technology program between School of Arts and
Humanities and Engineering. Moreover, it will be available to researchers in
national and international academic, industrial, and governmental institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the
institution currently work in the area sponsored by NSF, AFOSR, NIH, DARPA, and
Army. All this sponsored research can gain by having the cloud instrument be
secured for many applications. Both research and education projects have a
strong need to process massive amounts of data securely, for example, encrypted
data for research on secure multi-party computation techniques, where large
amounts of semantic web data have to be exchanged securely among multiple
parties for assured information sharing among coalition partners. The education
courses involve experimentation with malware detection tools and distributed
forensics on the cloud. The instrument will be made available to multiple
departments and have applications in several domains including science and
engineering, healthcare, homeland security, defense and intelligence, law
enforcement, space, banking and finance, power management, and environmental
protection. Consequently, it will benefit the national community such as the
open science research community.