* 1229267
* MRI: Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometer for Research and Research Training in Chemistry and Biochemistry at Carleton College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Steven Drew, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 351,622.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Deborah Gross from Carleton College and colleagues Steven Drew, Gretchen
Hofmeister, David Alberg and Joseph Chihade will acquire an high pressure liquid
chromatograph interfaced to a mass spectrometer (HPLC/MS). The proposal is aimed
at enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) characterizing the structure-function relationships of enzymes; (b)
quantification of dopamine in rat brains; (c) mapping the interface between an
enzyme and its RNA substrate; (e) synthesis and/or characterization of small to
mid-size molecules; (f) complex organic compounds formed in secondary organic
aerosols; and (g) forensic applications in determination of date-rape drugs and
fingerprint measurements.

An HPLC-MS combines the physical separation capability of liquid chromatography
with the mass analysis ability of mass spectrometry. The liquid chromatograph
with pressure separates a mixture into its molecular components. These
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into a parent
ion and fragment ions and their mass/charge ratios are measured. This highly
sensitive technique allows determination of the masses of the particles, their
chemical composition and enables one to deduce the structure of the substances
in a complex mixture. The instrumentation provided by this award will provide
faculty and students the opportunity to pursue research projects at Carleton
College and St. Olaf College using modern, state-of-the-art instrumentation. It
will also be used in several laboratory courses to train significant numbers of
students in the use of this important analytical technique.