* 1229616
* MRI: Development of Instrumentation to Support Multi-Technology Vehicular Networking Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Mohammad Ilyas, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 330,281.00

Proposal #: 12-29616 PI(s): Mahgoub, Imadeldin; Ilyas, Mohammad; Stevanovic,
Aleksandar Z. Institution: Florida Atlantic University Title: MRI/Dev.:
Instrumentation to Support Multi-Technology Vehicular Networking Systems
Research

Project Proposed: This project, developing a vehicular networking unit
instrument, aims to enable sophisticated wireless systems for the next
generation of transportation technology. This small and fully contained
instrument device combines ad-hoc networking capabilities of IEEE 802.11p and
WAVE with centralized cellular communications. It contains navigation sensors,
human-machine interface (HMI) components, and traditional communications ports
such as RS-232, USB, and WiFi to communicate with tethered equipment. The device
can function both as an on-board unit and as a road-side unit connected with
infrastructure. The platform will include both the hardware components necessary
to construct a realistic vehicular networking testbed and the software tools
needed to quickly develop and deploy protocols and applications on the system.

Vehicular networks constitute an important emerging application of embedded
wireless systems. With a large market (250 million registered vehicles in USA
alone in 2006), vehicular networking technology has captured the attention of
automotive manufacturers, academic researchers, and governmental agencies.
Future vehicles will communicate with other vehicles on an ad-hoc basis with
infrastructure access points using the recently ratified IEEE 802.11p, IEEE
1609.3, and IEEE 1609.4 (WAVE) standards. These vehicles will also have the
ability to access the wide-area network using cellular systems such as UMTS,
WiMAX, or LTE. Research efforts in vehicular networking protocols and systems
require hardware platforms that support all vehicular communication paths for
development and verification. Consequently, the development of this instrument
is well justified.

Broader Impacts: This instrument will help to alleviate the traffic congestion
that continues to worsen in cities of all sizes creating an annual drain that
exceeds $112 billion in the USA economy alone in the form of 4.8B lost hours and
3.9 billion gallons of wasted fuel in 2009. It should further help to prevent
traffic accident fatalities (37,262 in 2008, according to the statistics in the
report of the Department of Transportation for that year). The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention report that traffic accidents accounted for 1.2%
of all deaths in USA in 2006. The instrumentation will also enable researchers
to perform practical development and verification of vehicular networking
technologies aimed at alleviating these problems and contributing to establish a
higher standard in vehicular networks research. Moreover, the project offers
promising commercialization potential for the dissemination of the resulting
instrumentation.

On the educational side, the instrumentation will enhance student learning in
Vehicular Networking, Mobile Computing, Transportation Modeling, Traffic Signal
Systems, and Intelligent Transportation Systems at institutions studying
advanced transportation systems. It will also be used in area middle and high
school demonstrations to increase interest in STEM disciplines. The team
projects and active learning are emphasized in 6 courses that are taught in
summer (more are planned for development). The instrumentation will be
integrated by offering hands-on projects. Results will be disseminated in
technical and educational conferences and journals.