* 1229218
* MRI: Acquisition of a Data Center Testbed for Security and Resilience Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* H. Jonathan Chao, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2017
* USD 250,000.00

This project, acquiring a data center instrument, aims to conduct research on
security and resilience. The goal is to design and verify a security
architecture that features high scalability, good flexibility, and low
complexity, and to develop and verify a systematic resilience scheme to provide
differentiated resilience to various applications and optimize the failure
recovery. The project also focuses on the deployment of the novel, hybrid
security architecture (HSA), which decouples security from routing and enables
the full distribution of the security devices in the DCN regardless of network
topologies and routing schemes. This feature is expected to enable the perimeter
defense model to become one in which the security checking and enforcement is
much more integrated into the data center fabric.

The instrument will be used to study the modeling of the interactions between
the application and lower networking layers. In addition, it will be used to
design the protocols and interfaces between them, to develop QoS-aware fast
failure recovery algorithms, as well as improve the application layer failure
reactions.

The proposed instrument can greatly impact the evolution of secure data centers
(in particular, multi-tenant data centers) toward higher capacity and better
service provisioning. The results of the project will be disseminated via
publications. The proposed software and hardware modules are expected to
encourage research and commercialization. The proposed instrument should greatly
impact education and student training, and is expected to also be shared with
the research community also outside the institution.