* 1229549
* Item Response Models for Partially Ordered Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edward Ip, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,999.00

The project will develop advanced analytic tools for analyzing multiple
partially ordered responses. While partially ordered set (poset) data are
prevalent in many branches of the social and behavioral sciences, their presence
has been under-reported and their importance underrecognized. A simple example
is response categories Agree, Neutral, Disagree, and Don't Know, of which the
first three can be ordered and the last forms a category of its own. The project
will build upon previous work in poset and extend the methods to multiple poset
responses. The methods will be extensions of models based on the item response
theory (IRT). Specifically, the project will adapt the graded, nominal, and
sequential response IRT models - tools that are able to handle multiple
responses and mixed-response types - for partially ordered responses. Simulation
studies will be used to establish the validity of the methodology.

Very few analytic methods exist for analyzing data in which some of the
information is ordered and some is not. Because of the lack of analytic tools,
this broad class of data types is often unnecessarily being "forced" into other
data types - e.g., through summarization or artificially collapsing response
categories - so they can be analyzed by existing ordinal or nominal data
methods. Subtle and potentially important information is often lost through such
data reduction. While this problem was recognized more than two decades ago as
having a negative impact on the development of theory for psychological and
educational measurement, little progress has actually been made since then. This
research will directly address this gap in measurement. Because item response
theory (IRT) has been widely used and adopted in various fields - education,
social and psychological sciences, health measurement, and business marketing
research - the development of methods for analyzing this data type in IRT has
the potential to provide more precise measurement tools for researchers and
practitioners in a broad range of areas of study.