* 1229894
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inventing the Notion of the Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Greta Krippner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 10,226.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Before 1930, economists theorized and measured
markets, trade, inequality, and more, but did not bundle these objects together
into a unified whole named "the economy." This dissertation investigates why the
economy emerged in the 1930s and why it took the particular shape it did. Using
archival research and computational techniques for analyzing text, it argues
that the production of official, routine, timely macroeconomic statistics
transformed the fuzzy conceptual space of economic life into a concrete, bounded
object, "the economy" in the 1930s and 1940s. The standardization and diffusion
of national income statistics in the 1950s and 1960s globalized "the economy,"
such that by 1970 every country was understood to have an economy. Since these
economies were all measured the same way, their size could then be easily
compared to make claims about development and growth. National income statistics
focused attention on economic growth, and away from income and wealth
inequality, which contributed to academics and policymakers overlooking
increasing inequality even as interest in poverty
grew.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars have
long argued that scientific practices construct objects, but most work in this
tradition focuses on the natural sciences and medicine. Unlike the natural
sciences, social sciences often build their objects with administrative data,
and thus the information available is already interpreted and categorized. This
investigation of how economists constructed "the economy" should provide broader
insight into the process of how social sciences shape the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why should
every dollar count the same, whether it is spent on treating illness, cleaning
up pollution or building bombs? This dissertation explores how the US settled on
one particular answer to that question, and why scholars and others are still
arguing about it. Behind debates over the proper measurement of Gross Domestic
Product are ethical questions about what is to be valued and fundamental
questions about the nature of the economy itself.