* 1229443
* MRI:   Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope to advance research and education in biology and physics at the University of San Diego
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Lisa Baird, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 414,686.00

Five research-productive faculty members from the biology and physics
departments at the University of San Diego will purchase, install, maintain, and
manage a shared laser scanning confocal microscope to advance research in the
physiological, cellular, molecular, and biophysical sciences. Confocal
microscopy is essential in providing sensitive, high resolution, three-
dimensional, time-resolved imaging so as to characterize: ion transporter
expression in aquatic animals (Patrick, Gonzalez), reactive oxygen species in
plants (Baird), serotonergic neurons in worms (Loer), intracellular trafficking
in cellular migration (Prigozhina) and the intramolecular dynamics of diffusing
DNA molecules. Research by the PI and co-PIs is highly integrative and requires
a breadth of confocal technology that will enable imaging and data acquisition
over a wide range of magnification, ranging from individual macromolecules (DNA)
and real-time imaging of events in live cells, to localizing molecules in whole
mounts of tissues or intact organisms. The specifications of Olympus Fluo View
1000/IX81 inverted microscope will satisfy the confocal research and training
requirements of the faculty and provide opportunities for new and collaborative
projects.

The NSF award will be used to purchase a confocal microscope for five faculty
members in the Biology and Physics departments at USD, three of which are women
faculty, including one pre-tenure, junior faculty in Physics. USD is an
undergraduate institution where 58% of students are women and 20% are
underrepresented ethnicities. The PI and co-PIs have a strong record of
productive, collaborative research with undergraduates throughout the year.
Students from Mater Dei High School (80% Latino/a and 20% from economically
disadvantaged backgrounds) and San Diego City College (57% women, 70% minority
status) will also benefit from gaining skills in confocal technology in summer
research with USD science faculty. Integration of confocal technology into our
research-based curriculum will augment several biology and physics courses and
provide an opportunity to develop an interdisciplinary microscopy techniques
course for the new biophysics major. This state-of-the-art instrument will
enrich the research and educational experience of students in STEM areas at USD
and attract highly motivated undergraduates to science careers.