* 1229577
* MRI: Acquisition of a Powder/Thin Film X-ray Diffractometer for Alternative Energy Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* David Galipeau, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 271,189.00

This award to South Dakota State University (SDSU) is for the acquisition of an
X-ray diffractometer (XRD) system to advance alternative energy research and
education. The system will enable thin film, variable temperature/atmosphere,
reflectance, scattering, and powder refinement measurements. It will become a
core research facility on the SDSU campus to support several NSF, NASA, DOE
funded projects, including hybrid nanomaterials for efficient solar energy
conversion, extremely thin absorber solar cells, growth of CdSe nanorods,
crystalline low bandgap conjugated polymers for photovoltaic applications, and
novel catalysts for biomass conversion. The instrument will be housed in the
Center for Advanced Photovoltaics at SDSU with assigned space in a newly
completed building, guaranteeing the instrument will be fully operational and
remain at full capacity upon installation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition
of a state-of-the-art single-crystal X-ray diffractometer will substantially
improve the research capability, competitiveness, and productivity of SDSU, and
is expected to attract more researchers to this sparsely populated state. This
tool will be integrated into SDSU's Center for Advanced Photovoltaics, an active
research cluster that engages graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral
researchers, and senior investigators in materials research. Research enabled by
this instrument is expected to generate a tremendous amount of information on
the developed materials, advancing technology in cost-effective solar cells and
alternative energy to meet our Nation's needs. The instrument will enable
multiple academic departments to improve education by providing research
experiences to undergraduate and graduate students. This project will also
broaden participation in science and engineering research by incorporating the
instrument into established outreach programs, such as the Success Academy and
the South Dakota Science and Engineering Fair, to encourage high school, middle
school, and Native American students to pursue careers in Science Technology
Engineering and Mathematics.