* 1229853
* Towards Mathematical Modeling of Neurological Disease from Cellular Perspective
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* David Terman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 30,000.00

"Towards Mathematical Modeling of Neurological Disease from Cellular
Perspective," is a series of workshops to be held at the Fields Institute in
Toronto, Ontario, during May and June 2012. Oscillations and other complex
dynamic behaviors have been implicated in several neurological diseases. Both
animal models and humans with Parkinson?s disease, schizophrenia, epilepsy and
sleep disorders exhibit changes in the firing properties of neurons within
certain brain regions. These changes often take the form of increased
correlation in spiking activity, changes in bursting and other rhythmic behavior
and changes in the firing rates of neurons. Although the functional role of
rhythmic activity in cognitive processing remains poorly understood, it is clear
that these pathological rhythms depend on specific cell types and network
properties. Recent technological advances such as optogenetics allow for the
targeting of specific biological cells and the recording from multiple cells
lying in separate brain regions. This provides novel opportunities for
theoreticians to model the role of different cell types and network properties
in the generation of neuronal activity. A series of five workshops will be
conducted, each devoted to a separate neurological disease: Parkinson?s disease,
schizophrenia, epilepsy, Alzheimer?s and anesthesiology/sleep disorders. Each
workshop will bring together neuroscientists, mathematicians and clinicians, so
that the most relevant issues and latest research associated with the workshop?s
topic will be presented from several different viewpoints. In this way, the
workshops will: (i) attract newcomers to the field; (ii) broaden and deepen
perspectives of those in the field; and (iii) consider what mathematical tools
and analyses would be most helpful, and where further developments are most
needed, to move forth in tackling neurological disease.

Millions of people suffer from some form of neurological disease. Experiments
have demonstrated that many brain disorders, including Parkinson?s disease,
schizophrenia, sleep disorders and epilepsy, are associated with the onset of
pathological neuronal firing patterns. For example, recordings from both monkeys
and humans have shown that Parkinson?s disease is associated with increased
synchronization among neurons within the basal ganglia. Changes in the
synchronization properties of neurons may also play a critical role in epilepsy
and pathological firing patterns within the prefrontal cortex, and other brain
regions, have been implicated in patients suffering from schizophrenia. While
there has been tremendous progress in developing experimental techniques for
identifying cellular processes involved in the generation of neurological
diseases, the mechanisms underlying these pathological firing patterns remain
poorly understood. It has become increasingly evident that mathematical models,
together with both computational and mathematical analysis of them, can play an
important role in making sense of the data, testing hypotheses and generating
new ones. A series of five workshops will be conducted, each devoted to a
separate neurological disease: Parkinson?s disease, schizophrenia, epilepsy,
Alzheimer?s and anesthesiology/sleep disorders. Each workshop will address the
most recent and relevant research associated with the workshop's topic and will
bring together scientists from a wide range of disciplines.