* 1229817
* MRI:   Elucidating Biomechanistic Processes Using Confoncal Microscopy at San Jose State Univerisity
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Miri VanHoven, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 336,776.00

Funds from this Major Research Instrumentation Program grant will be used for
the purchase and support of a Zeiss LSM 700 Confocal Microscope at San José
State University. Research groups from the Biology, Chemistry and Civil
Engineering departments will be among the major users, as well as a biology
professor from Santa Clara University. A common theme to the research that will
be enabled and enhanced by this acquisition is to elucidate biomechanistic
processes. Faculty members with expertise in the areas of genetics, development,
environmental microbiology, cell biology, immunology, biochemistry, and civil
engineering will comprise the major users of the confocal microscope.
Specifically, the following research projects will utilize this microscope:
apoptotic induction by r-disintegrins; molecular mechanisms that mediate
neuronal circuit formation and maintenance; mechanisms by which ethanol exposure
affects synaptic plasticity; characterization of novel uncultured bacterial
groups for ecophysiological studies; immunomodulation of lymphocyte trafficking;
cellular localization of inositol glycans; examining angiogenesis during ovarian
development in mice, signal transduction resulting from binding of
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3] to the nuclear vitamin D receptor (VDR);
using microbiological dating and confocal microscopy to date structural cracks;
and developmental analysis of LIN-1 expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;San José
State University is a minority serving institution in Northern California with a
large proportion of students with physical disabilities. Research groups
actively incorporate undergraduate researchers and students at the Master?s
level in their projects. Four main components of the training infrastructure at
the university will be impacted by the purchase of this confocal microscope: 1)
increased involvement of undergraduate students in research, 2) promoting active
learning, 3) student training in specialized masters programs, and 4)
collaborations with faculty and students at other institutions. Faculty that
will utilize this confocal microscope are research mentors for several programs
that aim to increase the number of minority students who pursue Ph.D. degrees in
the sciences, including NIH-MARC, MBRS-RISE, HHMI-SCRIBE, and NSF-REU RUMBA.
Learning to use this state of the art microscope in their research will help
prepare students for careers in science. In addition, data collected from this
microscope will be used in undergraduate courses to bring contemporary research
into the classroom. Finally, smaller institutions in the surrounding community
including Santa Clara University will have the opportunity to utilize this
microscopy to increase their research potential.