* 1229016
* MRI:  Acquisition of a BD Accuri C6 Flow Cytometer for Multidiciplinary Undergraduate Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2015
* Melanie Styers, Birmingham Southern College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2015
* USD 86,553.00

Flow cytometry has become an integral tool in biological and biochemical
research because it combines the versatility of fluorescence microscopy with the
strength of quantitative population-based methods. This NSF MRI award provides
funds for the purchase of a BD Accuri C6 Flow Cytometer to introduce and expand
the use of flow cytometry at Birmingham-Southern College (BSC). Important for
use in an undergraduate research program, the Accuri C6 flow cytometer is
compact, cost-effective, and capable of complex cellular fluorescence and
counting analyses, supplying the functionality of a full-scale cytometer in a
table-top apparatus. The versatility of this instrument will facilitate its use
by undergraduate researchers in the Chemistry and Biology Departments in a
variety of broad applications. The instrument will be used to quantitatively
assess cellular fluorescence of bacteria, yeast, and mammalian cells. In
particular, flow cytometry will be used to address important questions in
biology and chemistry, such as understanding the mechanisms that regulate
membrane trafficking and control cell cycle progression in Schizosaccharomyces
pombe, characterization of iron uptake pathways in Staphylococcus aureus, and
investigation of the interactions between complex sphingolipid homeostasis and
cell physiology in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The CSamplerÂ® accessory will
further allow BSC researchers to perform high-throughput fluorescence-based
assays for large-scale screening and identification of new avenues for research.
Importantly, the ease of setup and use of this instrument makes flow cytometry
accessible for researchers at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow
cytometry allows researchers to rapidly quantify fluorescence levels in
thousands of individual cells within minutes, providing quantitative information
about cell populations that can be used to address many important biological and
biochemical research questions. Introduction of flow cytometry will impact
undergraduate education at Birmingham-Southern College, a primarily
undergraduate liberal arts college of approximately 1300 students with well-
regarded programs in biology and chemistry. Typically, one-third of each
incoming class expresses an interest in the sciences. Though primarily for
undergraduate research, this instrument will have a significant impact on
teaching, training, and learning due to (1) the research requirement for all
natural science majors at BSC and (2) integration of research into the
curriculum of BSC?s teaching laboratories. Our intensive senior research
programs are among the greatest strengths of the natural sciences at BSC. Every
graduate of these majors must engage in a minimum of two terms of research. This
instrument will provide senior research students with the opportunity to utilize
an important technology not currently available at the College. Acquisition of
this flow cytometer will also significantly impact students enrolled in biology
and chemistry courses. Flow cytometry will be incorporated into research-based
laboratories in Honors Cell and Molecular Biology, Genetics, Cell Biology, and
Biochemistry, exposing students in these courses to flow cytometry data
collection and analysis. Students will gain hands-on experience with flow
cytometry, impacting the vast majority of science majors at BSC.