* 1229859
* WORKSHOP:   2012 Biology REU Workshop: Enhancing and Strengthening the REU Experience to be held April 12-14, 2012 in Arlington, Virginia
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Robyn Hannigan, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2015
* USD 49,982.00

An award has been made to the University of Massachusetts Boston to organize and
conduct a workshop for the NSF BIO Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site Program Directors. The workshop is scheduled for April 12-14, 2012, in
Arlington, VA. Over 150 participants are expected to attend, and a Leadership
Council has been formed to assist in the planning. The goals of the workshop are
to (1) enhance the opportunities presented by the BIO REU Common Assessment Tool
(2) advance Ethics/Responsible Conduct of Research training at the undergraduate
level, (3) share ideas for improving individual program implementation including
reporting; and (4) discuss best practices in student recruitment, international
and interdisciplinary research experiences, and mentor training. These goals
will be accomplished through presentations and breakout groups and through
opportunities for discussion and networking among participants. A final report
will be submitted to NSF that will summarize the workshop findings. A website
for BIO REU program directors, faculty, and students has been developed and
launched (http://www.bioreu.org) and will be used to facilitate implementation
of recommendations from this workshop. The PI, Alan Christian, may be contacted
for more information at Alan.Christian@umb.edu.