* 1229153
* MRI:  Development of a Windowless Hydrogen Gas Flow Target for a High Precision Measurement of the Proton Charge Radius
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Vina Punjabi, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 410,359.00

Protons and neutrons (collectively called nucleons) are fundamental building
blocks of the atomic nuclei, and they are held together inside nuclei by the
strong force. Precise knowledge of the proton's radius is critically important
for understanding nucleons in terms of the underlying quarks and gluons, which
are the degrees of freedom of the accepted theory of the strong force called
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). High precision measurement of the proton's radius
is also warranted by the recent controversy over the size of the proton,
triggered by the new ultra-high precision measurement in muonic hydrogen, which
is significantly smaller than the commonly accepted value obtained from
measurement in normal (electronic) hydrogen. To address this "proton radius
crisis," we have developed a novel electron scattering experiment that can
achieve an unprecedented precision using a high resolution calorimeter and a
windowless gas flow target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Collaboration consisting of
Norfolk State University, Duke University, Mississippi State University, and
North Carolina A&amp;T State University will develop and construct a windowless
hydrogen gas flow target in order to measure the proton charge radius with sub-
percent precision. The experiment will be carried out at Jefferson Lab, where
this target will be the first of its kind. The windowless target in conjunction
with a high resolution calorimeter will allow us to access momentum transferred
squared ranging from 0.0001 to 0.001 GeV-squared, which is lower than any
previous electron scattering experiment. The experiment will employ a novel
approach of simultaneous measurements of electron-proton elastic scattering
cross section and Moller scattering cross section using a high resolution
calorimeter. This novel approach will help achieve the unprecedented precision
and an almost model independent extraction of the proton charge radius for the
first time in electron scattering experiments.