* 1229182
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Beam Lithography System for the NCSU Nanofabrication Facility
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mehmet Ozturk, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 959,959.00

Objective: This proposal is for a new electron beam lithography and imaging
system to augment the nanoscale fabrication capabilities at NC State University
for a wide range of applications and users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This acquisition proposal is expected to lead to high-performance nano-
devices for nanoelectronics, opto-electronics, nanofluidic bio-sensors, and
nanogap sensors. The electron beam lithography system and imaging system will
have the capability to reach the resolutions down to 10 nm on six inch wafers.
The PI manages the Microelectronics center, where this new tool will be located.
The new tool will be widely used, with over 40 faculty members actively involved
in research that will be enabled by this tool; 20 specific research projects of
high impact have been described in this proposal. This new instrument proposed
here will catalyze and accelerate interdisciplinary research in nanoscience on a
variety of technical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The requested
instrument will serve 4 colleges and 10 departments at NC State and hence is
expected to serve a large population of faculty and their respective students.
The research enabled by the requested system will have significant impact in
both graduate and undergraduate research and training at NC State and the
instrument will be integrated into several lab courses. Outreach activities
include involvement with Shaw University, a local HBCU, and summer internships
for minority students providing getting hands-on education and research
training.