* 1229889
* G8 Initiative: Nanodiamond-based Nanospacer Lubricants
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Donald Brenner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 440,000.00

This NSF award funds U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively
selected by the G8 Research Councils Initiative "Interdisciplinary Program on
Material Efficiency - A first step towards sustainable manufacturing." This is a
pilot collaboration among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian
National Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence
Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian
Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils
(RCUK), supporting collaborative research projects selected on a competitive
basis that are comprised of researchers from at least three of the partner
countries.

North Carolina State University and the International Technology Center (U.S.),
the NanoCarbon Research Institute (Japan), and the Ural Federal University
(Russia) will develop a breakthrough technology based on nanodiamond particles
as robust and effective anti-friction and anti-wear additives that will increase
the durability of a wide range of industrial and transportation systems as well
as enhance transportation fuel efficiency. Key elements of the research include
creating stable colloidal suspensions of 4nm particles with a rounded shape that
reduce friction by rolling; testing the tribological properties of these
suspensions in PAO and industrial oils; characterizing the stability and
properties of these structures via computer modeling; and developing a strategy
for industrial scale implementation.

Recent laboratory tests by our team suggest that DNDs can act as super-hard and
slick lubrication additives capable of virtually eliminating wear and
drastically reducing friction (5-10 times) of sliding interfaces. If this level
of reduction in friction and wear is achieved in large mechanical systems,
including combustion engines, the lifetimes and energy efficiency of these
systems will increase dramatically, leading to replacement of fewer broken parts
and overall lower manufacturing costs. Estimates suggest that if all US car
owners used engine oil that produced only a 0.5% fuel economy improvement, the
total cost savings would be $370 million per year. Thus the current project is
aimed at providing the following global benefits: (i) reduced manufacturing
costs through enhanced durability of sliding mechanical systems, (ii) reduced
oil consumption through increased lubricant longevity, and (iii) reduced fuel
consumption. Reduced fuel consumption will also lead to reduced greenhouse gas
emissions in industrial and transportation systems.