* 1229021
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Enhance Undergraduate and Faculty Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mariusz Kozik, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 285,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor Mary
O'Sullivan from Canisius College and colleagues Mariusz Kozik, Timothy Gregg,
Jeremy Steinbacher and Sarah Evans will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The
proposal is aimed at enhancing research training and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) development of particle-based contrast agents
for fluorine MRI; (b) investigations of organic mechanisms and methodologies
(allene cyclopropanation); (c) development of inhibitors of an enzyme
(trypanothione reductase) in parasites; (d) studies of the interactions of
polyamines with the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor; (e) investigations of
DNA-protein cross-links; (f) studies to elucidate the structures of inorganic
complexes (transition-metal substituted heteropolytungstates); and (g) uses of
inorganic complexes as photo-activated catalysts for reduction reactions.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching
as well as research at Canisius College and neighboring institutions.