* 1229678
* MRI: Acquisition of a Molecular Beam Epitaxy Chamber for Quantum-Engineered Structures and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ian Sellers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 812,984.00

This award to the University of Oklahoma is for the acquisition of a state-of-
the-art molecular beam epitaxy chamber to accelerate progress in developing a
wide range of scientific and technologically important applications for
materials containing antimony (Sb). Antimonide materials typically display a
relatively narrow band gap, small effective electronic mass, and strong spin-
orbit coupling. Interband cascade structures based on the type-II transition
between InAs and GaSb quantum wells will be further developed for applications
as mid-infrared lasers, photodetectors, and thermophotovoltaic devices. Quantum-
dot structures with antimonide compounds as the material for either the dots or
the matrix are candidates for solar cells that exploit intermediate band
absorption or multi-exciton generation. Exploitation of strong-spin orbit
coupling and confinement effects may lead to a new three-dimensional topological
insulator in quantum-confined Sb films. Improved InSb quantum-well structures
will facilitate further studies of electron spin effects and may enable
formation of novel topological superconductor states. The effects of dilute
amounts of nitrogen in narrow gap materials will be studied for photovoltaic and
photodetector applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular beam epitaxy
chamber will be used for the training of students in contemporary growth
techniques and will create new research opportunities for students studying
physics and engineering. Nanotechnology outreach to K-12 students, middle and
high school teachers, undergraduates, and senior citizens will be enriched by
the enhanced expertise that will result from the acquisition of a new chamber
for antimonide growth.