* 1229690
* MRI:  Development of an Aerosol Impact Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert Continetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 512,200.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program that is
co-funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) and
the Chemical Measurements and Imaging (CMI) Programs, Professor Robert
Continetti from the University of California San Diego will build a novel
aerosol impact spectrometer (AIS). The AIS will provide a new experimental
approach for the study of the chemistry of charged aerosol particles in the 50
nm to 1 micron size range, providing analysis of the chemical composition and
morphology using both laser desorption ionization (LDI) and hypervelocity impact
on an inert surface. The analytical process involves a series of carefully
choreographed steps. The instrument will first trap particles/aerosols in a
quadrupole ion trap, where they can be chemically modified if desired, and
sequentially eject them into an image-charge mass spectrometer to determine the
mass and charge state. The particles will then be accelerated to a high velocity
prior to impact on a single-crystal diamond surface. Chemical analysis of
charged products will be performed by time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS)
and neutral species desorbed on impact will be analyzed by vacuum ultraviolet
laser photoionization TOF-MS. Variation of the velocity of impact will provide a
new variable for studying the chemical properties of mass-resolved single
particles as a function of depth, yielding a technique for aerosol studies
analogous to the widely used secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) technique
that uses the impact of known ionic particles to characterize
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The chemistry of aerosols and nanoparticles has
broad importance to understanding environmental and biological systems, and
further development of techniques to understand the chemistry of particles as a
function of size, such as mass spectrometry, is essential. Mass spectrometry
vaporizes and ionizes a sample by a variety of methods. The particles (parent
and fragment ions) flow into a mass spectrometer where their mass/charge ratios
are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows determination of the masses
of the particles, their chemical composition and enables one to deduce the
structure of the substances in a complex mixture. The instrument that will be
developed will apply a new analytical tool in mass spectrometry (hypervelocity
impact) that will have broad application for the characterization of complex
nanoparticles and aerosols at a single-particle mass-resolved level of detail.
This will yield unique information on the chemistry of aerosols and particles
and will be useful in fields as diverse as Chemistry, Biology and Environmental
studies. The initial focus of the studies will be on atmospheric aerosols and
biologically modified synthetic nanoparticles. This research project will also
help train a new generation of instrumentalists in state-of-the-art techniques.