* 1229275
* MRI: Acquisition of a Volumetric PIV System to Study Flow Physics of Vortex Dominated Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Mohammad Khan, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 135,690.00

ABSTRACT: Khan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) has greatly
improved flow field diagnostics by providing a snap shot of a section of the
flow field rather than a point by point measurement. Enhancement from a
2-component PIV to the measurement of 3-components taking advantage of the
finite thickness of the laser sheet has provided additional understanding of
complex flow field. However, this enhancement still does not result in a true
3-dimensional understanding of the flow field as this requires several cross-
sectional slices of the flow to build a composite picture. The more recent
availability of Volumetric PIV system provides the ability to conduct
instantaneous flow field measurements of volumetric region of flow thereby
resulting in true 3-dimensional flow characteristics. It is intended to acquire
a volumetric PIV system to conduct flow field measurements of vortex-dominated
flows to better understand the flow physics. Measurements using volumetric PIV
will provide useful information on the morphology of the embedded regions of
vorticity and its diffusion into the flow field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee
University is one of the premier HBCUs and has been ranked as the #1
Baccalaureate College by the Washington Monthly. The Aerospace Science
Engineering Department is the only ABET-accredited program at an HBCU and hence
has a major impact on increasing the number of under-represented minorities in
this important engineering field. The Department had acquired a 2D PIV system in
2004 under the NSF MRI grant. This facility was used to conduct both
undergraduate and graduate research resulting in two MS theses as well as
several undergraduate student presentations at the AIAA Student conferences. The
Department is currently developing a bio-fluid dynamics sequence in
collaboration with the Biology Department under the NSF HBCU-UP program where
the facility is being integrated as part of the laboratory experiences. The
acquisition of the volumetric PIV system will therefore be used for disciplinary
as well as inter-disciplinary research (Aerospace Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering &amp; Chemical Engineering, Biology). The enhancement of the flow
diagnostic capability as result of this acquisition will substantially
strengthen the experimental research infrastructure of the Aerospace Science
Engineering Department. There are several projects that the students are
currently working on using a 3-component PIV system to understand the three
dimensionality of the flow fields. The facility will be an important addition to
the Departmental infrastructure and support its plans to develop a graduate
program. This diagnostic facility will enhance the learning experiences of
undergraduate students who will be involved in undergraduate research. The
facility will also be used as part of the aerodynamics and instrumentation
courses. The facility will also be used to demonstrate the use of such
techniques to K-12 students who are on campus for various summer enrichment
programs such as the Minorities in Technology and Engineering (MITE), and NSF
funded programs under MSP and ITEST.