* 1229282
* MRI: Development of a GPU-Enabled, Petascale Active Storage Architecture for Data-Intensive Applications in HPC and Cloud Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Anthony Skjellum, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29282&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Skjellum, Anthony &lt;br/&gt; Bangalore,
Purushotham; Hasan, Ragib; Zhang, Chengcui&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Alabama at Birmingham&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: A GPU-Enabled, Petascale Active
Storage Architecture for Data-Intensive Applications in HPC and Cloud
Environments&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a
2.4 Petabytes (PB) of raw storage instrument to support a variety of research
projects in experimental HPC and cloud storage, aims to both increase local
resources for scientific computing and act as a testbed for GPU-enabled reliable
storage. The instrument enables an increased virtualization of storage, the
concurrent access to storage under fault scenarios (e.g., RAID), and a series of
data intensive applications. Lessons learned will be leveraged from the existing
system in place, whereby the existing system and the new system will be
integrated in a way that supports cloud and disaster recovery modes of
operation. The project enables the following studies and research projects:
&lt;br/&gt;- Studying of effective rates of errors and reliability at highly
refined levels and seeking means to identify and manage additional classes of
errors (e.g., misdirected writes);&lt;br/&gt;- Creating semi-analytical models
to allow tunable storage characteristics within a lifetime-reliability-
performance cost space; &lt;br/&gt;- Running applications from data mining
(including bioinformatics as drivers for proving the efficacy of the final
system), to achieve new science in these data-intensive domains; and&lt;br/&gt;-
Conducting computer science research aimed at simplifying use of active storage
computation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation
increases the institution?s capacity to conduct cutting-edge research in an
inexpensive, fast, practical, reliable petascale storage for data-intensive
applications. Significant computational power logically close to that storage
enables new science. Student training (including underrepresented groups) will
be emphasized. The knowledge dissemination through this effort could be
significant.