* 1229709
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU-Accelerated High Performance Computing and Visualization Cluster
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Tim Andersen, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2015
* USD 555,384.00

Science and engineering researchers across many disciplines have access to
increasing amounts of computing power and research data available to support
their work. State of the art cyberinfrastructure resources are needed to tackle
large computational problems and make massive data accessible to promote
superior analysis. This proposal plans for a 32- node GPU/CPU cluster with a
storage array and a 5Ã—8 foot tiled display to be located in a visualization
theater setting. The equipment will support parallel computing and rendering,
data storage, and high resolution imaging as researchers complete externally
funded work. In addition, the instrument will be housed at a facility open to
both university researchers as well as to local technology companies and
partners, and provide partners with cyberinfrastructure access as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will support research in multi-scale wind
energy forecasting, data-driven modeling for threat reduction in chemical and
biological defense, material characterization and modeling, snow hydrology and
remote sensing, and fundamental studies on understanding the mechanisms in
skeleton development in living systems and how living systems maintain complex
three dimensional shapes. Boise State University is recognized as a CUDA
Research Center for embracing GPU computing use across multiple research fields.
The center?s goal is to develop and apply advanced numerical methods and
computational algorithms to science and engineering, where rapid and real-time
computations can transform current practice. This instrument would substantially
increase computing power and play a key role in advancing research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will directly support Boise
State's strategic goal to emerge as a metropolitan research university of
distinction. exposure to cutting edge cyberinfrastructure and research can not
only benefit researchers, but may also have profound effects on regional
students who might otherwise never gain exposure. Faculty will also use the
instrument to support externally funded education activities.