* 1229299
* MRI: Acquisition of ETG-4000 24 Channel Optical Topography System for Research, Training and Outreach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Deborah Givens, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 233,368.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award permits Dr. Nicholas Stergiou and four
co-investigators to purchase a functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
system. The participating researchers are all active in the area of human
movement and neuroscience. This system enables imaging of the brain in
functional postures and activities such as standing and walking. Brain imaging
is therefore enabled under more natural conditions with this instrument,
compared with other technologies that require the person to lie flat and still.
The fNIRS is a rapidly emerging technology that will transform the current
research program at the Nebraska Biomechanics Core Facility, enabling the
realization of leading-edge research. This facility specializes in the
neuromuscular control of gait and balance. It combines the principles of motor
control with mathematical theory to develop novel biotechnologies that
manipulate the sensory pathways for enhanced control of movement.

The fNIRS will play a key role in this program of research, allowing the
researchers to examine the neural correlates of auditory, visual and tactile
feedback that have previously been shown to improve gait, balance and upper limb
movement. This new knowledge will be later applied in the rehabilitation of
movement in patient populations. Beyond the Nebraska Biomechanics Core Facility,
the fNIRS technology will be subject to both intra- and inter-institutional use.
Researchers from Creighton University and the Department of Psychology,
University of Nebraska at Omaha propose a number of fundamental research
activities that will be enabled by the fNIRS instrument. In these activities
cortical brain activity will be examined before, during and after aerobic
exercise to establish whether or not cognitive performance and brain activity in
the prefrontal cortex is related to aerobic exercise. Inhibitory control of
irrelevant or redundant sensory information is known as "gating" of neuronal
responses. Another project will examine the test-retest reliability of sensory
gating, measured using an established paradigm. Additional research will
investigate the neural correlates of lower-limb muscular fatigue and the effect
of biofeedback on cortical activity in motor learning, based on a four-week
training study.

The Nebraska Biomechanics Core Facility is committed to involving undergraduate
and graduate students in research, reflected in the many student volunteers,
paid student workers and interns that have passed though the facility since its
establishment. The fNIRS instrumentation will transform the vista of potential
research questions that these students can tackle. Additionally, the Nebraska
Biomechanics Core Facility is involved in outreach initiatives that invite low-
income high school students to the facility to expose them to biomechanics as a
possible future career. The fNIRS will be a particularly exciting device to add
to this program and will stimulate interest in the neurosciences in this
population of students who are currently underrepresented at university level.