* 1229178
* MRI: Acquisition of a Large Volume, High Resolution Motion Capture System for an Interdisciplinary Research Facility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Philippos Mordohai, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 203,988.00

Proposal #: 12-29178&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Cappelleri, David; Backburn, Mark;
Mordohai, Philippos; Valdevit, Antonio; Zavlanos, Michael
M.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Stevens Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Acq.: Large Volume, High Resolution Motion Capture System for an
Interdisciplinary Research Facility&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a Vicon Motion Capture
System, aims to support a wide range of technologies and systems including
unmanned vehicles, embedded robotics, sensing, perception and visualization, and
collaborative, cooperative, networked robotics. Adding critical capability to
researchers, the instrumentation is expected to impact research projects in the
following areas: &lt;br/&gt;- Micro aerial vehicles, Active Heterogeneous Sensor
Teams, 3D Range Data Generation and Reconstruction, &lt;br/&gt;- Control of
Mobile Robot Networks, Biomechanics, Human-Robot collaboration, Concept
Engineering, and Concept of Operations Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
the institution has initiated a wide range of interdisciplinary high-risk, high
payoff technologies and systems, the instrumentation fosters a multidisciplinary
research-intensive learning environment. Utilizing highly responsive
instrumentation to capture the nuances that can be missed by lesser systems,
this work should advance the area of motion capture to the next generation. The
instrumentation is also expected to greatly accelerate research progress in the
multiple areas addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system impacts research projects in many emerging
robotics, controls, and scientific areas of national and societal importance.
The instrumentation supports a training environment and educational initiatives
that contribute to increase the number of undergraduate and graduate students to
the system and the research projects that leverage its capabilities. Enabled
research will be incorporated into classes and outreach programs. This
acquisition fosters further the integration of research and education.