* 1229454
* MRI: Development of a Dynamic Environmental Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Shen Dillon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,792,000.00

This award to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is for the
development of a dynamic environmental transmission electron microscope (TEM).
Application of in-situ electron microscopy techniques to study dynamic processes
with temporal resolution from millisecond to ultrafast regimes can contribute
immensely to the understanding of phase transformations and chemical
interactions in a wide range of material systems impacting a broad range of
research topics at the forefront of Chemistry, Physics, and Materials Science.
To enable such studies, this development project will build upon the
technologies of environmental TEM and high speed (khz frame-rate) - high
performance CMOS pixel sensors and integrate pulsed laser and gas flow
technologies on-site to develop time-resolved, in-situ, electron imaging and
diffraction capabilities. The instrument will enable studies such as chemical
reactions and rapid phase changes of supported nanoparticles, oxygen reduction
in electrochemical energy conversion, ferroelectric domain switching, nucleation
and growth of semiconductor nanowires, and degradation mechanisms in lithium-ion
batteries. Through the use of liquid cells and the direct electron detection
CMOS sensing low electron dose, in vivo, electron imaging of native peptides and
cells will also be enabled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron microscopy plays a
critical role in the development of new materials for technology, energy, and
medicine by providing chemical and structural information at high spatial
resolution. The development of in-situ electron microscopy with fast and
ultrafast time resolutions will open broad new areas of enquiry to researchers.
The proposed instrument will be housed and become one of the featured tools in
the Center for the Microanalysis of Materials (CMM) at the Materials Research
Laboratory (MRL) Central facilities at the University of Illinois. The CMM is an
open access facility with dedicated staff that serves more than 850 users from
over a 100 research groups across 30 departments at Illinois as well as
researchers from other institutions throughout the nation. The MRL's facilities
support Illinois' academic mission with instruments utilized in several
university course offerings and each year hosts a tutorial characterization
workshop facilitating the 'hands-on' training of a large number of graduate
students and professional scientists from all over the world. The shared
instrumentation is also an important resource for the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates programs in Physics, Material Science, Chemistry, and
Engineering, with many undergraduate students getting their first training in
the use of advanced instrumentation. The proposed instrument will be integrated
into these training activities. Moreover, this new instrument will contribute to
the materials research 'ecosystem' which serves as a model of how to integrate
first principle materials design, nano-fabrication, nano-characterization and
computation.