* 1229897
* RUI: Collaborative Research:  Vulnerability and Resilience Among Small Farmers: An Assessment of Environmental Change, Economic Stress, and the Role of Water Management.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Douglas Gamble, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 08/31/2015
* USD 94,374.00

This project is about assessing the vulnerability of small farmers in the face
of environmental change and economic transformation, with a focus on improving
the resilience of rural agricultural communities. Traditional farmers in various
places around the world are faced with multiple stressors arising from both
environmental change and changing regional economic conditions. One of the key
factors in creating and overcoming this vulnerability is the access to and use
of water. Accordingly, this study will answer two primary research questions: 1)
what vulnerability do farmers face as a combined result of environmental change
and economic restructuring? and 2) what role do different water delivery systems
have in enhancing the resilience of small-scale agriculture in the face of
uncertainty and change? These questions will be examined in southwestern
Jamaica, a region with extensive smallholder food production for the domestic
market. The project will engage a mixed methods research design that combines
the collection and analysis of environmental data with a qualitative
investigation of farmer knowledge, perception, and adaptation to changing
regional economic conditions. The study builds on prior research in Jamaica,
which demonstrated that farmers experience stress from environmental change and
market instability, a condition that has been described in the literature as
'double exposure.' This study aims to document the nature of these stresses, and
also to investigate the role played by different water management strategies in
building resilience. The results should add significantly to theories of
vulnerability and resilience, and also contribute to a better understanding of
environmental change adaptation in rural agricultural communities throughout the
Caribbean and other developing regions. As such, this work addresses important
questions that are of interest to scholars and policy-makers who work at the
intersection of economic development and environmental change and
sustainability.

This project will contribute to teaching, training, and learning in several
ways. Learning opportunities for students at both the University of North
Carolina at Wilmington (UNC-W) and East Carolina University (ECU) and the
University of the West Indies (UWI) at Mona will be enhanced through the
development of two courses. One of these will be a summer field course for UNC-W
and ECU students focused on environmental change and sustainable development,
which will be coordinated with the curricular offerings at UWI. The second will
be a collaborative, online course on environmental change, open to students on
all three campuses, and run through an innovative 'global classroom'
videoconference facility. The installation of instruments for the environmental
data collection will enhance the infrastructure for research in Jamaica and
provide important opportunities for long-term monitoring and capacity building.
Finally, the proposed project has significant potential benefits to society.
Results from this work will be shared with the Jamaican research community and
policy-makers, who have stressed to us the importance of developing a better
understanding of regional environmental conditions. Insights from this study can
help to inform assessments of vulnerability and resilience for other small
island developing states in the Caribbean, and can assist in the development of
adaptation strategies in a region that is expected to experience disruptions
from both environmental change and global economic restructuring in the coming
years.