* 1229292
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI-ToF Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Hans Schanz, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 219,000.00

This award for a benchtop MALDI-ToF mass spectrometer to Georgia Southern
University will impact a number of researchers in the Chemistry and Physics
Departments there as well as researchers at Armstrong Atlantic State University.
The instrument will enhance the following research projects: 1) artificial
bioactive polymers; new artificial polymers via hydroamination; 2) ROMP
copolymers for binding to hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier; 3) biomass for
catalytic conversion into liquid fuels; 4) repellent polymeric coatings and pH-
responsive polymers; 5) potential iron chelation therapy drugs; 6) modified
hemoglobin products; 7) porphyrin-based singlet oxygen sensitizers; and, 8)
investigation of proteins in nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MALDI-ToF
mass spectrometer will enhance the research culture at Georgia Southern by
supporting the team's efforts in the multi-disciplinary and collaborative
Material Science research focus area on campus. Additionally, the instrument
will improve undergraduate research training by enabling 'hands-on' experiences.
The instrument will also enrich the curriculum through the integration of a
practical instrument component into lecture classes and laboratory courses for
undergraduate students. Finally, a multiple-student project is planned
incorporating the instrument in the development of a YouTube video, which
introduces and illustrates mass-spectroscopy techniques, in particular MALDI-
ToF.