* 1229278
* MRI: Acquisition of GPS Equipment for Establishing a Continuously Operating Dense GPS Network in Houston Metropolitan Area for Urban Natural Hazards Study
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Thomas Hsu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 401,374.00

1229278&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) grant supports acquisition of necessary equipment and installation of a
real-time continuously operating Global Positioning System (GPS) observational
network in the Houston metropolitan. The so-called ?HoustonNet? will support
studies of urban natural hazards related to deformation processes associated
with local and regional tectonics, flood loading and subsurface fluid extraction
and salt diapirism, in large part causing subsidence and sinkhole dynamics in
this area with significant associated civil costs and engineering and hazards
management considerations. Data from the network will also enable geoscientists
to address fundamental questions about the relationship between tectonic motions
in the Gulf Coast and the activity and processes of growth of normal faults, the
role of salt domes, and the possible role of aquifer depletion and petroleum
extraction in re-activating certain normal faults. HoustonNet will span an area
of 200 x 150 km with average GPS station spacing of 15 km inside the Houston
metro area and 30 km outside the metro area. Forty-five (45) continuously
operating GPS stations, 10 with co-located weather stations would be installed.
Twenty-five (25) of these will be maintained by the Houston-Galveston Subsidence
District and Fort Bend Subsidence District for ground subsidence monitoring
motivated by understanding the effects of water, oil, and gas extraction. Seven
(7) stations will be co-located with borehole extensometers operated by U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS). Five (5) stations will be in close proximity with
weather and environmental towers operated by the University of Houston (UH).
Eight (8) stations will be installed on local public school buildings. The
stations will be installed with assistance of a UNAVCO field engineer and a
graduate student who will be trained in geodetic monument engineering and GPS
geodesy. All of the observational data will be telemetered and open to the
public through the data archiving facility at UNAVCO and a real-time GPS data
streaming system at the UH Geodesy Laboratory. The network will also support
real time tropospheric water vapor tomography in support of atmospheric studies
and for improving regional weather forecasting and hurricane intensity
forecasting. The network will serve the local civil engineering for cadastral
surveys and engineering projects requiring precise positioning. The PI team
includes faculty from the Departments of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Civil
&amp; Environmental Engineering, Engineering Technology, Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM) at the
University of Houston and planned installations at local area K-12 building will
form the basis of planned outreach efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***