* 1229222
* The Validity of Markov Latent Class Analysis for Evaluating Measurement Errors in Complex Panel Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Marcus Berzofsky, Research Triangle Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 175,000.00

Markov latent class analysis (MLCA) comprises a broad class of models and
techniques for analyzing categorical longitudinal data subject to
misclassification. An important application area is exploring data quality
issues in panel surveys. Because MLCA does not rely on gold standard or
replicate measurements, it can be applied to virtually any panel survey. For
data quality evaluations, MLCA has been used to compare interview modes and
alternative questionnaire designs, estimate measurement bias, investigate the
causes of misclassification, and investigate many other measurement error
issues. Despite its many potential applications in survey work, MLCA has not
enjoyed widespread use among survey methodologists because practical guidance on
fitting MLC models to complex survey data is lacking. This project will: (1)
evaluate the magnitude of the model bias when one or more MLCA assumptions fail
when analyzing complex survey data under a wide range of conditions; (2)
identify and evaluate the current strategies for diagnosing and repairing MLC
model failure and misspecification; (3) address the limitations of current
methods by developing improved strategies for diagnosing and repairing MLC model
failure and misspecification, particularly in applications to complex surveys;
and (4) apply the most effective diagnostic and remedial approaches to real
panel survey data to demonstrate the range of modeling issues that can arise in
practical applications as well as how to deal with them effectively. As part of
the application of these approaches, at least 10 years of data from several
national panel surveys will be analyzed to identify temporal trends in
measurement error for key national statistics.

This research has important implications for MLCA in all branches of science
where classification error is an issue, including social science, epidemiology,
clinical research, educational testing, and psychology. The project's impact
will be felt in at least four ways. The research has particular relevance for
complex survey applications because of the emphasis in this research on modeling
cluster-correlated data selected with unequal probabilities and subject to
nonresponse and measurement error. It also has important implications for
disadvantaged and minority populations whose data may be differentially affected
by measurement error. In addition, the evaluation of error trends will provide
important information on current and historical levels of measurement error for
three important federal statistical programs. Finally, theories regarding the
relationship between measurement error and survey participation will be
formulated and tested. The project is supported by the Methodology, Measurement,
and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part
of a joint activity to support research on survey and statistical methodology.