* 1229645
* MRI: Acquisition of an FEI Versa 3D dual-beam FIB/SEM for Catalysis and Materials Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Bala Subramaniam, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,540,000.00

Abstract

#1229645 Subramaniam, Bala

The proposed equipment will provide a unique, state of-the-art electron
microscopy infrastructure that would allow researchers to directly probe the
surface/interfacial properties and surface dynamics of materials at nanometer
length scales. These facilities will enable a deeper fundamental understanding
essential to developing novel functional materials for catalysis and energy
applications.

The major users include those from the Center for Environmentally Beneficial
Catalysis (CEBC), the Kansas Center for Solar Energy Research (CSER), and their
nationwide academic/industry collaborators. Additionally, many other researchers
in engineering, geology and biological sciences will benefit from these
facilities. CEBC researchers are addressing the major challenges facing the
sustainable manufacture of fuels and chemicals from traditional and renewable
feedstocks. The design of active, selective and stable catalysts is a key
challenge in this regard. Examples of recent innovations include versatile
large-pore ordered mesoporous catalyst supports, nanometer size metal catalysts
tethered to supports by organic and inorganic anchors that show enhanced
activity for a variety of chemical transformations, and bimetallic catalysis for
hydrogenolysis of biomass-derived feedstocks. The proposed instrumentation will
enable in situ characterizations of the catalytic metal and surface reactant
species at nanometer level resolution.