* 1229766
* MRI: Acquisition of an Adaptive Computation Server for Support of STEM Research at the University of Idaho
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jim Alves-Foss, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29766&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Alves-Foss, Jim; Barannyk, Lyudmyla L;
Potirniche, Gabriel P; Xing, Tao; Ytreberg, Frederick M;&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Idaho&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Adaptive Computation Server for
Support of STEM Research at Univ. of Idaho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project from an EPSCoR state, acquiring an "adaptive
computational server" with 80 CPUs, 2 TB RAM, and 9.6 TB disk, enables a variety
of research projects in the areas of computational fluid and molecular dynamics,
with applications in ecology, energy systems, hydraulics, and protein
structures. An effort is also starting out in computer security modeling. The
proposed instrument supports up to 40 separate concurrent
experiments/simulations each with 2 processor cores and 50 GB of memory,
parallel computation across any number of processor cores. It is expected to
manage large-scale simulations across hundreds (potentially up to thousands) of
virtual machines each running small portions of a parallel
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposal carries
potential for strong broader impacts, as the acquisition will be widely used
across many disciplines and colleges due to the intrinsic flexibility of this
instrument and the lack of existing resources. Proposed is a good educational
and outreach plan.