* 1229165
* MRI: Acquisition of GC-MS to Support Basic and Applied Research and to Integrate Research and Education at Saint Cloud State University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Jeannot, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 129,809.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Latha Ramakrishnan from St. Cloud State University and colleagues Michael
Jeannot, Mohammad Mahroof-Tahir, Lakshmaiah Sreerama and Mark Mechelke will
acquire a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer system. The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) understanding the evolution and function of GABAergic
neurotransmission in planaria; (b) determination of serotonin and norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors in the wastewater treatment;(c) verification of a kinetic
model for headspace single-drop microextraction; (d) development of bioprocess
technologies to produce ethanol from lignocellulosic biomass; and (e) design and
synthesis of goniothalamin analogues to explore the natural product mechanism of
action.

A gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer vaporizes and separates a multi component
mixture which then passes into the mass spectrometer where the components are
ionized. The mass spectrometer determines the mass/charge ratio of these
particles (parent molecular ion and fragment ions). This highly sensitive
technique allows determination of the masses of the particles, their chemical
composition and enables one to deduce the structure of the substances in a
complex mixture. The instrumentation provided by this award will provide faculty
and students the opportunity to pursue research projects at St. Cloud
University. It will advance the training of many students in the use of this
important and widely used analytical technique.