* 1229035
* MRI-Acquisition: 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer including PFG/HRMAS for Materials Chemistry Research: The Missing Instrument
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ranjit Koodali, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 270,091.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Andrew Sykes from University of South Dakota and colleagues Paul May, Grigoriy
Sereda and Ranjit Koodali will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer with solid
state capabilities equipped with a pulsed field gradient (PFG), high sensitivity
liquid probe (for 1H, 13C, 19F, and 31P nuclei), a high resolution magic angle
spinning (HRMAS) probe for liquid samples, variable temperature (VT) capability,
and an automatic sample changer. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
training and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
luminescent nanomaterials for biological and materials applications; (b)
derivatization of quantum dots for drug delivery; (c) reactivity of frustrated
Lewis pairs; (d) study of the mechanism of formation ofperiodic cubic mesoporous
materials; (e) green chemistry using carbonaceous catalysts; (f) organic, nano-
assemblies for photocatalytic water splitting; (g) fluorinated materials for
air-stable and moisture-resistant flexible optoelectonics; (h) metal-organic
chemistry of fluorescence sensors; and (i) thiacalixarene based metal-organic
cages as artificial receptors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for
the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research at the
University of South Dakota but also at South Dakota State University (SDSU) and
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&amp;T). The instrument will
also be used extensively in the education and training of underserved groups,
including students and faculty at tribal and small rural colleges through The
Northern Plains REU Site: Serving the Needs of Regional Tribal Colleges and
Primary Undergraduate Institutions.