* 1229059
* MRI Consortium: Acquisition of a Heterogeneous, Shared, Computing Instrument to Enable Science and Computing Research by the Mass. Green High Performance Computing Consortium
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Christopher Hill, University of Massachusetts Donahue Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 1,622,830.00

This work includes a consortium acquisition of a shared high-performance
computing (HPC) instrument emphasizing HPC-based science and engineering with
the benefit of "on-demand" capabilities. The instrument is a hybrid platform,
integrating a state-of-the-art cluster computer with forward-looking,
potentially exascale-oriented, GPU accelerator hardware that will enable
progress in key STEM applications across a consortium of higher-educational
partners with a research agenda that spans science disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system?s high levels of responsiveness will be applied
to systems modeling and identification for immunology, interactive drug pathway
analysis, bio-molecular electrostatics, virtual earth modeling and data
analysis, multi-scale environment modeling, adaptive real-time model data
synthesis, interactive virtualized materials design, and studying fundamental
physics of matter. In computer science, researchers and industry collaborators
will use the instrument as a controlled, configurable facility with an advanced
user base and application workload, driving forward research into abstractions
for next-generation HPC environments, enhanced virtualization methodologies for
large-scale HPC, and quantitatively experimenting in cloud/service paradigms at
scale for HPC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition will catalyze collaboration
among scientists, engineers, computational science practitioners and computer
scientists with research interests in&lt;br/&gt;- broadening the use of HPC for
critical science and engineering problems&lt;br/&gt;- driving knowledge in earth
science, life science, material science and basic physics&lt;br/&gt;- developing
new, more engaging approaches to HPC&lt;br/&gt;- paving the way for a post-
petascale HPC ecosystem spanning software to workforce skills&lt;br/&gt;- ere
are extensive education and outreach activities planned to grow participation
across institutional research communities as well as among local collaborators
at community colleges, in K-12 education, and in community organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will contribute to cyberinfrastructure in
multiple ways and will be a valuable part of a broader public-private
partnership enhancing computational science infrastructure and catalyzing high-
tech innovation.