* 1229701
* MRI: Development of an Open-Source Dual-Probe Atomic Force Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Ming Leu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 316,044.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the development of an
open-source, dual-probe atomic force microscope (AFM). The AFM is one of the
most versatile tools for nanoscience and nanotechnology with the ability to
perform a wide variety of manipulation and measurement tasks. Current state-of-
the-art AFMs use one probe, requiring the user to switch between manipulation
and measurement modes. The dual-probe AFM will exploit the unique geometry of
newly developed probes to place two probe tips head-to-head. Each probe and the
substrate will be independently actuated creating unprecedented functionality
through simultaneous, localized manipulation and measurement. In manipulation
tasks (push, pull, cut, pick, position, orient, assemble, twist, etc), one probe
will manipulate while the other probe is imaging. A feedback loop will create
high-speed, automated manipulation. In lithography tasks (scratch, dynamic plow,
oxidation, dip-pen, etc), a similar arrangement will create precision
lithography through real-time process regulation and control. In material
characterization tasks, the sample will be mechanically, electrically,
magnetically, or thermally excited by one probe and measured by the other
creating spatially and temporally resolved material measurements under localized
excitation. The open-source architecture of the developed instrument will also
serve as a unique experimental platform for advanced control systems
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument to be developed has the potential
for broad impact in a wide range of research and research training activities.
The Missouri S&amp;T Materials Research Center (MRC) will make the instrument
available to external users. In addition to materials-related experimentation,
the instrument will also be available for control-systems research. Modular code
will be provided on the MRC webpage which can be modified and submitted for
remote testing. Missouri S&amp;T and the MRC are committed to long-term
maintenance and upkeep of this instrument. The instrument will also be used in a
variety of educational activities including undergraduate and graduate courses.