* 1229297
* MRI: Development of Infrastructure for Research in Multi-View Video, Graphics, Visualization and Immersive Virtual Environment Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Chaoli Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29297&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Nooshabadi, Saeid&lt;br/&gt; Kuhl, Scott;
Wang, Chaoli&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Michigan Technological
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev: Infrastructure for Research in Multi-view
Video, Graphics, Visualization and Immersive Virtual Environment
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing an instrument consisting of a large-scale tiled display,
multiple video capture cameras, and a high-performance GPU cluster for large-
scale data analysis and visualization, and multi-view coding and rendering, aims
to enable a significant amount of research where graphics, vision, and multi-
view video converge (including image-based modeling and rendering (IBMR) and
MPEG-4/7). The instrument additionally includes augmentation of traditional
interfaces that support research in 3D merger of graphics and video-coding,
augmented reality and human perception research. It will also be used a to
further advance the development of novel algorithms and techniques for large-
scale data analysis and visualization, immersive virtual environments and image
coding, as well as their on-going collaborations with scientists and researchers
at national laboratories and industry. As evidenced by the availability of very
large flat-panel displays and basic tracking systems such as Xbox Kinect, these
types of coders, displays, and tracking systems should become more mature and
affordable in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument can greatly impact the areas of
telemedicine, manufacturing, and robotics. It can also be used for classes on
computer graphics, virtual environments, data visualization, multi-media, and
computer gaming. The PIs propose to organize summer programs to attract high-
school students into &lt;br/&gt;science and STEM related areas.