* 1229498
* MRI: Acquisition of an EPR spectrometer for studies in biochemistry, chemistry, and physics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Norton, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 338,845.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Derrick Kolling from Marshall University and colleagues Michael Norton, Michael
Castellani, Xiaoping Sun and Nalini Santanam will acquire an electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer with liquid nitrogen and liquid helium
cooling systems and the capability of analyzing samples in the gas, liquid, or
solid phases from 3.8 K up to room temperature. The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) synthesis and characterization of ionic charge-transfer magnets; (b)
transient catalytic states trapped via an ultrafast freeze-quench apparatus; (c)
using light-induced ESP (LESR) to characterize molecular wires and
multimolecular assemblies in a DNA origami testbed; (d) chemical and
photochemical reduction of uranyl UO2(2+); (e) study in diluted magnetic
semiconductor; and (f) oxidized lipids in cardiovascular disease.

An EPR spectrometer yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic
structure of molecular and solid state materials. It may also be used to obtain
information about the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive
species involved in valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation
of pathological tumor growth. These studies will impact a number of areas, from
the synthesis of inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid
state materials to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing
examples inspired from ongoing research, this instrument will be an integral
part of research and teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at
Marshall University as well as at the University of Charleston.