* 1229406
* MRI: Hardware for Computational Chemistry of Reaction Mechanisms Related to Energy and the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Bert Holmes, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 114,772.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
George Heard from University of North Carolina Asheville and colleagues Bert
Holmes and Sally Wasileski will acquire a 480-core computer cluster with a set
of terminals. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research training and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) substituent effects for the
1,2-FCl interchange reaction; (b) computational investigation of the
1,2-interchange reaction of halogens and pseudo-halogens; (c) computational
investigation of the Wagner-Meerwein rearrangement mechanism; (d) computational
investigation of catalytic reaction mechanisms for hydrogen generation from
alcohols; (e) 1,1-HX elimination reactions of halogenated ethanes; and (f)
studies of the rearrangement and elimination processes using the Quantum Theory
of Atoms In Molecules (QTAIM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer systems and
clusters of computers are used by chemists and biochemists to investigate
reactions and the properties of chemicals and materials using theoretical models
and programs. The computer calculations are used, often along with experimental
data, to model and better understand many types of complex chemical and
biological phenomena. They are also used to predict results and guide
experiments. This resource will be used in research and in course work by
undergraduate students and faculty at the University of North Carolina
Asheville.