* 1229189
* Graduate Student Travel Support Program for the 2012 V.M. Goldschmidt Conference in Montreal, Canada, June 24-29, 2012
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Carla Koretsky, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2013
* USD 30,000.00

The 2012 V. M. Goldschmidt Conference in Montreal, Canada will provide an
excellent opportunity for young geochemists to share their research with the
scientific community, learn about cutting edge research taking place around the
world, and interact with senior scientists specializing in their specific realm
of interest. Thematic issues to be addressed at the conference span a broad
range of sub-disciplines in low- and high- temperature geochemistry, including
evolution of the early Earth, the solar system, climate, ocean chemistry, and
continental crust; formation, evolution and dynamics of deep earth materials;
subduction, the mantle wedge and arc volcanism; earth surface processes;
interfacial geochemistry; earth resources; atmospheric aerosols; global
geochemical cycles; environmental impacts of human activities; computational
geochemistry; analytical techniques; geomicrobiology; evolution of life and
astrobiology; geochemical kinetics; medical geochemistry; geoengineering and
remediation; and hydrogeochemistry and the water cycle. In addition to oral and
poster presentation sessions, students will have an opportunity to participate
in field trips as well as short courses. This proposal puts forth a method for
fairly selecting and distributing travel support funds to the most qualified
student applicants, to ensure that 30 or more have an opportunity to benefit
from all the resources to be assembled at the conference. In addition to the
funding requested from NSF, the Geochemical Society will contribute $10,000,
bringing the total number of student opportunities to
40.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International scientific meetings are the primary
networking outlet for researchers of all experience levels. For students, these
meetings are often the first opportunity to interact with members of the
international scientific community. As the premier international geochemical
conference, the Goldschmidt Conference plays a critical role in introducing
young researchers to the world of geochemistry beyond their home institutions.
The lingering effects of such an international learning and networking
experience can be life changing for a student struggling to gain a foothold in
the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed student travel
support program will enable the best and brightest students from the US and US
Territories, students who might otherwise be unable to attend due to financial
constraints at their home institutions, to benefit from all the advantages this
meeting has to offer at this turning point in their respective careers. Every
effort will be made to encourage women, underrepresented minorities, and people
with disabilities to apply for funding, and to ensure, as much as possible, that
the full range of demographic diversity sampled by today's geosciences graduate
student community is represented among the awardees. Encouraging participation
by underrepresented groups in international events such as the Goldschmidt
Conference will increase the diversity of the core group of senior geoscientists
in the years to come.