* 1229519
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Instrument for Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Stephan Zeeman, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 137,527.00

This NSF-MRI grant has been awarded to an interdisciplinary team of researchers
in the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of New England (Biddeford,
Maine) to purchase a state-of-the-art gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer (GC-
MS). A GC-MS is an instrument that allows for the separation and analysis of
volatile and semi-volatile chemical components in mixtures and is an important
analytical tool that is widely used in a variety of disciplines. The gas
chromatograph volatilizes the sample by applying high temperatures and separates
individual compounds in a column depending on their molecular weight or
polarities by increasing the temperature of the column. The mass spectrometer
component ionizes the separated compounds and detects their masses using the
mass spectrometer, which facilities identification of the individual components.
The GC-MS funded by this award will have a quartz quadrupole analyzer, a triple
axis detector and both electron impact and chemical ionization modes to
strengthen the analytical instrumentation for multidisciplinary research and
teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GC-MS will be used by faculty and students
in the basic science departments (Biology, Marine Sciences, Chemistry and
Physics, and Psychology) at UNE for a wide range of research projects,
including: analysis of plant volatiles and hormones; secondary metabolites in
algae; product distributions in chemical reactions; characterization of
materials for photovoltaic and other ?green? nanotechnology applications;
hormone levels excreted by fish and their correlation to behavior; and organic
matter in river sediments. Faculty involved with these projects extensively
include undergraduate students in their research activities, thus students will
gain valuable hands-on experience with state-of-the-art analytical technology
while participating in cutting-edge research in the fields of chemical ecology,
chemistry, animal behavior and chemical oceanography. As the student body at UNE
is comprised predominately of females, many of whom are first generation college
students, individuals in this underrepresented group will gain exposure to
techniques and instrumentation that will enable them to be more marketable and
better prepared for future careers in science, industry and when applying to
graduate programs. The GC-MS will also be used for classroom teaching activities
in chemistry and biology, including discovery-based learning, and as part of
outreach programs such as University of New England's NSF-funded GK-12 SPARTACUS
program