* 1229393
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Flow Injection Analysis ? Ion Chromatograph System for Research and Training in Biology, Geology, and Agriculture at Illinois State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Catherine O'Reilly, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 141,788.00

MRI funds will be used to acquire a Lachat Instruments QuikChemÂ® 8500 Series II
flow injection analysis system with coupled ion chromatograph system (FIA-IC) to
provide a high throughput automated analysis of nutrient and ions for samples
from surface and ground waters, soil extracts, digested solid sample, and other
samples that might be required by researchers. The modular construction of the
system allows parallel analysis or independent analysis of samples using the FIA
and IC components of this integrated system using EPA approved methods. The fast
processing time will ensure that all users will have access to the instrument
for their research, and the purchase of this single, shared equipment is more
efficient than having each lab develop and conduct their own manual
spectrophotometric analyses. The acquisition of this instrument will allow rapid
throughput of samples from existing studies but will facilitate the expansion of
research projects in the Biological, Geological, and Agricultural Sciences at
Illinois State University. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of Illinois
State University is to provide an accessible small-school learning experience
with the opportunities of a big university, and our education, research, and
outreach activities will be substantially enhanced with the acquisition of the
FIA-IC. The FIA-IC will raise the level of current analyses in classes including
Human Physiology, Stream Ecology, Limnology, Soil Fertility and Fertilizers, and
Environmental Geology Field Methods. The FIA-IC will be incorporated into
existing K-12 outreach programs that involve student groups from Chicago urban
districts and local rural districts to further expose high school students to
scientific research through either age-appropriate learning modules or
independent research during the summer. Researchers from Northern Illinois
University, University of Illinois - Springfield and University of Illinois
Champaign Urbana, will also use the instrument. Acquisition of the FIA-IC will
constitute a central piece of equipment needed in the development of an
interdisciplinary-based environmental analytical center bridging the disciplines
of Biological, Geological, Agricultural and Chemical Sciences. The instrument
will be operated and administratively managed as a cost-center at Illinois State
University and will promote research particularly on water quality within an
agricultural and urban setting.