* 1229247
* Acquisition of a High Speed Video Camera System with Microscopic Capabilities for Undergraduate Research and Teaching at the University of St. Thomas
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* John Wentz, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 116,225.00

This proposal requests funds for the purchase of a high-speed imaging system to
be housed in the School of Engineering at the University of St. Thomas (UST) in
Saint Paul, Minnesota. The system will consist of a Photron Fastcam capable of
recording at 675,000 frames per second, associated micro-objective lenses for
viewing phenomena on the microscale, laser and high-intensity LED lighting
sources, precision manual positioning stages, and computing resources to drive
the system and conduct image processing. The School of Engineering will be
financially responsible for its maintenance and operation.

High-speed imaging of complex fluid flow is leading to a deeper understanding of
the fundamentals in a diverse array of fields such as micro-particle formation
and atomization cooling. Dr.?s Wentz and Shepard have been involved with the
design and development of similar instrumentation and advanced analysis
techniques in their previous work at the University of Illinois and the
University of Minnesota. Dr. Shepard?s fundamental research on air injection
into a liquid cross-flow has shown that wall shear stress is more strongly
correlated to bubble diameter than bulk liquid velocity when generating micro-
bubbles which find application in drag reduction, heat transfer enhancement and
sprays.