* 1229090
* MRI: Acquisition of a 50 nm Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Instrument
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,290,362.00

This MRI grant is for the acquisition of a nano-scale resolution X-ray computed
tomography (nano-CT) instrument that provides 3D volumetric imaging within
opaque structures at 50 nm resolution. Nano-CT offers a unique set of
capabilities compared to other imaging techniques and other available X-ray CT
instruments. The particular nano-CT provides visualization inside materials and
devices with 50 nm or 150 nm resolution with large 3D fields of view of 15 µm
and 60 µm, respectively. This is the highest X-ray CT resolution available
outside of large-scale synchrotron facilities. The high resolution is obtained
even with soft materials, such as polymers, through a combination of a Fresnel
zone plate objective and Zernike phase contrast imaging. Compared to techniques
using sectioning, nano-CT is non-destructive and sample remains intact.
Furthermore, the imaging is done in ambient or controlled environments without
vacuum. These features combined with the nano-CT?s long working distance enable
in-situ, in-operando, and time-history (4D) imaging. The nano-CT will be used in
a wide array of projects across the colleges of science and engineering at
Carnegie Mellon, with the enabled research falling into the major themes of: a)
Energy and the environment, b) Micro/Nano materials and fabrication, and c)
Biomedical and life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nano-CT will be a unique
resource at Carnegie Mellon and at the regional and national levels, attracting
external users from academia, industry, and national labs. The nano-CT will be
installed alongside an existing custom micro-CT that offers a maximum resolution
of 0.5-1 µm and large fields of view. These combined instruments will form a
versatile multi-scale CT imaging facility, with imaging length scales ranging
five orders of magnitudes, O(10 nm) to O(1 mm). This comprehensive facility will
be advertised through a dedicated website and an annual user group meeting will
be held to promote information exchanges and collaborations between the diverse
set of users. In addition, workshops will be held to introduce industry to X-ray
CT and nano-CT. The nano-CT will result in the training of a large number of
student researchers from diverse areas, inspiring interdisciplinary
collaborations. The nano-CT and its data will be integrated into existing
outreach efforts and classes. To support this effort, a fixed number of zero
user cost scans will be made available annually for education and outreach
activities.