* 1229838
* G8 Initiative: High Performance permanent Magnets Sustainable for Next Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* George Hadjipanayis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 258,000.00

This NSF award to the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa and the University of
Delaware funds U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively
selected by the G8 Research Councils Initiative "Interdisciplinary Program on
Material Efficiency - a first step towards sustainable manufacturing". This is a
pilot collaboration among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian
National Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence
Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian
Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils
(RCUK), supporting collaborative research projects selected on a competitive
basis that are comprised of researchers from at least three of the partner
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project with the United
States, Germany and Japan focuses the issues of scarce availability and high-
cost materials in Permanent Magnets (PM) and to offer alternative solutions for
these issues. The current high performance PM heavily depend on Rare-Earth
elements (RE). The consortium aims to develop RE-free PM. Emphasis focuses on
thin films and nano-particles of PM with (BH) max of about 25 MGOe as the first
step. Such Permanent Magnets have the potential to make possible new
applications such as magnetic MEMS and biomedical sensors. At the second stage,
emphasis will be placed on the development from thin films and nanoparticles to
powders and bulk Permanent Magnets. Also, the development of fabrication
processes for production and recycling of the materials will be integrated with
the aid of a non-funded industry expert. The goal is to build the knowledge to
achieve (BH) max, comparable to that for NdFeB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
consortium consists of six organizations from three countries. All the partner
members have had rich experience on Permanent Magnets including the proposed Mn
alloy systems. The consortium will work on RE free PM from fundamental materials
issues, processing and manufacturing, and cost-effectiveness points of view.
Also, emphasis will be placed on training students and post-doctoral fellows.