* 1229383
* MRI: Acquisition of a Rheometer to Expand InterdisciplinaryMaterials Science Research with Undergraduate Researchers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kevin Caran, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 186,625.00

This award for a rheometer is expected to strengthen ongoing research at James
Madison University focusing on the characterization and applications of soft
materials through detailed rheological measurements. The rheometer can be
configured to provide temperature control, visualization, and extensional,
interfacial, concentric cylinder, and large particle rheometry. The instrument
will directly lead to the training of undergraduate research assistants and will
serve as an interdisciplinary tool in a variety of research projects focusing on
the interplay of physical, chemical, and rheological properties of soft
materials. The rheometer will serve as a shared resource at JMU's Center for
Materials Science, which is composed of twenty faculty affiliates from six
disciplines actively engaged in materials research. The four co-PIs will
specifically conduct rheological examinations on novel self-assembled colloidal
materials, flow dynamics of emulsions and foams, characterization of polymer
nanocomposites, and jamming behavior of particulate suspensions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meaningful undergraduate research opportunities and active
faculty mentoring are hallmarks of the educational philosophy at James Madison
University. Fundamental and applied research will be conducted with
undergraduates as primary participants. While largely a research tool, the
rheometer will also be used as the basis of a laboratory experiment for an
upper-level course on materials characterization.