* 1229450
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Data Analytics Cluster for Computational Social Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* David Hachen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 451,839.00

This award permits Dr. Jaaroslaw Nabrzyski and his collaborators at Notre Dame
University to enable transformative research in the social sciences through the
acquisition of a Data Analytics Cluster for Computational Social Sciences
(DACCSS). The major capabilities provided by DACCSS will accelerate existing
research throttled by insufficient computational capability, enable analysis and
discovery at scales previously inaccessible, incubate new research projects and
enhance multidisciplinary collaboration between social scientists and their
peers. This investigation of broadly defined social phenomena through the medium
of computing and advanced information processing technologies can be generally
referred to as computational social science (CSS). At the University of Notre
Dame, multiple departments have a growing number of faculty leveraging CSS
techniques and capabilities. The DACCSS acquisition provides them with over
2,600 CPU cores, 5,300GB of RAM, and 60TB of high performance storage in
clustered data analytics servers connected with a state of the art network
fabric; running the world's most advanced analytics software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The size, number, and availability of social science
datasets (such as census data, detailed surveys, historic records, and logs from
electronic devices/sensors) is growing rapidly. Subsequent data analysis
facilitated by high performance computational tools, now shapes the way that
scholars discover and communicate their findings with students, colleagues, and
the public. The DACCSS system will enable this CSS research supporting social,
behavioral, and economics (SBE) research activities such as the following:
Sociology: Analysis of social network patterns and dynamics with complex mobile
phone topologies. Psychology: Genome-wide analyses of multivariate phenotypes to
investigate the genetic underpinnings of mental and personality disorders.
Economics: Optimization of complex and dynamic multi-agent utility maximizing
models to understand the evolution and impact of household savings rates with
important correlations as driving factors for economic growth. DACCSS is
essential for transformative discovery in these and numerous additional SBE
research endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of CSS requires
innovation in training for new social science scholars; the DACCSS operation and
training management plan will have direct integration with a CSS training plan
for faculty, post doctoral researchers and students of sufficient rigor to share
with peer universities. DACCSS will also be accessible to the classroom with
integration into numerous courses taught by the investigators. DACCSS-supported
research will be integrated into multiple existing outreach programs to
underrepresented minority and high school students such as the Notre Dame Summer
Scholars Research Computing Track and the NSF REU Site program in Computational
Science.