* 1229603
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Three-Dimensional Multi-Wavelength Raman Spectrometer for the Nanotechnology Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Pamela Norris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 482,497.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports acquisition of a Raman
spectroscopy system that is integrated with an atomic force microscope, capable
of three-dimensional structural and Raman mapping, capable of cryogenic to high
temperature operation (77 ? 1,800 K), outfitted with five different wavelengths
for Raman probing, and aligned with an additional integrated path for a pump
laser. The Raman spectroscopy system will significantly impact and enable a wide
range of research projects, including nanomaterial synthesis and assembly,
carbon detection and identification, and chemical and biological sensing. It
will also play an important role in the validation of computational nanoscience
initiatives. The instrument will also advance the understanding of Raman
processes at ultra-high temperatures and extreme chemical environments, along
with furthering the field of integrated Raman-atomic force microscopy processes
and tip-enhanced Raman scattering

Raman spectroscopy is a a powerful technique for characterizing frequencies,
energies, and fingerprints of matter. This instrument will be housed in Wilsdorf
Hall, a recently completed facility dedicated to cutting-edge, multidisciplinary
research and actively managed, operated, and supported under the existing
infrastructure of the Nanoscale Materials Characterization Facility (NMCF) at
the University of Virginia. Existing research thrusts that will utilize the
instrument are interdisciplinary, connecting various departments in the
Engineering School and the College of Arts and Sciences, and range from basic
science and materials discovery to contaminant detection in water supplies. The
instrument will be integrated into a combination of classroom and laboratory
discussions and activities in multiple classes at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels, spanning six disciplines, thus impacting a diverse audience.
The use of this instrument will also be encouraged in existing REU and RET
programs, which target underrepresented groups and expose them to cutting edge
research.