* 1229573
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared Parallel High Performance Storage System to Enable Computational Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Eric Wood, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2015
* USD 525,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29573&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Hillegas, Curtis W. &lt;br/&gt; Carter,
Emily A.; Pretorius, Frans; Spitkovsky, Anatoly; Wood, Eric
F.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Shared
Parallel High Performance Storage System to Enable Computational Science and
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a High
Performance Computing (HPC) storage system, aims to provide storage and I/O
bandwidth required to enable advancement of research to new, previously
unattainable areas. Specifically, in astrophysics the storage will allow an
increase in dimensionality to perform full 3D modeling of shock formation; in
civil and environmental engineering, it will enable the analysis of higher
resolution water condition data in both time and space; in mechanical and
aerospace engineering, the instrument will facilitate rigorous physical modeling
of rate constants for biofuel combustion and fundamental understanding of
molecular adsorptions; and in physics it will enable the modeling of
gravitational waves and compact object mergers considering a broader range of
physics. More generally, the system will enable projects across many disciplines
in computational science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Since data storage and
access have become a bottleneck hampering researchers in the TIGRESS systems,
the proposed system should contribute to remove the bottleneck. Understanding
that data growth will continue, a modular storage system design has been chosen
that will allow the system to grow in capacity and performance as the data
deluge continuous to mount. Planned is the purchase of a 1.5 PB storage system
based on hardware from NetApp, integrated with servers from SGI by Comnetco. The
system will run IBMs General Parallel File System (GPFS) and provide 12 GB/s
parallel performance across the institution?s TIGRESS HPC
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrument will facilitate
collaboration by making it easy for researchers to share data within the
institution; furthermore, it will foster collaboration nationally and
internationally through the included web server facility by allowing researchers
to broadly share their data. As a research tool available to postdocs, graduate
students, and advanced undergraduate students, including many researchers
underrepresented minority groups, the instrument will serve as a training
platform, teaching data layout, management and performance optimization.