* 1229429
* Urbanization and Global Environmental Change International Project Office
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Charles Redman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 750,000.00

This award provides support for the International Project Office (IPO) of the
Urbanization and Global Environmental Change (UGEC) project, an international
collaborative research project sponsored by the International Human Dimensions
Programme on Global Environmental Change (IHDP). UGEC has functioned since 2005,
coordinating and facilitating new knowledge generation and dissemination about
global environmental change in urban areas, placing special emphasis on
collaborative activities that bridge the social and natural sciences as well as
national boundaries. Through its catalytic impact on development of new research
projects and its networking activities, UGEG has become an international leader
in research on urbanization and global environmental change. The IPO has built
an international interdisciplinary research coordination network of scholars and
practitioners whose work deals with various facets of the interface of cities
and the environment, promoting collaboration among academics and practitioners
as urban areas prepare to respond to global environmental change. During this
third phase of UGEC activity, the IPO will promote the next generation of UGEC
research, with an emphasis on synthesizing findings and connecting science to
policy. The IPO will promote, coordinate, and disseminate science and policy
findings in the UGEC field by actively providing a platform for the docking and
synthesis of global case-studies. It also will continue to facilitate
connections between research and practice by organizing international workshops
and conferences utilizing cutting-edge communication tools, and it will assist
in increasing the connections between U.S.-based networks of UGEC scholars and
practitioners with their international counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
UGEC IPO will make significant contributions to UGEC science and policy by
facilitating integrative and synthetic understanding springing from new
interdisciplinary knowledge. It will encourage innovative conceptual and
methodological approaches that link the social sciences with the natural
sciences, and it will establish a new platform for the realization of continuous
synthesis activities. The IPO will operate at the boundary of science and
practice, communicating its integrative efforts to decision makers,
practitioners, and other end-users at different scales. Through its support for
international collaborative research and its encouragement for the involvement
of early-career scientists in such efforts, the UGEC IPO helps address the
social, economic, and environmental consequences of urbanization in diverse
settings around the globe.