* 1229740
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Training at Northern Arizona University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Diane Stearns, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2016
* USD 612,560.00

Funds from this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will support
the purchase of a new field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) for
the Imaging and Histology Core Facility (IHCF) at Northern Arizona University
(NAU). This instrument will include a thermal field emission (FE) electron
source, secondary electron imaging (SEI), backscatter electron imaging (BSE),
electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), wavelength disperse detector (WDS),
scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), variable vacuum (VP), an
interactive software system for live export of information to other locations
(including across campus and to collaborators at other institutions), image
archiving with database management, and collaborative software. This FE-SEM will
support research and training across a number of departments at NAU including
Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry, Forestry, Mechanical Engineering, Biological
Sciences, Environmental Sciences, and Physics &amp; Astronomy. Ongoing research
that will be supported by this instrument includes (1) properties of uranium
oxide particulates and their uptake and localization in living cells; (2)
changes occurring in pinyon pine (Pinus edulis) during severe drought; (3)
accumulation of uranium is tissues of mice exposed to environmentally
contaminated drinking water; (4) investigation of the role of giant titin
protein in active muscle of mice; (5) symbiotic interactions among plant roots,
fungi, and bacteria; (6) characterization of existing and novel biomaterials
used for vascular grafts with human elastin; and (7) characterization of
nanoparticle thin films used for energy storage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a new FE-SEM will strengthen NAU's ongoing
efforts in basic research, training of underrepresented students, business
development, and collaborative work with academic institutions in Arizona and
beyond. This instrument will improve the quality of research at NAU in the four
areas of research targeted by our current Strategic Plan for Enhancing Research
and Scholarship at NAU, namely life sciences/biosciences, renewable energy,
landscape conservation/geospatial technologies, and climate-ecosystem
interactions. It will significantly enhance the hands-on training of our
undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields, including women, Native
American and Hispanic students. It will strengthen the many community outreach
programs currently conducted or facilitated by the IHCF, and will foster
connections between NAU and regional businesses.