* 1229067
* Sleep Restriction and Circadian Mismatch Effects on Differential Decision Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Todd McElroy, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* catherine arrington
* 08/31/2016
* USD 405,628.00

In our fast-paced world, people often find themselves making important decisions
while sleepy. Current surveys indicate that tens of millions of Americans are
considered sleep deprived and/or have occupations requiring some shift work.
Fatigue can result from insufficient sleep or other factors. For example, some
people are naturally more alert in the morning as opposed to the evening. The
goal of this research is to examine how sleepiness or fatigue affects decision
making. The decision-making process involves (at least) two systems: 1) an
unconscious system that responds more automatically and without conscious
thought, and 2) a deliberative system that makes "high-level" rational
decisions. The investigators hypothesize that when individuals are sleepy, and
therefore cognitive resources are compromised, the decisions a person makes will
be more the result of automatic processes than deliberative ones, thereby saving
mental effort. The investigators will conduct a controlled experimental study
that manipulates individuals' sleep quantity as well as the time during the day
that decisions are made. The project will test the hypothesis that decision
rules that a person uses while sleepy are more automatic and less a product of
high-level deliberation. This will also allow the investigators to evaluate
whether decisions based on automatic processes are inherently worse than
decisions based on more complex deliberative processes. In contrast, relying on
automatic processes might lead to better decisions if more thoughtful
deliberation makes people overthink the decision task.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to significantly improve our
understanding of how fatigue affects decision making in areas such as simple
social interactions, the incorporation of new information into decisions, or the
importance of how a choice is framed. This is especially critical in our modern
society where decisions are often made while one is tired. In occupations like
truck driving, air traffic control, medical professionals, and emergency
services, poor decision making can cost lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[Co-funded
by Perception, Action and CognitionProgram and Decision, Risk and Management
Sciences Program]