* 1229463
* MRI:   Acquisition of an ABI genetic analyzer for Research and Research Training at a Predominately Undergraduate Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Edelbrock, The University of Findlay
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 64,467.00

The Applied Biosystems 310 Genetic Analyzer will provide researchers with
instrumentation to promote and foster the advancement of individual and
collaborative research opportunities in the dynamic and growing areas of
genomics, molecular evolutionary biology and systematic, cell and molecular
biology, microbiology, and forensic science at The University of Findlay. The
genetic analyzer will provide opportunities to enhance the current research of
faculty and undergraduate researchers, and provide exciting opportunities to
develop and implement new research ideas and techniques possible only through
advanced sequencing and fragment generation and analysis. Specific projects that
will require extensive use of the genetic analyzer include investigations into:
1) evolutionary biology using sequence and fragment data, including
phylogeography and population genetics, of amphibians and reptiles; 2) mutation
frequencies and structural rearrangements of chromosomes; 3) the discovery and
prevalence of Ranavirus in a natural preserve and a restored wetland in northern
Ohio; 4) antibiotic resistance using bioflims in commercial and organic farms;
and 5) in silico and in vitro Analysis of Protein Intrinsic Disorder. As a
predominantly undergraduate institution, instrumentation, such as the requested
Genetic Analyzer, is crucial in assisting us to integrate research into our
curriculum where we train the next generation of scientists and foster faculty?s
research interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed
activities for the faculty and undergraduate researchers at The University of
Findlay, the scientific community, and society are on par with the goals of the
NSF-MRI program and include: 1) providing access to shared scientific
instrumentation for research and training of faculty and to the broader
scientific community through training sessions; 2) developing interdisciplinary
and collaborative research opportunities among researchers; 3) enhancing
opportunities for basic research techniques (e.g., experimental design,
molecular methodologies and techniques), as well as teaching, training, and
learning related to modern sequencing techniques and fragment analysis; 4)
disseminating novel research findings, methods, and training opportunities to
the broader scientific research community through peer-reviewed publications in
scientific journals and attendance and presentations at scientific meetings; 5)
providing exceptional access and hands-on training using advanced
instrumentation to undergraduate students, who encounter such equipment rarely
or only upon study at the graduate level; 6) developing critical thinking and
problem-solving skills, which augments the learning experiences for
undergraduate students; and 7) offering outreach opportunities for area primary,
middle, and secondary schools, as well as area college students, to learn basic
sequencing techniques from research scientists in their field of interest.