* 1229185
* MRI: Acquisition of an Infrastructure for Prototyping Next-Generation Algorithms for Large-Scale Visualization, Data Processing and Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Huy Vo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 799,999.00

Proposal #: 12-29185&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Silva, Claudio; Freire, Juliana; Iacono,
John; Suel, Torsten; Vo, Huy&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Polytechnic University of
New York&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Prototyping Next-Generation Algorithms for
Large-scale Visualization, Data Processing and Analysis&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring an instrument for
prototyping the next-generation algorithms for large-scale visualization, data
processing and analysis, facilitates the development and evaluation of next-
generation algorithms and systems that leverage different hardware
configurations. It consists of computational resources in the form of an SGI UV
1000 machine with 384 cores and four Tesla M2070 GPUs, and a small cluster
composed of 32 nodes (384 cores total), each with two Tesla M2070 GPUs; and disk
resources in the form of solid-state storage cards and an Isilon Storage
Cluster. The instrumentation supports projects in various domains. The computer
science projects include &lt;br/&gt;- Dataflow architectures, &lt;br/&gt;-
Theoretical models of computation, &lt;br/&gt;- Web search, &lt;br/&gt;-
Visualization, and &lt;br/&gt;- Data mining; &lt;br/&gt;While the application
area research projects (undertaken with external collaborators) relate
to&lt;br/&gt;- Wildfire simulation, &lt;br/&gt;- Bird migration simulation, and
&lt;br/&gt;- Climate science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The team plans to release the software developed as part of this
project as open source, which carries potential for significant broader impact.
The involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in the project provides
mentoring opportunities.