* 1229957
* Collaborative Research:   Metadata Portal for the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* George Alter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This is a pilot project to provide enhanced access to two seminal social science
data resources - the American National Election Studies (ANES) and General
Social Survey (GSS) - by creating structured, machine-actionable metadata and a
portal populated with new tools for data discovery and analysis. The project
will also analyze the current workflows that produce the ANES and GSS data and
make recommendations for transitioning to metadata-driven processes to
streamline data production and guard against the metadata loss that currently
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team including representatives from the ANES,
GSS, and ICPSR will develop rich metadata in Data Documentation Initiative (DDI)
XML, a well-defined standard for the social sciences. This work will entail
retrofitting all existing documentation, which currently exists in disparate
formats, to a uniform XML structure. A sample of the ANES and GSS documentation
will be enriched with detailed information on provenance, universe, and other
contextual information that accumulates across the data lifecycle. This sample
will also include information to facilitate comparison and harmonization. All
documentation created for the project will be freely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Metadata Portal for the Social Sciences will
demonstrate DDI-based open-source tools for advanced searching, dynamic
codebooks, question banks, harmonization, and other functions. The portal will
also feature links to bibliographic citations for both surveys and will provide
opportunities for researchers and others to comment and interact. An important
aspect of the project will be to re-envision the workflows currently used to
produce the ANES and the GSS and to lay the groundwork for new metadata-driven
workflows to realize a more seamless "interview to internet" process based on
DDI and the Generic Statistical Business Process Model
(GSBPM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will facilitate transparent and user-
friendly access to the ANES and the GSS to enable expert use of the data as well
as exploration by more novice users. Production transparency in terms of how
data came into being is essential, and this project will provide structured
metadata on provenance of variables as well as detailed universe statements to
permit users to understand the routing patterns for specific respondents and
missing data. Many researchers are interested in determining comparability of
data items and questions over time, and this project will demonstrate ways to
assess comparability for these key time series. In general the project will
provide more information about the ANES and the GSS data than researchers have
had access to in the past. Improving the ANES and GSS workflows will lead to the
automated capture of more metadata "upstream" that can be made available across
the life cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved access to data through better
search, extraction, and analysis tools will enable greater participation across
all segments of society interested in democratic process and social trends. The
demonstration portal and its tools will illustrate the potential of using
structured documentation as a foundation for tools development and will be
extensible to other surveys, leading to improved accessibility for other social
science data resources. The large base of metadata and the open source
applications developed for this project will encourage software developers to
create new ways to access ANES, GSS, and other data. New workflows will focus on
metadata re-use over the life cycle, leading to greater efficiencies and cost-
savings in creating DDI metadata for all social science data projects.