* 1229011
* G8 Initiative: Material Efficiency: A First Step Toward Sustainable Manufacturing of Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Steven Nutt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 447,035.00

This NSF award to the University of Southern California funds U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by the G8 Research Councils
Initiative "Interdisciplinary Program on Material Efficiency - A first step
towards sustainable manufacturing". This is a pilot collaboration among the U.S.
National Science Foundation, the Canadian National Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the
German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian Foundation for Basic Research
(RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils (RCUK), supporting collaborative
research projects selected on a competitive basis that are comprised of
researchers from at least three of the partner countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Composite parts for aerospace structures are presently
manufactured using autoclaves, large heated pressure vessels used to cure
laminates consisting of fiber layers partly impregnated with polymer films,
called prepregs. Autoclaves are highly effective in producing high-performance
laminates with high fiber loadings and low defect content, but they consume
large amounts of energy and nitrogen gas. A new class of vacuum bag only (VBO)
prepregs was recently introduced to eliminate the need for autoclaves during
manufacture. Work at the composite centers at the University of Southern
California (USC) and McGill University has begun to develop fundamental
understanding of processes inherent to VBO prepreg processing, suggesting the
broad utility of this new class of materials. While these developments have
great potential for expanding the use of composite materials and VBO prepregs in
particular, key technical challenges must be addressed to realize widespread
acceptance and use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project with
the United States, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom focuses on (1)
developing fundamental understanding of the effects of manufacturing process
parameters on defects in composites produced with VBO prepregs, (2) improving
material efficiency by reducing material waste in the automated manufacture of
composite parts, (3) accelerating insertion of VBO materials technology through
simulation and validation of VBO composite performance, and (4) improving
sustainability by advancing recycling technology and developing and
demonstrating energy-efficient smart tooling concepts. These objectives require
an approach that combines expertise in process simulation, automated
manufacturing, materials qualification and acceptance, and fundamental polymer
science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will leverage
the expertise of researchers at major academic composite centers in four G8
countries. Project personnel will be trained in state-of-the art tools for
design, manufacture and re-use of next-generation composites. Postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students will be involved in
the completion of this work. The project will involve participating students and
early-career researchers in a coordinated effort to address scientific issues of
global importance through international collaboration.