* 1229547
* MRI:  Development of a pulsed ESR/NMR DNP spectrometer for structural studies of membrane proteins in native lipid environments
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Alex Smirnov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2017
* USD 747,639.00

A pulsed DNP/NMR/ESR (DyNE) spectrometer for the structural studies of
macroscopically aligned membrane proteins under their native-like physiological
conditions will be developed. Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (ssNMR)
allows one to obtain atomic-resolution structures of membrane proteins and
membrane-bound receptors in their native lipid environment without the need of
crystallization. The current disadvantage of ssNMR is its relatively low
sensitivity due to small polarization of the nuclear spins at the available
magnetic fields. This main drawback will be addressed by employing and
optimizing the Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP) method that transfers the
larger polarization from the electronic spins to the nuclei, thereby achieving
several hundred-fold enhancements of the NMR signals. DNP is rapidly
revolutionizing the field of NMR of small molecules, polymers, and inorganic
surfaces, but its applications to biological macromolecules remain fairly
limited. This project is focused on developing the DNP instrumentation that will
be specifically suited for the structure-function studies of membrane proteins
under their physiologically relevant conditions (i.e., full hydration at 37 C).
To achieve these goals, the expertise of the PI (Nevzorov) in high-resolution
structural studies of membrane proteins by ssNMR will be combined with the
expertise of the Co-PI (Smirnov), who is a pioneer of using lipid nanotube
arrays for stabilizing membrane proteins and an expert in building millimeter-
wave instrumentation and probeheads for electron-spin resonance (ESR).
&lt;br/&gt;The development of the DyNE instrument will take place at the
interface of magnetic resonance, membrane protein biophysics, and
nanotechnology. Such an instrument would become an invaluable tool for a diverse
group of researchers ranging from biophysicists to structural biologists and
medicinal chemists studying the interactions of small-molecule therapeutics with
membrane protein receptors. In the course of this development project graduate
students will obtain an interdisciplinary training ranging from advanced NMR and
ESR methods to biophysical experiments with membrane proteins and preparation of
hybrid nanomaterials. The results from this instrumentation development will be
disseminated through interdisciplinary educational initiatives including the
existing undergraduate and graduate level courses at NCSU as well as by
collaborating with biologists, chemists, and physicists on the structural
studies of membrane proteins by utilizing this unique instrumentation.