* 1229051
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Global Population, Population Science, and Population Politics in the Twentieth Century
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Emily Merchant, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project documents the intertwined
histories of global population, population science, and population politics from
1920 to 2010, focusing on population projections, estimates of future size and
structure, to examine the mutual relationships between these three domains.
Using archival research and content analysis of key publications, it will ask
how population change stimulated the emergence of demography, how demography
informed population politics, how population politics directed the development
of demography, and how demography, through population policy, influenced
population growth. The project treats population projections as boundary
objects, a critical interface between population, population science, and
population politics that allowed scientists and policy makers to work together
without necessarily agreeing on the terms of analysis or goals of intervention,
and suggests that population projections have often aimed not just to estimate
future population dynamics, but to influence them via the programs they inspire
and justify.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is for the first book-length history of demography in the
twentieth-century when the world population increased more rapidly than ever
before; during this time, demography became a new science and a means of
intervention for governments, intergovernmental agencies, and philanthropic
organizations. The book will bridge the divide in the current literature between
interwar anxieties about population decline in Europe and postwar anxieties
about overpopulation in the rest of the world. Because it will begin before the
emergence of the so-called postwar "global population crisis," it will document
the scientific and political production of that crisis, rather than treating it
as the context in which population science and population politics
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project stem from its
goal of analyzing and describing the intellectual conditions under which
population estimates and projections are produced. Understanding of and
attention to these conditions by the policy makers, scientists, and activists
who use demographic data and population projections to produce economic,
ecological, and other types of models, and to inform interventions, could help
them create more accurate models and effective interventions, both in population
studies and in other arenas.