* 1229217
* "MRI: Development of a Free-Space Ultrafast Spectroscopy System for Chemistry, Materials Science, and Biophysics Research And Education In The 25-T Split-Coil Helix"
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Stephen McGill, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 906,650.00

This award to Florida State University is for the development of a unique
ultrafast magneto-optical spectroscopy system using the new Split-Florida Helix
25 T magnet at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). Access to
optical probes in high magnetic fields (i.e. &gt; 10 T) is critical to the
scientific missions of understanding quantum phenomena and strong electron-
electron correlations in condensed matter systems, chemical bonding, and
mechanisms of natural reactivity in biological systems. The development of this
instrument will enable unprecedented free-space ultrafast and continuous-wave
optical investigations in the otherwise inaccessible phase regimes of liquid
helium temperatures (4 K) and ultra-high DC magnetic fields (25 T). These
experiments will provide insight into fundamental processes that cannot be
accessed at zero or low magnetic fields and will have an important impact in
areas that include: a) probing the limits of quantum coherence in complex
materials through THz measurements of dephasing times, b) exploring quantum
mechanical correlations in chemical changes, c) Imaging excitons and spins in
organic systems, and d) understanding interactions and changes in oxidation
states in organic complexes, including bioproteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new ultrafast spectroscopy system will be available to the international
scientific community through the user program at the NHMFL. The instrumentation
will enable a transformative alternative to existing methods of materials
investigations where photons will probe individual quantum states and
interactions that are the origin of electronic and magnetic behavior in
materials. The combination of unprecedented free-space optical access and the
latest generation of ultrafast laser technology will enable seminal techniques
such as multi-dimensional femtosecond spectroscopy, studies in the terahertz
region of the electromagnetic spectrum, and magnetic circular dichroism imaging
in high magnetic fields. The scientific program addresses fundamental research
questions that have implications for our future quality of life and include
studying the formation and breaking of Cooper pairs in the superconducting
state, the formation of magnetic states in organic semiconductors, the
oxireductase - an electron transfer process present in all living organisms, and
correlations between excited states in complex biological molecules. This award
will enable never-before-possible scientific pursuits while providing unique
educational opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers, who will be the primary operators of the instrument.