* 1229522
* MRI: Development of a High Resolution Infrared Spectrograph with a Large Spectral Grasp
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Daniel Jaffe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2017
* USD 683,565.00

Many objects in our Galaxy and in the universe are difficult to observe because
their light is obscured by dust between earth and the objects. This is a
particular problem for observing in the visual part of the spectrum as the dust
is very effective at absorbing and effectively blocking visual light. In order
to study objects embedded in dust (often true of the environments where stars
and planets are initially formed) telescopes must look in the infrared part of
the spectrum as infrared light can more readily penetrate through dust. Dr. Dan
Jaffe and his collaborators at the University of Texas at Austin have developed
a new technology infrared spectrograph. Spectrographs disperse the light into a
band of colors (much like a rainbow) and the resulting "spectrum" can be
analyzed to reveal the presence of and identify various atoms and molecules and
also to measure the velocities that objects have relative to earth. Dr. Jaffe
has developed a new type of diffraction grating (the optical element that
disperses the light into its spectrum) that is much more compact and efficient
than standard gratings. Thus the new spectrograph is smaller and less expensive
than spectrographs of similar capabilities. The new spectrograph will be
installed on the McDonald Observatory 2.7-meter telescope for commissioning and
initial science verification. Discussions are underway with NSF-funded
observatories Gemini and NOAO about the possibility of putting the spectrograph
on their larger telescopes which are available to all astronomers though a
competivie merit-review process. NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences is
funding this work through the Major Research Instrumentation program.