* 1229513
* MRI:   Acquisition of an iMIC Digital Microscope for Research and Research Training at Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Feng Zhou, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 572,359.00

The TILL iMIC Andromeda is a sophisticated and multipurpose confocal microscope
specially adapted to the imaging of living samples. Through the NSF MRI award,
Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP) acquired the iMIC Andromeda to develop
a state-of-the art microscope facility benefiting the research and research
training of several departments within IUP?s College of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics (CNSM). More specifically, the acquisition of the iMIC strengthens a
current research emphasis on plasticity and cell-signaling. Researchers can
address basic biological and biochemical questions about the structural and
functional remodeling that occurs in several physiological events, including
normal development pathways, metabolic processes, the generation of biological
rhythms and vacuole formation in yeast. Additionally, IUP researchers are using
the iMIC in an innovative way to measure fluorescence and the absorptive spectra
of novel optical materials to further the goal of enhancing telecommunications
and sensor applications. Overall, the augmented imaging capabilities of this
facility allow for in-depth analyses of several biological, biochemical and
physics projects, as well as the initiation of additional research projects for
which highly developed fluorescent microscopy is
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iMIC expands CNSM research capabilities and
has the inimitable advantage of being used by a significant number of students
and university professors in a variety of scientific disciplines. In addition to
providing faculty members with opportunities to broaden their research
repertoire, the iMIC enhances intra- and interuniversity collaborative research
efforts between faculty and students. The iMIC also impacts the advancement of
science education at IUP, including undergraduate and graduate CNSM students.
Regional high school students interact with the iMIC through workshops and
outreach programs designed to enhance STEM training. This promises to be a
significant recruiting tool as approximately 75% of IUP students are from rural
Pennsylvania and have not been exposed to state-of-the-art microscopes like the
iMIC Andromeda. Importantly, graduate, undergraduate and secondary students are
able to design research projects involving advanced microscopy techniques under
the careful mentorship of IUP faculty?experiences that will better prepare them
for careers in biology. Thus, the iMIC is expanding the range of techniques that
can be offered to introduce CNSM students to the rapidly advancing field of
microscopic imaging that has changed the paradigm for basic and applied
sciences.