* 1229263
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Cryo Scanning Electron Microscope System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 638,770.00

This MRI grant supports the purchase of a new high resolution field emission
scanning electron microscope (cryoSEM) with a cryostage and advanced features,
including x-ray chemical analysis, and a versatile cryospecimen preparation and
transfer system. This new cryoSEM system will be used in a wide variety of
research projects to produce a more in depth and realistic understanding of the
micro- and nanostructure, chemical composition and structural development of
complex samples that are impossible to image in an ordinary, room temperature
SEM. The features of the cryoSEM and the specimen preparation and handling
system facilitate a variety of research projects that demand high resolution
imaging with the option of chemical analysis and with precise control over the
cryospecimen preparation and handling. Some example research projects include:
microstructure development in liquid applied coatings, structure of ordered
porous materials used as electrodes, nanostructure of complex, block copolymer-
based hydrogels that are used drug delivery materials and the structure of
hydrated collagen- and fibrin-based tissue equivalents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research enabled by the cryoSEM facility will have
broader impacts across a variety of fields, including coating processing,
colloidal science, porous materials, block copolymers, collagen-based tissue
equivalents, biofilms, geomagnetism, and emulsion science. The cryoSEM will
provide results that could not be achieved by other means and will impact not
only on the scientific understanding but also on the engineering of new
materials and devices. The results will be disseminated in publications and
presentations, including presentations to industry through the University of
Minnesota's Industrial Partnership for Research in Interfacial and Materials
Engineering. The new cryoSEM system will also impact the research training and
education of students at various levels, from graduate students down to middle
school students, through seminars, workshops and demonstrations.