* 1229417
* MRI:  Acquisition of a three-dimensional X-ray imaging system (microCT) supporting multiple users, research, and education through a central facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jayma Moore, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2016
* USD 482,807.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award to North Dakota State University funds
acquisition of an imaging system to examine relatively small items up to 12
inches and 25 pounds using digital radiography and computed X-ray
microtomography (microCT). In addition to producing high-resolution conventional
two-dimensional/flat radiographs, the system uses microCT to form multiple
cross-sectional digital images of an object along a single axis. These images
can be reassembled and manipulated graphically to create a three-dimensional
virtual model, permitting inspection of external and internal structures without
damage to the original object. There are many possibilities for subsequent
analysis of the virtual model, e.g. visualization of computer-generated
?slices?, arbitrary sectional views in any desired plane, pseudo-color
representations of different phases, and pore analysis. Accurate internal
measurements can be made that are obtainable in no other way without destroying
the sample. MicroCT provides a unique nondestructive way to visualize complex
structures from the macro to micro scales. Overall system resolution now is
better than 1 µm, permitting detailed understanding of characteristics of
structure, composition, phase morphology, and particle distribution. Also
included for specimen prep¬a¬ra¬tion is a lyophilizer or freeze-drying apparatus
to remove water by sublimation and desorption, thus preserving perishable
samples for imaging. Instrumentation will be housed in the NDSU Electron
Microscopy Center, making it universally available for analysis to researchers
in fields from Biology and Anthropology to Engineering and Chemistry as well as
for teaching/training across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through microCT,
investigators will have access to nondestructive analysis that is simply
impossible at NDSU now. This active, well-funded research team, which is
ethnically and gender-diverse, encourages participation by members of groups
that traditionally have not been not well-represented in the scientific
community (e.g., women, Native Americans). In addition to research use, microCT
will be an integral part of courses on nanotechnology, nanomaterials,
characterization, and materials-design physics; that training will broaden
career opportunities for NDSU graduates and help attract talented new faculty
members. The instrumentation is expected to see immediate use as a teaching tool
for inspection in Bison Microventure, an ongoing multidisciplinary course that
over the past three years has provided hands-on experience integrating biology,
chemistry, and engineering for undergraduate and graduate students representing
eight majors from five colleges. With its versatility and ready visualization,
microCT will be an attractive option for undergraduate Biotechnology students
and K-20 students participating in NDSU outreach programs like the North Dakota
Governor's School, NATURE program (Nurturing American Tribal Undergraduate
Research and Education), state Science Olympiad, and local education
collaborations. Other anticipated users include institutions throughout the
North Dakota University System and industry partners across the upper Midwestern
region, as no other microCT units are available within the state.