* 1229532
* MRI: Acqusition of a Three-Dimensional Scanning Laser Vibrometer System for Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* J. Vanderlei Martins, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 410,444.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
three-dimensional (3D) scanning laser vibrometer (SLV) system. This instrument
features precise, automatic, and rapid measurements of 3D surface vibrations of
complicated 3D structures. It acquires data in a noncontact manner with a broad
bandwidth, wide measurement range, and high resolution. The research that will
be pursued with this diverse instrument can be grouped into three thrust areas:
i) model validation, design, and testing; ii) vibration-based damage detection
and health monitoring; and iii) renewable energy and energy harvesting.
Acquisition of the equipment will enable researchers to work together to address
challenging problems in damage detection and health monitoring, or renewable
energy and energy harvesting, and their collaboration will foster opportunities
for breakthroughs in these multi-disciplinary fields. Various health monitoring
applications will be investigated. New damage detection methods that integrate
such diverse disciplines as vibrations, fracture mechanics, composite materials,
ultrasonics, laser vibrometry, system identification, and signal processing will
be developed. The development of a new all-mechanical speed converter will
enable generation of grid-compatible electricity from wind, water, and tidal
energy, and produce a large torque at a low speed for vehicles. New theories in
joint mechanics, machine dynamics, fracture mechanics, system identification,
and signal processing, as well as new designs in various applications, will be
developed and validated. Other examples of research cover a diverse range of
topics including turbine blades, flexible multibody dynamics, satellites,
compliant mechanisms, thin-walled structures, and microscale
resonators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the equipment will greatly
improve research infrastructure and promote collaborative research among
universities, government labs, and industry. Since a 3D SLV can visually
demonstrate the 3D vibrations of a structure under different excitations in an
engaging and intuitive fashion, it is ideally suited for educational purposes
for students at all levels, from high school students to Ph.D. students. The
equipment will be incorporated into various undergraduate and graduate courses
at UMBC and other universities; test samples and results will be shared.
Underrepresented students in such programs as a summer program for high school
students in the Baltimore region and the Meyerhoff Scholars Program will have
opportunities to use the equipment. The research results on a diverse range of
topics will benefit society and various industries by advancing technical
knowledge, and will especially impact the infrastructure health monitoring and
energy initiatives.