* 1229798
* MRI:   Acquisition of a inverted fluorescence microscope system to increase biological research at Linfield College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Anne Kruchten, Linfield College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 223,182.00

Linfield College requests funding to purchase a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 inverted
fluorescence microscope system. The system enables DIC, phase, and fluorescence
microscopy, and includes a motorized body for automated analysis in the x, y,
and z planes, an environmental chamber system, and a micro-injection system.
This microscope system will be used to enhance the research programs of faculty
within the Biology department as well as to enhance the training of
undergraduate researchers in the college. The research projects that will be
enabled with this instrument include 1.) Deciphering molecular mechanisms of
microRNA activity in vivo and determining the roles of specific microRNAs during
animal development, 2.) Determining the role of phosphoregulation of proteins in
regulating cellular motility in human and Dictyostelium models, and 3)
Investigating the role of sponges and sponge-associated bacterial communities on
nutrient fluxes in estuarine habitats. Undergraduate students participating in
research projects in faculty laboratories and through curriculum-based research
projects will use the microscope system to acquire high resolution images of
mammalian cells, analysis of GFP reporters and immunofluorescence in Drosophila
tissues and cell culture, and fluorescent in situ hybridization assays of
bacterial symbionts in sponge. Undergraduates trained on this instrument will
include a range of introductory through senior level students, and it is
anticipated that research training incorporating this instrument will further
enhance students' productivity and acceptance into graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past six years, the Biology Department at
Linfield College has undergone a significant period of growth, due to
retirements and addition of new faculty lines, resulting in the hiring of five
new faculty members. Among these new faculty hires are three faculty whose
research includes various applications of fluorescence microscopy. In order to
facilitate their research, to increase the productivity of all faculty, and to
improve the research experience of undergraduate students in this program,
Linfield College requests funds to purchase a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 Microscope
System that will enable faculty and students to generate publication quality
images using its fluorescence, DIC, and phase contrast capabilities. The goals
in acquiring this instrument are to 1) enable faculty members to collect high
quality data, publish their results, and increase competitiveness for future
external federal funding to support research programs; 2) enhance the
department's work that integrates education and research by providing students
with research grade equipment to perform high resolution, quantitative analyses
of cells and; 3) provide outstanding research training facilities for
undergraduate students in preparation for future research and medically related
careers in the biological sciences. The department?s integration of research and
education leads to research publications and presentations at national meetings
as well as an excellent success rate for students applying to and succeeding in
graduate and professional programs at the national level. Approximately 40% of
the graduates from the department in the past five years have continued on to
graduate or professional programs, and the trend in this pattern is increasing
as new faculty establish and maintain their research programs.