* 1229700
* MRI: CloudCar: Development of a Diverse Distributed Instrument for Vehicles in the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Nicoladie Tam, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: 12-29700 PI(s): Dantu, Ram; Tam, David N Institution: University of
North Texas Title: MRI/Dev.: CloudCar: A Diverse Distributed Instrument for
Vehicles in the Cloud Project Proposed: This project, developing an instrument
referred to as CloudCar, aims to build a cloud-based infrastructure to monitor
and collect data about drivers, vehicles, and road conditions. The type of data
to be collected includes driver's biometrics (eyeball tracking, heart rate,
blood pressure, and EEG brain wave analysis), sensory data from the vehicle,
traffic data, and sensed data about road condition. The collected data is
analyzed in the cloud and used to enable a wide spectrum of applications,
including assessing drivers' behavior and ability to drive, the "health" of the
vehicle, dissemination of information about road conditions to prevent accidents
and road congestion, and vehicular crash detection and notification.

The basic equipment requested includes cloud servers, software and tuning tools,
the OBD-II and CAN software/hardware, a number of 14-channel EEG equipment for
the alpha, beta, and gamma wave analysis during driving, EEG headbands, and
mobile devices. AvaCars will be developed to allow researchers and application
developers to access information about virtual cars. This work extends current
infrastructure to include the cloud for real-time monitoring and feedback. A
successful integration of the cloud into the system has great potential to
enhance the accuracy and reliability of the system.

The proposal raises multiple research questions and establishes research
directions that can be pursued to address these questions when the proposed
infrastructure is made available. The following research activities will be
pursued: - Design of a portal with AvaCar of a vehicle and road conditions with
all the timeline of events; - Measurements of driver attention and vehicle
condition using mobile phones, OBDII, and CAN bus; - Measurements of the driver
distraction using EEG-based headband; - Design of an infrastructure for near
real-time notifications and alerts to drivers in an area; - Real-time guidance
to the driver for optimal fuel consumption, energy-efficient localization, and
speed tracking; - Proactive prediction of drivers? behavior during accidents,
hazards, and construction; and, - Performance analysis, sensitivity analysis,
and calibration for V2C2V. Broader Impacts: The proposed instrument can greatly
impact the capability to assess and/or improve the driving performance of people
with disabilities, senior citizens, teen drivers, physiotherapists, and proper
physical exercises. Overall, the project contributes to personal and road
safety, optimized fuel consumption, and energy-efficient localization. The
project incorporates the use of the infrastructure in the curricula of the
different institutions involved. Course content, focused on cloud computing and
vehicular communications, will be developed and tailored to computer science,
electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, and cognitive science programs
at participating departments. The research team will build on their existing
outreach and educational programs to attract diverse undergraduate and graduate
students and involve them in the MRI project.