* 1229720
* MRI: Development of the Global Network of Robotic Echelle Spectrographs - NRES
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Edward Gomez, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,721,571.00

In recent years astronomers have observed over 1,000 stars that are thought to
contain planetary systems akin to our own solar system, and new discoveries are
rapidly being added. In order to confirm and characterize these systems, it is
necessary to conduct numerous observations of the host stars. Telescopes collect
the light from the star and pass it through a spectrograph that spreads the
light out into a rainbow-like "spectrum" that can be analyzed to determine the
velocity of the star as viewed from earth. If the observed velocity varies in a
repeatable way it may be due to the presence of a companion object in orbit
around the star. These observations require a considerable amount of telescope
time and there is a shortage of the kinds of telescopes and spectrographs
specifically designed to do this high precision work. This is especially
problematic for so-called short period orbits, where the orbiting planet is
close to its host star and the planetary "year" (the time for a full orbit
around the host star) may be days or even hours. To determine the orbital
characteristics of these objects frequent observations around the clock are
required. As the earth rotates on its axis, however, stars, just like the sun
and moon, set in the west, so they can only be seen for a few hours from a given
observatory. Dr. Timothy Brown of the Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope
network proposes to put identical spectrographs on several telescopes around the
earth so that the stars can be monitored continuously as the earth turns. He and
his team have designed a high resolution and very precise spectrograph and they
will build six copies. Observations made with this network of spectrographs is
certain to add considerably to our understanding of planetary systems. This work
is funded by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through the Major Research
Instrumentation program.