* 1229391
* MRI: Development of the Collaborative-Research Augmented Immersive Virtual Environment Laboratory (CRAIVE-Lab)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Johannes Goebel, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,001.00

Proposal #: 12-29391&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Braasch, Jonas; Chang, Ben; Cutler, Barbra
M.; Goebel, Johannes; Radke, Richard&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Collaborative-Research
Augmented Immersive Virtual Environment Laboratory (CRAIVE-
Lab)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a
specialized virtual-reality (VR) system, introduces a new concept for an
immersive virtual environment which is optimized for collaborative group
activities. The system addresses the auditory and visual senses with equal
priority, which is currently only championed by head-mounted display systems.
Unlike the latter, this system also enables direct communication between
participants without the need for telecommunication devices. The system?s haptic
floor display can be used to recreate floor vibrations (e.g., simulate concert
stages) with an accuracy that is currently only known for smaller displays
(e.g., car simulators).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work addresses the need for
specialized virtual reality (VR) system for the study and enablement of
communication-driven tasks with groups of users immersed in a high-fidelity
multi-modal environment located in the same physical space. While current multi-
modal VR systems have achieved a high degree of realism, they either focus on
the immersion of a single or very small group of users or on presenting material
to a larger group of users in a cinema-type environment. In both cases, the
systems provide homogeneous visual and acoustic fields. For group communication
tasks, inhomogeneous fields that provide personalized visual and acoustic
perspectives or each user, could provide better access to relevant information
from the VR system?s display and at the same time increase the experiential
degree of presence and perceived realism for interactive tasks. The project
addresses the technical hurdles that need to be surmounted to establish a large-
scale (18mx12mx4.3m), muti-user, muti-perspective, muti-model display. For
visual domain, multiple point-of-convergence rendering techniques will be used
to (re-)create scenes on a 7-projector display.. For the acoustic domain, a
192-loudspeaker-channel system will be designed for Wave-Field Synthesis (WFS)
with the support of Higher-Order-Ambisonic (HoA) sound projection to render
inhomogeneous acoustic fields. A haptic display, consisting of 16 platforms
elements, will be used to simulate floor vibrations and also to provide
infrastructure for other vibrating objects (e.g., handheld devices). An
intelligent position-tracking system estimates current user positions and head
orientations as well as positioning data for other objects. For the tracking
system, a hybrid visual/acoustic sensor system will be used to emulate the human
activity of extracting robust information by relying on different
modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;With new tools to
study human perception, the system will enable research to explore new multi-
modal, multi-user data displays that strategically utilize human ability to
integrate cross-model sensory information. It will also serve as a platform to
study interactions between humans and humanoid intelligent systems that can
simulate environments at different degrees of complexity. The instrumentation
supports research that will include the development of new interfaces for people
with disabilities. The CRAIVE system will be an integrative facility for three
school-wide centers, the center for Cognition, Communication, and Culture (CCC),
the CCNI supercomputer, and the Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center
(EMPC) to their full potential for collaborative research in this area, and to
serve as a training platform for students who will engage in one of the enabled
research areas.