* 1229252
* MRI:  Acquisition of a flow cytometer with high speed sorting to advance aquatic science research and education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Kimberly Reece, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 580,488.00

1229252&lt;br/&gt;Bronk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) Program grant support acquisition of a laser-based flow cytometer at the
College of William and Mary, Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS).
Partial technician salary support over a two year period will also be supported.
The flow cytometer will support a range of marine ecosystem research that will
be advanced by the ability to quickly separate abiogneic and biogenic particles
and sort individual microbes and even viruses based on characteristics of size,
shape and pigment composition as interrogated via laser diffraction and
fluorescence from appropriately stained cells. The instrument to be purchased, a
BD Influx, will support novel studies of nutrient cycling by marine
phytoplankton and heterotrophs by enabling separation of individual
microorganisms that can then be cultured and their rates of nutrient cycling
measured with stable isotopic labeling techniques. Measurement of species level
phytoplankton nitrogen assimilation rates are now possible using combinations of
flow cytometry, molecular probes, 15N labeling and mass spectrometry. Other
research avenues that will make use of the flow cytometer include marine microbe
specific studies of trace metal and nutrient cycling, studies of hydrothermal
vent associated benthic invertebrate feeding rates and efficiency, and molecular
studies of harmful algal blooms, marine parasites and wastewater effluent borne
human pathogens. The cytometer will support regional research use by professors
and students from institutions throughout the Commonwealth of Virginia and
further afield including faculty at Princeton and the University of Georgia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;