* 1229213
* MRI: Acquisition of HPC-B: A High Performance Computational Infrastructure for Biomedical Informatics Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joseph Kizza, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2016
* USD 305,494.00

Proposal #: 12-29213 PI(s): Cao, Yu; Kizza, Joseph M; Li, Ming; Tanis, Craig;
Institution: University of Tennessee Chattanooga Title: MRI: Acquisition of
HPC-B: A High Performance Computational Infrastructure for Biomedical
Informatics Research Project Proposed: This project, from an EPSCoR state and a
non-PhD granting institution, acquiring a high performance computational
infrastructure to be located at U. of Tennessee, Chattanooga (UTC), aims to
support, as a shared facility, five research projects involving ten
investigators and 18 students (9 UG, 6 MSc and 3PhD). The proposed projects
explore three requirements for a viable, productive and usable health
information technology. The project addresses the need to - Retrieve relevant
information from biomedical data, with accuracy and security; - Analyze the
data; and - Disseminate and share the data. Biomedical records hold enormous
amounts of multimodal data. Thus, the research efforts described focus on
actions needed to make this data available (complete, secure, and reliable). The
proposed research questions are organized into three main thrust areas: How to -
Discover clinically and biomedically important knowledge from complex biomedical
multimedia data; - Evaluate and improve the quality and safety of health care by
analyzing the large amount of clinical data; and - Facilitate the biomedical
information collection, management, exchange, and analysis with large-scale
network computing platforms and telemedicine systems. The computational
infrastructure is expected to serve as an essential shared research instrument,
allowing researchers to analyze, design, develop, test, and deploy large-scale
and distributed computer algorithms to address a variety of computationally-
intensive and data-intensive biomedical informatics research challenges. Broader
Impacts: Due to a large potential number of users, its convincing educational
plan, outreach plan, as well as expected scientific discoveries in a very
important area for every society: health care, this work exhibits potential for
strong broader impacts. The programs to enrich broader impact aspects will not
only be felt locally, but also internationally, and help to ensure that the
country maintains leadership and innovation within the addressed research
domains.