* 1229919
* Standard:  Improving Intelligence: A New Dialogue Between S&TS Scholars and Intelligence Analysts
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Kathleen Vogel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2014
* USD 85,000.00

Studies of how scientific knowledge is used in policy decisions usually shed
light on how natural and physical science intersects with policy. By contrast,
less is known about how social science is utilized in policy making. To fill
this gap, this study investigates how intelligence analysts acquire, process,
and utilize social science to make policy, through a study of the uptake of
science and technology studies (STS) research by weapons of mass destruction
experts and policymakers. It addresses a gap that the U.S. intelligence
community has recognized: the need to access expertise about the human-
technology interface in order to mitigate future intelligence failures. Using
participant observation, anonymous surveys, and anonymous in-person interviews,
the study investigates how weapons of mass destruction assessments can integrate
social and technical factors.

Two groups composed of STS researchers and WMD policymakers are studied: one
that examines nuclear weapons technologies, and one that examines biological
weapons technologies. The study (1) interjects into the U.S. intelligence
community analytic perspectives from science and technology studies that can
generate new understandings on weapons of mass destruction (WMD) threats; (2)
studies how intelligence analysts absorb these perspectives to make sense of
these threats; and (3) examines how feedback from intelligence practitioners can
refine and suggest new research avenues for STS scholarship related to WMD
threats.

Through publications, presentations at conferences, workshops, teaching, and
web-based publishing, the findings of this project are made available to a broad
range of expert, educator, student, and informed lay audiences. The specific
research outputs of this project are scholarly publications, briefings to U.S.
intelligence and policy officials, and workforce training to improve WMD
assessments. Integrated with the research, the project also creates new graduate
and undergraduate courses for students interested in science, technology, and
security, and produces new knowledge about pedagogical methods to teach science
and security issues at the undergraduate and graduate level.