* 1229142
* MRI: Acquisition of an inverted optical microscope to enable interdisciplinary research that unites five departments within the Union College Nanoscience Program
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Hagerman, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 308,323.00

This award for an inverted optical microscope will enable research across five
different departments at Union College including Biology, Chemistry, Physics,
and Electrical and Mechanical Engineering. This new instrument, integrated with
an existing atomic force microscope (AFM), offers simultaneous collection of
fluorescence and morphological data under controlled environmental conditions
(temperature and humidity). The new integrated system will be used to: 1) study
in-situ phase transitions and mechanical properties of soft materials (semi-
crystalline polymers and polymer nanocomposites) in order to understand the role
of interface in phase transition and reinforcement mechanisms; 2) probe the
influence of domain heterointerfaces on photocurrents to improve
photoefficiences in polymer/CdSe/clay solar films; 3) investigate the influence
of controlled environmental conditions on conduction in nanomaterials for
sensing applications; 4) study interactions between the human follicle
stimulating hormone receptor at the cell membrane with intracellular proteins to
better understand receptor dysfunction in infertility; 5) investigate
morphological changes during sucrose hydrolysis and fat bloom in chocolates; 6)
study the depth of penetration of visual markers (quantum-dots) for painting and
architectural conservation; and, 7) extend a suite of novel graphical techniques
for short and long range pattern recognition in integrated optical/AFM images.

The integrated optical/AFM system will support Union College's long-standing
commitment to incorporate undergraduate research experience as an integral part
of the curriculum and develop innovative, multidisciplinary research and
teaching opportunities through active learning that includes hands-on experience
in instrumentation. The proposed instrument will empower faculty research and
programs that feature bridges between courses and research laboratories.
Enhanced student expertise with key materials characterization techniques will
promote professional development and open career opportunities in science and
technology. Union College is committed to including students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in research and educational projects using the proposed
instrument and other major research instrumentation. The proposed instrument
will be an integral part of the ongoing dynamic outreach programs that use
frontiers of science and technology to engage the general public through
applications including arts, food science, and their 'Physical Constants'
workshop designed for high school students and teachers.