* 1229786
* MRI: Acquisition of a FLEX Reconfigurable Multi-User Immersive Visualization System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Warren Sack, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This project, acquiring a reconfigurable multi-user immersive visualization
system (Mechdyne FLEX), aims to support a new style of collaborative and
interdisciplinary design and experimentation in the fields of human health and
wellbeing, human cognition, human behavior, computer science, gaming and game-
based applications, product design, language and linguistics, and digital arts
and new media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FLEX provides opportunities to improve
knowledge and perception of the world by enabling observation and manipulation
of events and information that take place in remote spaces, are protracted or
dilated in time, are hazardous, or are either too small or too large to view in
intricate detail. FLEX also allows users to create realistic representations of
places, people, sounds and sites that no longer exist (e.g., historical events),
never existed (e.g., fantasy world), or may not be easily experienced (e.g.,
underwater), with applications for both research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The impact of FLEX
on the research and training infrastructure will occur on several
levels:&lt;br/&gt;- Research: Due to the high cost of an immersive visualization
system, most design and experimentation are currently conducted in two-
dimensional environments and with two-dimensional virtual objects. FLEX will
have a profound impact on the kinds of designs and experiments that can be
performed. Furthermore, FLEX will provide a natural bridge between engineering,
social sciences and arts research areas and will facilitate collaborations with
industry in Silicon Valley.&lt;br/&gt;- Undergraduate and graduate education:
FLEX will enrich courses that are currently offered at the institution, trigger
innovative new courses on virtual reality in various application areas, provide
new ways of learning and experimenting, and open up new areas of research for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;- Campus Impact: This system will be the first
multi-user configurable immersive visualization system on the campus, where the
instrument would be central to new initiatives and
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the FLEX immersive visualization system will
impact a number of research groups, both augmenting current research and opening
up new areas of research. The system can make Science and Engineering (S&amp;E)
research, as well as training and education, more attractive to students
(especially those who are underrepresented in the area). FLEX will create
exciting and engaging components for research and education on campus.
Applications to such fields as assistive technology and technology for health
and healthy living will attract underrepresented students, due to their societal
importance. FLEX will also be used to make Arts education more modern, and more
digital. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad dissemination of the research enabled by
this instrument will take place through regular publications, conference and
workshop presentations and technical reports. Websites that contain interactive
visualization of the various research and training activities will be
maintained, and inform the public about the roles of virtual reality in various
application areas. The software developed will be released as open source, with
potential for significant broader impact. The involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in the project provides mentoring opportunities.