* 1229038
* Broadening Participation And Perspectives On Crime And Justice Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ruth Peterson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 459,997.00

Intellectual Merit This project builds on the successful collaboration of an
interdisciplinary and diverse group of scholars and disciplines, whose work
seeks to improve the quality of research on the linkages among race/ethnicity,
crime, and criminal justice. This group, known as the Racial Democracy, Crime
and Justice Network (RDCJN) established a Summer Research Institute (SRI) and
annual summer workshops with prior NSF support. To date, the group has supported
44 young scholars and produced several volumes of innovative scholarship,
including books and special issues of top-ranked specialty journals in the
field. The current project seeks to build on these successes. To advance the
science of broadening participation, the project will pursue two closely
interrelated goals: First, it will expand the scope of collaborative projects
that improve our understanding of the interrelationships among race/ethnicity,
crime, and criminal justice. Second, it will advance the research and
professional development of young scholars in this branch of the STEM pipeline,
including graduate students from underrepresented groups.

Achieving Project Goals The PIs will hold additional SRIs for underrepresented
faculty and advanced graduate students to enhance their research achievements
and success in the academy. The institutes will provide a constructive
environment that supports, trains, and mentors young and aspiring faculty in the
completion of papers/proposals for journal publication or grant review, offer a
tool-kit of information for survival in the university, and reduce isolation of
young scholars. In the long run, these activities will contribute to a critical
mass of scholars from underrepresented groups whose work is visibly placed, and
whose presence and success encourages students-of-color, women, etc. to pursue
research and teaching careers. Summer workshops, held separately, will enable
participants to develop collaborative projects in the field. These workshops
will provide scholars from different disciplines, backgrounds, and career stages
with the means to develop, report, and improve on on-going research. Workshops
will also support the broadening participation activities of the SRI, especially
by integrating underrepresented junior scholars into an energetic network of
scholars. Institutes and workshops will also focus direct attention on
contemporary issues such as Housing, Lending Patterns and Crime; Race, Crime and
Justice in Comparative and International Contexts; and Youth, Peer Culture, and
Criminal Justice.

Broader Impacts This project has the potential for broader impact in multiple
areas. First, the central premise of this work is that the complexity of social
relations, including race/ethnicity, shapes our understanding of crime and
criminal justice. Participants employ collaborative, multi-method, multi-
disciplinary and comparative studies. Findings may improve our understanding of
how racialization relates to our understanding of citizenship and democracy,
nationally and around the world. Thus, findings may be of interests to the law
enforcement and social service providers, urban planners, the law enforcement
and policy communities, as well as the general public. Second, the project draws
on the expertise of diverse scholars to carry out innovative crime and justice
research and purposely seeks to broaden participation in the field by fostering
the careers of scholars from underrepresented groups. The workshops and SRIs
will enhance not only future research but also training and curricula in
criminology and criminal justice fields.