* 1229899
* SBIR Phase II:  High Resolution Channel Sounding for Indoor TDOA Positioning Using a Narrowband RF Transceiver
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Gary Sugar, Diani Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2014
* USD 422,880.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is focused on high-
accuracy wireless positioning technology for indoor environments. Indoor time-
of-flight-based positioning technologies have had little commercial success to
date primarily because of multipath - signal reflections that smear the arrival
time of the over-the-air signals, making it difficult to determine the arrival
time from the line-of-sight (LOS) or shortest distance path. The best way to
combat multipath is to use ultra-wideband (UWB) location beacon signals with
bandwidths in excess of 500 MHz; the wide signal bandwidth increases the
resolution in the time-domain, allowing the receiver to distinguish the LOS from
other paths. The challenges with UWB are that it is plagued by high
manufacturing costs, too much DC power consumption and regulatory issues
limiting its range and operating frequencies. The focus of our research is to
develop a way to overcome these limitations by defining a method for
transmitting a sequence of relatively narrowband standards-based (e.g., WiFi)
signals in such a way as to make them behave like UWB signals, yielding UWB-like
positioning accuracy at no additional cost and without any of the other
aforementioned shortcomings.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is fueled in part by the
ubiquity of the smartphone, whereby a large and growing number of applications
could benefit from high-accuracy indoor positioning technology, including:
indoor route guidance, mobile retail (find products, receive targeted ads, use
proximity-sorted shopping lists), staff and asset tracking for healthcare and
manufacturing industries, indoor E911, location-based security, exhibit tracking
commentary and route guidance for the blind. However, existing state-of-the-art
positioning systems such as WiFi received signal strength (RSS) techniques are
not accurate enough (typically 30 feet at 90% confidence) for many of these
applications. There are UWB-based solutions available today that are much more
accurate than their RSS counterparts, but there is strong resistance to
integrating UWB into smartphones due to cost, DC power and regulatory
limitations. The goal of this project is to provide a way to make
straightforward modifications to a WiFi chipset's MAC and PHY in order to
achieve an indoor location accuracy of 3 feet or better with 90% confidence,
yielding an order-of-magnitude accuracy improvement at no additional cost, since
WiFi is already a standard feature in most smartphones.