* 1229061
* MRI:  Acquisition of a system of geophysics instruments for archaeological geophysics research and training.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Robert Brunswig, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 110,321.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award to Dr. Andrew Creekmore funds the
acquisition by the University of Northern Colorado (UNC) of a system of
geophysics instruments for research, training and education in the fields of
archaeology, earth science, biology, and physics. These instruments include a
magnetometer, resistivity meter, conductivity meter, ground-penetrating radar,
and down-hole susceptibility sensor attachment for an existing magnetic
susceptibility meter. Each of these measures different properties of the earth;
together, they form an integrated research system for state-of-the-art
applications. These instruments will be shared with researchers and educators at
regional institutions including Colorado State University, the University of
Denver, and Laramie County Community College. Researchers include eight
collaborators, as well as graduate students and future colleagues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These instruments will support several ongoing and new
research initiatives, including: 1) A regional-scale, interdisciplinary
archaeological, paleoenvironmental, ethnographic, and historical cultural-
landscape study of Colorado prehistoric and historic Native American and non-
native populations from the Late Pleistocene to the early 20th century.
Geophysics survey can improve understanding of these cultures by identifying
buried remains that help the analysis of mobile forager behavior and responses
to environmental change; 2) An archaeological and historical study of Front
Range trading forts of the mid 1800s. These forts were a key part of westward
expansion characterized by trade between Native Americans and Euroamerican
immigrants; 3) An interdisciplinary study of the structure and history of the
early 20th-century African American settlement at Dearfield, Colorado. This
settlement demonstrates African American resilience in their efforts, inspired
by Booker T. Washington, to attain economic security, equality, and social
justice; 4) A geophysical study of the internal structure of rattlesnake
hibernacula. This study contributes to a better understanding of snake lifecycle
and behavior; 5) Analysis of climate history and change through study of rock
glaciers and moraines. This work informs current water-use policies because
runoff from the watershed in which the rock glaciers occur is diverted for
agricultural irrigation on Colorado's eastern plains; 6) Development of a grant-
funded archaeogeophysics test site for testing and calibrating instruments, and
training students; 7) Undergraduate research projects in physics, earth
sciences, archaeology, biology and other disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
requested instruments will enable UNC and collaborating institutions to provide
opportunities for hands-on education and research, including courses in
anthropology, earth sciences, and physics; geophysics workshops; and the
archaeological field school. Investigators will train students in the theory and
application of geophysics in these fields, engage students in research, and
prepare students to incorporate geophysics into graduate or professional work in
their respective fields. Investigators will engage Front Range communities and
area K-12 students through geophysics workshops, field days, and city and
private museum exhibits designed to connect students and the public to science.
Results will be presented at local community workshops, regional and national
meetings, and submitted for publication in peer-reviewed journals. This award
will make it possible to expand collaborations with area scholars in a variety
of fields, advancing knowledge and understanding in archaeology, earth science,
biology, and physics.