* 1229082
* MRI: Acquisition of a Biaxial Test System to Advance Research, Education, and Training at Howard University
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Mohsen Mosleh, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 367,500.00

This MRI award will provide funds for the acquisition of a biaxial test system
to strengthen research, education, and training at Howard University in the area
of materials synthesis, processing, testing, and characterization. This research
instrumentation is ideal for performing higher-capacity bi-axial tests and will
be used to test and characterize various materials including nickel-base super
alloys, aluminum alloys, polymer matrix composite, and nanocomposites for
current projects funded by the Department of the Defense, Army Research Office,
the National Science Foundation, and Boeing. The acquisition of the biaxial test
system will facilitate more realistic materials testing and characterization
that will advance fundamental understanding of the complex interactions between
advanced materials microstructure and stress/strain gradients in the formation
and the growth of small cracks at notch root regions in safety critical
components such as gas turbine engines. The outcome of this work will (a)
provide a great deal of information and considerable insight into local
phenomena such as crack initiation and growth, and (b) facilitate more efficient
design and better life predictions of advanced materials for various
applications in the aerospace, civil structures, and defense sectors where
fatigue is a critical issue in reliability and design. The biaxial system will
also be used to conduct extensive experimental tests needed to establish a
quantitative assessment of the mechanical property change for functionalized
carbon nanotube filled epoxy nanocomposites under complex loads. Other research
projects that will benefit from the acquisition of the requested biaxial test
system include: i) full-scale system-level validation studies of structural
systems with several innovative retrofit systems, ii) investigation of stress
distributions in composite members at joints, where details of stress
distribution are difficult to simulate analytically using closed-form solutions,
and iii) investigation of the role of surface characteristics on rolling contact
fatigue in ceramics for gas turbine engines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biaxial
test system will have broader impacts on the research, education, and training
capabilities of Howard University; the largest HBCU research intensive
University in the nation, and also the nation?s largest on-campus producer of
African-American PhD degree. Specifically, the research of 11 current PhD/M.S,
and several undergraduate students in the Departments of Mechanical Engineering,
Civil Engineering, and Chemistry will be enhanced through exposure to this
requested research instrumentation. Our collaboration with the defense and the
commercial sectors will also create a unique opportunity for more funding
opportunities that will enable the training of well qualified underrepresented
groups at Howard University. The equipment will also enhance Howard University?s
capability to recruit, retain, and develop minorities and less privileged
students with lower than average social-economic. This will be achieved through
the integration of the research activities in this project into the Minority
Science and Engineering Improvement Program (MSEIP). MSEIP is a summer program
at Howard University sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education designed to
give 30 selected high school students from the minority groups the opportunity
to explore many exciting education and research opportunities in science and
engineering.