* 1229760
* MRI: Acquisition of a Raman and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) microscope for interdisciplinary research and research training at Seattle University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Christopher Stipe, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 265,908.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, Professor
Christopher Stipe from Seattle University and colleagues Ryan McLaughlin, Frank
Shih, Katherine Kuder and J. Wesley will acquire an integrated Raman and laser-
induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) microscope. The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research training and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) identification and quantification of geological materials; (b)
sediment fingerprinting in support of sediment source determination; (c)
characterization of light alloys and biomaterials; (d) analysis of underground
coal mining particulate matter for environmental health monitoring; and (e)
development of sustainable cement-based materials.

A Raman-LIBS microscope rapidly acquires both elemental and molecular chemical
information spatially across a sample surface. In Raman-mode, the instrument
provides information regarding a sample's chemical composition, structure,
phase, and polymorphism; in LIBS-mode, the instrument provides elemental
composition. Thus chemical mapping and depth profiling of a wide array of
samples can be obtained. The instrument will be used in research by faculty and
students in three departments at the institution. It also will be employed in a
collaborative study with the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture
studying pigments used in Native American art and in a summer immersion program
for STEM students from a local high school to learn chemistry and forensic
science.