* 1229558
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope System for the Core University Research Resources Laboratory (CURRL) at New Mexico State University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Cynthia Zoski, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 266,459.00

This award to New Mexico State University (NMSU) is for the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art high resolution atomic force microscope (AFM) system. The
instrument will be installed in a readily-accessible centralized core facility
that supports the NMSU main campus and five satellite community colleges. AFM is
an indispensable tool in characterizing surface topography on the nanoscale via
phase or force imaging. It will enhance process development and analysis of
nanostructured materials as well as provide a new resource to probe specific and
dynamic interactions of complex physic-chemical, biological, and agricultural
systems. A multidisciplinary group of junior and senior faculty from the
Colleges of Engineering; Arts and Sciences; and Agricultural, Consumer and
Environmental Sciences with active research programs will expand their
investigations and teaching into nanoscience and nanotechnology by employing the
unique capabilities of the AFM. Specific research projects that will directly
benefit from the instrument include thin film morphology of nonmetals (such as
graphene), metals, metal-oxides, nitrides, carbides, and their nanocomposites;
surface functionalization of nanomaterials and microstructural changes in
material surfaces; imaging in soft biological and agricultural materials;
electrochemical investigation on addressable array platforms; and, optical,
magnetic, and electrical properties of materials, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new AFM will impact not only the specific research programs, but also help to
catalyze and promote a broader, college-wide initiative in materials research
and education at NMSU. The centrally-located instrument will significantly
enhance the research and breadth of capabilities of more than one-hundred
faculty, staff, and students. In addition, this modern AFM includes design
features for ease-of-use and versatility for multi-disciplinary applications
that facilitate high quality educational training and will be used for student
training, classroom demonstrations, and sponsored workshops. This project
bridges the gap between the classroom and the research lab. The combination of a
modern AFM in a managed core facility with established informal and formal
training for a multi-disciplinary user base will have a positive impact on
nanoscience and microscopic imaging research and education in southern New
Mexico, the borderland region, and beyond.