* 1229138
* MRI: Development of a Versatile, Ultra-Low Temperature, High Magnetic Field Scanning Probe Microscope for Investigations of Nanostructured Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2019
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,337,606.00

This award to Penn State University is for the development of a novel scanning
probe microscope system, specifically designed with the flexibility and capacity
to answer a wide range of open questions on new nanostructured materials and
devices. It will have a unique combination of characteristics including
interchangeable sensors enabling complementary investigations of local
electronic and magnetic properties, and multiple sample contacts allowing
simultaneous bulk transport measurements. An array of surface preparation and
characterization tools will expand the set of materials and devices that can be
studied, and simultaneous optical access will ensure that researchers can
quickly locate and move to important sample features. Broad temperature (50 mK
to room temperature using cryogen free technology) and magnetic field (up to 10
T) ranges will enable researchers to probe a variety of phase transitions and
phenomena including superconductivity, topological, quantum, and multiferroic
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the proposed instrument will also
inspire broader impacts in education, training, and outreach. During
development, near real-time sharing of instrument designs and data, unique in
the materials research community, should spur the much needed development of
other new instruments and encourage thinking about the benefits of data sharing.
The investigators will translate their development and research experiences,
which unify a broad set of cutting-edge tools, into the development of a
tutorial explaining the use of these tools and the need for the interrelated
information they provide to understand complex systems. Together with the Penn
State Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) and the Franklin
Institute of Philadelphia, the researchers will develop an interactive museum
kit on visualizing nanostructures, designed to spark the interests and
imaginations of a new generation of science and engineering students.