* 1230944
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: A Fundamental Investigation of High Efficiency Low Temperature Recycling Technology for Lithium Ion Batteries
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Brajendra Mishra, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2015
* USD 80,000.00

Program Director's Recommendation Center for Resource, Recovery and Recycling
(CR3) Proposal # 1230675 & 1230944 Apelian and Mishra

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Resource, Recovery and Recycling
(CR3) located at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute (lead site) and the
Colorado School of Mines. Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are
authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570. The solicitation invites
I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental
research.

The rechargeable secondary Lithium ion (Li-ion) battery is expected to grow to
more than $6.3 billion by 2012 from ~$4.6 billion in 2006. With the development
of personnel electronics, hybrid and electric vehicles, Li-ion batteries will be
more in demand. However, Li-ion batteries are not widely recycled because it is
not economically justifiable (in contrast, at present more than 97% Lead acid
batteries are recycled). So far, no commercial methods are available to recycle
Li-ion batteries economically and efficiently because of the complex chemistry
of Li-ion batteries. Considering the limited resources, environmental impact,
and national security, Li-ion batteries must be recycled. The proposed project,
therefore, will build fundamental understanding on handling and recycling Li-ion
batteries. Material separation and deposition will be established for the
complex Li-ion battery system. Critical processes to synthesize the cathode
materials using recycled materials will be developed. These findings will add a
new chapter to Li-ion battery recycling.

The proposed project is expected to have a significant impact on the Li-ion
battery industry. Inorganic materials are not renewable; Li-ion batteries
contain expensive elements such as Co, Ni, among others. It is critically
important that these materials are recovered and recycled. Having a recycling
infrastructure in place will ease concerns that the adoption of vehicles that
use Li-ion batteries could lead to a shortage of lithium carbonate and a
dependence on countries such as Chile, Russia and Bolivia, which control the
bulk of global lithium reserves. A comprehensive education plan will also be
integrated with the research plan. The three key elements being: 1) Develop a
K-12 outreach and research program with an emphasis on reaching out to
minorities, 2) Help undergraduate and graduate students develop skills outside
their immediate field, 3) Develop an online resource of Li-ion battery recycling
to provide free and open educational resources for self-learners around the
world.