* 1230049
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transnational Judicial Dialogue and Evolving Jurisprudence in British National Courts
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Kelley Littlepage, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2013
* USD 23,995.00

This research project explores the dynamics of European legal integration by
examining how foreign legal jurisprudence is transmitted into the domestic
realm. This study performs a single country analysis of the importation of
foreign jurisprudence from the European Court of Justice (ECJ) and from other
member states of the European Union (EU) into the British legal system. The
project explores to what degree foreign jurisprudence has influenced the British
legal system and how much influence judicial actors (judges, lawyers,
politicians) have in this process. European legal integration has two
dimensions: vertical and horizontal. Most scholarship has focused on vertical
legal integration, a top-down process where the establishment of a hierarchical
legal order of courts and laws causes national courts to make increasingly
similar decisions over time as they come under the formal authority of the ECJ.
Less studied is horizontal legal integration, where national courts make
increasingly similar decisions over time because national courts interact,
borrow, and imitate each other informally. This dissertation investigates the
latter dynamic, while also asking whether it has been fostered by vertical
integration or, conversely, has encouraged vertical integration over time.

The analysis includes all British high court cases in immigration, banking, and
family law from 1920-2010. The study will also include qualitative analysis of
British parliamentary documents from both chambers, interviews with British Law
Lords and law clerks, interviews with judges at the ECJ, and visits to British
and EU judicial archives.

The influence of jurisprudence from myriad courts, both national and
supranational, has been topic of discussion in the United States. This project
provides a broader context for the American conversation by considering how
ideas move within a national institution, between national and supranational
institutions, and spread beyond the boundaries of the state in a country with
legal officials who also see themselves as within a legal system distinct from
the European system of which they are a part. The data collected during the
course of this project will be made available to scholars.