* 1230600
* Trusting Knowledge: Agency, Dependence, and Responsible Knowing in a Scientific World (Scholars Award)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Heidi Grasswick, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 116,672.00

Introduction

This is a project to develop a normative account of the role of trust in
responsible scientific knowing. It is informed by the literature of sociology of
scientific knowledge, science studies, and philosophy of science. The researcher
will use a situated approach that is derived from feminist studies of science;
in that approach, science and technology experts are modeled as occupying
different social locations that can shape their possibilities for knowledge. The
project develops the concept of responsible trust in science and outlines
several of its conditions. The project examines challenges to and strategies for
achieving this trust using several case studies including forms of indigenous
knowledge, gender-differences research, and climate research. The result will be
a normative account of the dimensions and degrees of trust in science that are
required for sound and effective knowing.

Intellectual Merit

The concept of responsible trust in science has significant implications for
understanding both the relationship between individual knowers and their
communities, and the importance of cross-community engagement if we are to
succeed in generating sound and effective knowledge that is meaningful for
society. The analysis generated will bridge the fields of philosophy and science
studies by integrating philosophical concerns about how we justify our reliance
on the testimony of others with concerns raised in science studies regarding the
varying degrees of trust that specific lay communities place in scientific
institutions.

Potential Broader Impacts

The project will result in a book aimed at a broad interdisciplinary audience of
science studies scholars, philosophers of science, educators, and policy makers.
It will contribute to science policy discussions by analyzing the importance of
trusting relations across communities and considering strategies to develop this
trust. A website of curricular resources for courses on science and democracy
will also be developed. By increasing our understanding of the relationship
between scientific and lay communities, and offering strategies for developing
responsible trust, this project has the potential to offer policy insights
regarding best institutional practices for interacting across scientific and lay
communities. The work is important because the results of science will be
maximally useful to society only when they are produced and implemented within a
sufficient climate of trust.