* 1230365
* The International Criminal Court and the Pursuit of Justice
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2013
* Maxine Kamari Clarke, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 260,001.00

Dr. Maxine Kamari Clarke of Yale University will conduct research on
international justice and human rights as these concepts have been interpreted
by the International Criminal Court and the African Union Commission. The past
two years have witnessed the ICC's intensive focus on African states, including
arrest warrants for numerous African leaders. The proposed research -- shaped by
current theoretical debates on the globalization of human rights, the
anthropology of justice, and genealogies of affect -- explores contestations
over justice, documenting the making of the Rome Statute for the ICC and the
corresponding rise of the rule of law movement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will take place at two critical sites: (1) the ICC at The Hague, in
which investigations and adjudication are ongoing; (2) the AU Commission in
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, where political, economic and culturally shaped decision-
making is underway toward the development of an African court with the
jurisdiction to handle international crimes committed by individuals. Data will
be collected at each site through a variety of social science methods, including
interviews, participant observation, and archival research, and analyzed to test
three major hypotheses concerning (1) the globalization of human rights and the
cooperation of AU leaders; (2) the factors affecting the nature and form of
struggles over the meanings of justice; (3) the structures of affect that shape
AU cooperation with the ICC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As international justice
mechanisms continue to evolve, there is a special urgency to this research as it
relates to appropriate forms of legal involvement in the pursuit of peace. This
project will advance scientific understandings of international law and justice
in the field of Law and Social Sciences, especially in anthropology or
interdisciplinary studies of law. The research will also contribute to the
training of a graduate student. The empirical findings of this study will be of
great importance to policymakers, providing insights into the motivating
factors, experiences, and concerns of international justice mechanisms. This
research was co-funded by the Cultural Anthropology program and the Law and
Social Sciences program.