* 1230687
* SEP Collaborative: A Unified Framework for Sustainability in Buildings through Human Mediation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* John Wen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 670,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Suman Banerjee and co-workers at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Prof. Sandipan Mishra and co-workers at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. The project takes a holistic approach to
develop a framework for unified control of commercial and institutional
buildings that reduces overall energy consumption through human mediation. The
framework consists of multiple components: sensor networks deployed in buildings
that will monitor and measure various parameters, e.g., energy, lighting,
temperature, humidity, etc. that lead to efficient models; software components
that allow human occupants to interact and provide feedback; and actuation
outcomes that allow control of building components, such as heating, cooling,
airflow and lighting sub-systems and optimize these controls jointly. The novel
aspect of this effort is that it combines the following elements in the feedback
control of building energy systems: (i) Forecasting of external variables such
as energy pricing, energy demand, and weather, as can be determined from the
smart grid or the web; (ii) Predicting internal variables such as occupancy,
user comfort preferences, and state variables as obtained from predictive
dynamic models; (iii) Extracting and then exploiting pattern repetition (daily,
weekly, and yearly cycles in temperature, occupancy, usage etc.) in a
computationally efficient fashion, an (iv) Incorporating human and psychological
factors in the model, by obtaining and processing human-in-the-loop feedback
effectively. Through the design of the right human-machine interfaces, creating
appropriate incentives for human participation, effective feedback collection,
and integrated processing of sensory measurements (obtained from an in-building
sensing network) and human inputs, the project aims at providing a by-demand
comfort level that is mediated by end-users through their personal communication
"apps". This approach differs significantly from the current research and
practices of modeling, controlling and optimizing building energy sub-systems in
isolation, and providing by-default comfort level everywhere in the building
independent of occupancy level and demand level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project explores techniques that can provide major savings in energy consumption
in commercial and institutional buildings leading towards a more sustainable
design. The educational component of the project includes a laboratory-based
curriculum which includes a cross-disciplinary capstone course, "Smart Energy
Laboratory", suitable enhancements to existing courses, and co-development of
new campus-wide sustainability certificate programs. Further, multiple campus
dormitories and institutional buildings are being incorporated as "living
laboratories," thus educating their occupants about green consumption practices.
Other aspects of the project provide interactions with local high schools as
well as related industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant fraction of energy
consumption in the modern world is within buildings. This project is focused on
the development of an intelligent control system to manage energy consumption of
buildings by actively incorporating human mediation in this process. The unique
aspect of this project includes mechanisms by which multiple tenants of a
commercial building can participate in the energy management process and allow
the various control and actuation functions to efficiently meet their collective
needs. The goal is to develop a blueprint for a more sustainable design of
buildings. In addition to the significant impact on energy efficiency and
sufficiency of next-generation buildings, the techniques being developed here
also have transformative impact on sustainability research and sustainable
technologies as a whole.