* 1230830
* Modernizing Traditional Medicine and the Law
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Stacey Langwick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 233,765.00

Traditional forms of knowledge about bioactive plants have challenged current
legal and scientfic understandings of intellectual property (IP) by raising
questions about the centrality of authorship, the definition of property, the
obligations of ownership, and the territoriality of the patent system.
Understanding how these forms of knowledge can productively intersect with
global IP regimes is an important question for policymakers, social scientists,
and those seeking to fairly distribute IP benefits to traditional groups. To
address this issue, this study investigates how and why scientists and
scientific institutions investigating traditional medicine in Africa are
innovating new sustainable forms of intellectual property as the grace periods
for the implementation of the major international property agreements near their
end and developing countries are compelled to complete the transition to the new
global property regime. The study investigates the formation and operation of
new forms of collaboration that are emerging between healers, patients,
scientists, scientific institutions and private companies in the name of
modernizing traditional medicine; accounts for the relationship between property
and health that inheres in visions of sustainable health; and describes the
forms of commons that are being imagined in efforts to develop traditional
medicine with the goal of contributing to sustainable health. To do so, the
study uses ethnographic tools to examine the ways that two research centers in
Tanzania are interpreting, applying and re-working global intellectual property
policies during their research into traditional medicines.

Broader impacts include the creation of international research and publication
networks, educational and capacity building initiatives, and transferrable
knowledge about how traditional forms of knowledge can be fairly integrated into
international property regimes. This project will also bring African ways of
knowing and innovating into emerging legal debates on property, public domain,
and the commons in an effort to catalyze new possibilities for the protection of
plant life and communal knowledge derived from plant life.