* 1230878
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Actor-Network Study of Artisanal Food Production and Food Safety Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Jenifer Buckley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2014
* USD 13,037.00

The regulation of food through the creation and imposition of standards has
important consequences for food quality and the economic value of food. Most
studies of food production standards have focused on large-scale producers. The
rise small-scale and localized agrifood production and the corresponding
increase in artisanal production has led federal and state food safety
regulatory agencies to revise food production policies to encourage these new
processors. These efforts, however, frequently expose fundamental disagreements
over the nature of artisanal production and the role of food safety standards.
These disagreements impede debate on public policy responses. This study uses
ethnographic and field observations of food safety inspections and semi-
structured interviews with artisanal bread and cheese makers and inspectors to
investigate these scientized policy mismatches and their possible remedies.

Tools from actor-network theory (ANT) are used to draw attention to the multiple
ways the ostensibly simple social phenomena of reconciling practices and
standards takes place. The study investigates the multiple approaches that food
safety inspectors take to regulatory enforcement, just as artisanal producers
take multiple approaches to artisanship. ANT provides methodological tools for
conducting a fine-grained exploration of the interactions between artisans and
inspectors, the tensions that may arise in these interactions, and the ways in
which closure is and is not reached.

The broader impacts of this study are to contribute to food policy studies by
analyzing the practical enforcement of food safety regulations during
inspections, thereby enhancing understanding of these public policy instruments,
and to science and technology studies by analyzing how scientific standards
operate in practice. In addition, by focusing on artisanal producers, the study
helps inform policy that is designed to encourage and support small-scale and
artisanal agrifood initiatives. Finally, by fostering opportunities for
engagement, collaboration, and mutual understanding among producers and food
safety inspectors, this work enriches the relationship between science,
governance, and society.