* 1230908
* SEP Integrated National Framework for Cellulosic Drop-in Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Hemant Pendse, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Hemant Pendse and co-workers at the
University of Maine. The highly multi-disciplinary team will develop a framework
for evaluating and comparing biofuel technologies by integrating the disciplines
of engineering, environmental science, economics, and policy. As a baseline, the
framework will be applied to Formate Assisted Pyrolysis (FORMAP) which is a
transformative new "drop-in" (infrastructure compatible) hydrocarbon biofuel
technology. Project efforts will culminate in a multi-criteria decision-making
analysis (MCDA) tool. The research will include work to (1) Evaluate the
environmental impacts of each stage of the product life cycle based on various
feedstock, processing, component recycling and production scenarios related to
the FORMAP technology, and (2) Evaluate possible policy, legal and social
acceptance barriers to swift implementation of the new technology. This combined
with the MCDA tool will culminate in an Energy Pathway Readiness Level (EPRL)
scale, by which this FORMAP technology and other energy technologies could be
evaluated for their "readiness" for deployment in the commercial arena in other
regions. The FORMAP chemistry is transformative as it makes possible a paradigm
shift away from the heterogeneous catalytic post-processing, which is currently
the most studied pathway to improve pyrolysis. This project takes FORMAP to real
biomass derived intermediates rather using synthetic reagents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide guidance on the most sustainable
pathway for public and regulatory acceptance, and commercialization. While the
proposed research is focused on the Northeast region, the research results will
be broadly applicable other regions in the United States. Since a broad suite of
technologies will be necessary to reduce the overall dependence on petroleum,
the analyses will make it possible to systematically marry feedstock production,
fuel production, and product distribution technologies for a particular region.
Education initiatives will utilize online delivery to improve the size and scope
of the audience. Taken in total, education and outreach efforts will promote
applied workforce development for those entering or currently working within the
biofuels industry. Experience in interdisciplinary research collaboratives and
undergraduate and graduate student research projects will promote the next
generation of scientists and scientific discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will support development of a new process, FORMAP, which has the
potential to renewably replace petroleum products with new drop-in biofuels that
can be used for aviation and ground transport. The proposed research will result
in the development of a multi-criteria decision-making analysis (MCDA) tool that
will allow national and international researchers in other regions to optimize
the overall sustainability of advanced biofuels through alterations to feedstock
choices, production processes, and transportation and distribution alternatives
that are locally appropriate. Detailed chemical characterization and process
models developed by the project will provide data for the economics and
integration of FORMAP into existing petroleum fuels infrastructure.