* 1230615
* SEP: A Sustainable Pathway to Terawatt-Scale Solution-Processed Solar Cells from Earth Abundant Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Hugh Hillhouse, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Hugh Hillhouse and co-workers at the
University of Washington to develop new solar cell technology from earth
abundant elements. A sustainable energy pathway must yield high-value energy
products at or below the price from non-renewables, with a net environmental and
societal impact that is known and benign, and at a scale sufficient to become a
major contributor to worldwide energy production (terawatts). Based on crustal
abundance of the elements, mineral production rates, cost of the mineral feed
stocks, the material defect chemistry, stability of the material and likely p-n
junctions, and the photovoltaic electricity generation potential, Cu2ZnSnS4
(CZTS) appears to be a most promising candidate for terawatt-scale low-cost
solar energy harvesting. Here, we will use a rigorous life cycle assessment
(LCA) to analyze the sustainability of CZTS solar cells and avoid indirect
market effects that have plagued other large-scale energy production routes. The
LCA will affect the synthetic routes to fabricating the devices and help steer a
body of fundamental research focusing on: (1) Developing a fundamental
understanding of defects at interfaces and their passivation by applying
combinatorial surface treatments, state-of-the-art electrical scanning probe
methods, photoluminescence, and ab initio calculations; (2) Exploring the
possibility of using novel voltage-boosting electron-dopant Auger de-excitation
processes in the buffer layer; (3) Pioneering a method to utilize the unique
properties of graphene to create a field-effect back contact. Using this
3-terminal back-contact architecture, the back-surface field, for the first
time, will be tuned. This extra degree of freedom will allow the effects of
surface chemistry to be separated from Fermi level equilibration. The increase
in efficiency that could be achieved would bolster this technology to a level
that would be economically competitive with current non-sustainable
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2009 the National Research Council estimated
that fossil fuel use accounts for $120B/yr in non-climate damages and 20,000
premature deaths in the U.S. As a result, the development of a sustainable
energy pathway to low-cost solar cells from Earth abundant elements will have a
substantial impact on the environment and human health. In addition, the solar
cell market is predicted to reach $44B/yr by 2017, and currently, U.S. companies
lead the world in manufacturing and technology development for thin film
devices. Advances such as those being pursued by the SEP team could shift thin
film technology into the lead of the solar cell market, and help U.S. companies
secure a long-term leadership position. The project will also train a skilled
set of scientists and engineers for this growing manufacturing sector who
understand the necessity of sustainable processes and appreciate the
collaborative interdisciplinary approaches needed to achieve them. The impact of
the project will be broadened by efforts including: (1) setting up a new
children's exhibit at the Pacific Science Center called Light Racing, (2)
deploying experimental solar cell technologies at the new UW Solar Energy
Testbed Facility; (3) staffing the SunDawg Solar Kiosk which will be viewed by
thousands at University of Washington and Seattle sporting events, (4)
increasing the already substantial effort the investigators have in
undergraduate research experiences (70 long-term research projects with
undergraduates in the last decade); (5) expanding a high-school outreach program
that within the past two years has already resulted in greater than 20 classroom
visits to Seattle high schools, reaching more than 800 students; and (6)
supporting efforts to broaden participation working with the MESA outreach
program to provide mentorship to underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the transformative potential to solve key
fundamental and technological challenges that will enable a new sustainable
energy pathway for thin film solar cells that have economic advantage over
current technology and are competitive with utilizing fossil fuel resources. If
successful, the project could transform the solar industry from one currently
dominated by silicon solar cells that are manufactured overseas to a new
technology based on copper, zinc, tin, and sulfur that are manufactured in the
U.S.