* 1230262
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Algorithms for Automated 3D Building Models and 3D Street Maps
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kevin Williams, ClearEdge3D
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 737,727.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
commercialize the first automated modeling software to create fully 3D computer
models of buildings, streetscapes, and entire cities. 3D models are used
extensively in the architecture/engineering (A/E), personal navigation/mapping,
and government markets. However, it currently can take hundreds of hours of
tedious manual tracing of laser scan or photogrammetry point clouds to create a
full 3D model of a single large building. The output of this research will be a
fundamental change from current CAD technology that should reduce 3D modeling
time by 99%. Automating 3D model creation is a massive mathematical challenge,
one that has vexed the CAD/mapping community for decades. Algorithmically
accounting for the innumerable geometries of building facades and automatically
creating a light-weight, accurate, fully 3D streetscape model has never before
been successfully accomplished, according to all published literature. This
project should be able to be the first software available that creates fully 3D,
centimeter-accurate building models automatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. The
widespread availability of fully 3D city models and streetscapes will have a
profound impact on the personal navigation, commercial real estate,
design/construction, first responder, security, and defense industries. Although
this project is high-risk due to the enormity of the algorithmic challenge, it
is high reward with a commercial potential close to one billion dollars. In the
A/E market alone, firms spend nearly $800 million per year on manually creating
3D building models. Successful commercialization of this research will reduce
those costs by up to 99%. The project should deliver a completely innovative
technology and a totally new economic equation to the marketplace - one that
will spur the widespread adoption of high-resolution 3D building models and 3D
streetscapes among consumers and industry alike.