* 1230189
* EAGER: A New Analyzer for In-Situ Characterization of Engineered Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Omowunmi Sadik, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2014
* USD 110,000.00

Abstract #1230189 Sadik, Omowunmi A.

Intellectual Merit Novel environmental nanoparticle analyzers and methods are
needed to assess the risks posed by engineered nanomaterials. Addressing the
complex and critical issues surrounding the responsible development of
nanotechnology is important both for society and the environment. The progress
of society as technological advances are introduced has often resulted in the
simultaneous emergence of adverse effects either for human health, the ecosystem
or both. The emerging field of environmental nanotechnology is a critical
research area, and one which would greatly benefit from a rapid EAGER support.
Hence, the immediate goal of this research is to develop an environmentally-
relevant, portable nanoparticle analyzer which can measure various levels of
nanomaterials directly from pure standards, simulated matrices and real-world
samples. The proposed research is expected to bridge the knowledge and
methodology gaps associated with the potential environmental health and safety
(EH&S) issues of nanomaterials. The resulting technology should provide
information about the size or shape of the nanoparticle, which are important
factors for determining toxicity; as well as distinguish them from naturally-
occurring particles.

The research will make use of a new class of flexible, optically transparent
conducting nanoporous membranes to simultaneously capture, isolate and detect
engineered nanomaterials. Selected metal oxides and carbon based nanomaterials
will be tested by integrating electrochemistry, polyamic acid membranes and
tangential flow filtration to create a system that can be used in situ.

Broader Impacts A major outcome of this project is an environmentally-relevant
portable sensor system which can measure the levels of various nanomaterials
directly from the environmental samples and possibly remedy them via filtration.
The approach provides information regarding the size and other physical
parameters of the nanomaterials, which are important in determining
nanomaterials toxicity. This approach can be of great benefit for environmental
and security applications because the portable analyzers can be deployed in many
places to safeguard the environment, public safety, and security. This research
will provide excellent training experience for graduate students as well as
train undergraduate minority students who will gain exposure to field
environmental analysis. Further, this research will support the enhancement of
existing graduate and undergraduate courses including Chemistry and the
Environment (CHEM 552C/482C) and Sensors and Bioelectronics (CHEM 424/524).
Other dissemination plans include presentations at national conferences and
joint publications in peer-reviewed journals in related fields.