* 1230395
* AGS-PRF: Hygroscopicity of Secondary Organic Aerosols Formed via Aqueous Reactions
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Shunsuke Nakao, Nakao, Shunsuke
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 172,000.00

This project seeks better characterization of the climatic impact of a key
atmospheric aerosol component, secondary organic aerosol (SOA), which
contributes to both natural and anthropogenic aerosol concentrations. The focus
is on the impacts of SOA on warm cloud formation. Current models, based on
chamber experiments that focused on production of aerosols from gas-phase
oxidation processes, tend to underpredict the mass concentrations and the extent
of oxygenation of ambient organic aerosols. Growing evidence suggests that SOA
formed in clouds or in hydrated haze particles via aqueous reactions (aqSOA) may
reconcile these gaps: these aqueous reactions have been shown to proceed under
atmospheric conditions in the laboratory, and reaction products are highly
oxygenated. Although aqSOA hygroscopicity, a measure of a particle's ability to
participate in cloud drop formation or cloud condensation nucleating (CCN)
activity, is expected to be high due to its highly oxidized composition, few
studies have confirmed this relationship to evaluate its climatic impact. This
study will correlate CCN activity of aqSOA, component polarity, and composition
for the first time. A new analytical method will be applied for determination of
CCN activity of aqSOA as a function of component polarity, providing new
insights on the unresolved contribution of many chemical species to overall
hygroscopicity. Elemental analysis of aerosol data obtained using a high-
resolution time-of-flight aerosol mass spectrometer will be used to evaluate how
polarity and hygroscopicity relate to oxygen:carbon ratios in the aerosol phase.
The work will be conducted at Colorado State University (CSU) under the
mentorship of Prof. Sonia Kreidenweis.

In terms of broader impacts, the results of this project will help improve the
global budget of atmospheric organic aerosols and the representation of organic
aerosol climate impacts. Also, the principal investigator will be actively
involved in educational activities at CSU including serving as a discussion
leader for a graduate level course on responsible conduct of research. The
principal investigator will also be a research mentor to interns via the NSF-
sponsored Center for Multiscale Modeling of Atmospheric Processes at CSU.