* 1230183
* SBIR Phase II:  Micro-Solar Powered Battery Charger Circuit
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Wayne Chen, Triune Systems
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address the
efficiency issues with existing solar harvesting technology and the excessive
power consumed by the power management circuitry. The proposed technology
addresses the solar performance issues by including a low-power Maximum Power
Point Tracking (MPPT) algorithm to maximize solar collection efficiency under
variable lighting conditions. The patented technology reduces the power consumed
in the charging electronics by 60x over existing products. The solar power
solutions developed will minimize the charging time while meeting portable form-
factor requirements in both indoor and outdoor lighting conditions. The first
development phase will define specifications and develop system level
implementations for portable charging and standalone off-grid applications. In
the second phase, technologies used in the prototype systems will be integrated
into a single device to further reduce overall size and system costs. The final
product of this Phase II effort will be single-chip integrated power management
devices for portable charging applications and standalone autonomous off-grid
systems. These devices will deliver class-leading solar conversion efficiency
both indoors and outdoors, and have revolutionary power dissipation levels that
will enable new applications and markets that were not possible with products on
the market today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is to improve the environment, enable new markets, and provide
opportunities, jobs, and tax revenue. In the past, solar energy harvesting was
not taken seriously due to lack of flexibility and portability. Early solar
panels and harvesting electronics were too inefficient and expensive to be
useable, and remained a niche product. With advances in harvesting and charging
technologies, solar power can be used effectively in many consumer standalone
and portable applications. The proliferation of these efficient, cost-effective
solar and low-power solutions can reduce a system?s carbon footprint. Utilizing
this proposal?s technology and working closely with solar panel manufacturers,
solar charging and energy harvesting becomes a viable alternative to replaceable
batteries and grid-power. North American consumers use approximately 200,000
tons of cell batteries each year, 95% of which end up as waste. High-efficiency
solar rechargeable systems can reduce the amount of toxic battery waste that
ends up in neighborhood landfills. In addition to the positive environmental
impact, the technology enables new markets and growth in existing markets which
allows firms to grow and provide opportunities, jobs and more than an estimated
$1.5 million in federal income tax revenue over the next 5 years.