* 1230292
* Collaborative Research: The COnvective Precipitation Experiment- Microphysical and Entrainment Dependencies (COPE-MED)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Sonia Lasher-Trapp, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2015
* USD 476,602.00

The primary goal for the Convective Precipitation Experiment- Microphysics and
Entrainment Dependencies (COPE-MED) study is to investigate how changes in the
strength of the warm rain process acting directly, as well as through the
Hallet-Mossop process, impacts the amount, intensity and characteristics of
convective rainfall. Of equal interest is cumulus entrainment, factors
influencing its progression, and how it alters the effectiveness of both the
warm rain and Hallet-Mossop processes. The COPE-MED study includes: (i) a field
campaign to collect a unique data set; (ii) the novel application of data
analysis techniques designed to maximize the utility of the data; and (iii)
numerical simulations of the clouds, to complement the data analysis and
hypothesis-testing, and to develop improved representation of these processes in
numerical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COPE-MED field campaign is built
around the combination of remote sensing capabilities and in situ cloud physics
instrumentation on the University of Wyoming King Air research aircraft. These
capabilities will be used to observe, in detail, the microphysical and dynamic
structure of convective storms in their initial stages of development. COPE-MED
will take place within the broader context of COPE - a U.K. lead field campaign
scheduled from June through August, 2013 in Southwestern England. In this
geographical location, the cooler cloud bases, lower drop concentrations and
relatively predictable convective initiation along convergence lines provide an
ideal opportunity to sample developing cumuli as they progress from the warm
rain process into ice processes, and the influences of entrainment upon that
progression. The remotely-sensed and in-situ aircraft data will be analyzed
together with data collected from a COPE UK research aircraft as well as from
ground-based radars, radiosondes, aerosol instrumentation, and surface rain
gauges. The data will be analyzed in conjunction with high-resolution 3D
numerical simulations of the clouds, which can represent the different
microphysical pathways and the effects of entrainment, and provide information
on cloud features that are otherwise incapable of being sampled by the
aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel contributions from COPE-MED will
include technical development of the use of attenuation of the in-situ Wyoming
Cloud Radar signal by raindrops as a measure of the strength of the warm rain
process; the analysis of data collected from a suite of microphysical probes on
the aircraft, with post-processing algorithms designed to maximize information
and minimize ambiguity regarding quantification of the different water phases in
the cloud; and the first direct comparison of flow fields near cloud top derived
using dual-Doppler analysis with those from high-resolution cloud simulations,
with the purpose of studying entrainment features and improving its
representation in large-eddy simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merits:&lt;br/&gt;This research will collect a unique, multi-component data set
for the initial stages of convective precipitation development, increase
understanding of entrainment and microphysical interactions affecting convective
rainfall, and develop data analysis methods and improve cloud simulation models
that can be applied to many future studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The study will improve quantitative precipitation forecasting
(both by increasing basic knowledge as well as inspiring new microphysical
and/or entrainment parameterizations), advance in cloud seeding, and improved
prediction of the effects of aerosol and climate change upon clouds and
precipitation. Other broader impacts of the work include the education and
training of three graduate students and two postdocs in observational data
collection and analysis and/or numerical modeling of clouds, and their
introduction to numerous members of the international cloud physics community.