* 1230454
* SBIR Phase II:  Flexible Organic Circuits with Photolithography for eReader Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* John DeFranco, Orthogonal, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,951.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to quickly enable
the large-scale manufacturing of organic and flexible electronic devices by
leveraging the existing infrastructure used in the display industry. Currently,
proven manufacturing techniques do not exist that can make flexible electronics
at scale, and all proposed methods would require the abandonment of billions of
dollars of equipment and decades of manufacturing expertise based around
photolithography. This proposal aims to solve this problem, using photoresist
technology that is designed to work with a wide range of materials including
organic electronics. Previous research has established the feasibility of these
resists, but there is still much work needed to apply the technology to more
complex and integrated systems, especially when working with flexible
substrates. The Phase I project has revealed the areas of improvement needed to
reach mass production and high yields for demanding display applications. This
project will address these issues and will create a high-performance process
capable of making flexible eReaders with high yield. Researchers will work with
industrial and academic partners to gain a better understanding of all of the
issues required to be overcome as the process is scaled up to a real
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will be very large for the display industry, which seeks to
manufacture innovative flexible eReader displays for the large worldwide
education market. The broader commercial potential lies in the sales of high-
margin and high-volume chemicals to an industry that will quickly ramp
production. The photoresist market for liquid crystal displays (LCDs) is
currently $1.2 billion, and it is anticipated that the proposed technology will
dominate the organic electronic resist market, which is anticipated to reach
similar values. The societal benefits will be seen when the eReaders are brought
to classrooms around the world. Their low weight, low power consumption, and
physical robustness will allow these displays to fully replace heavy and
expensive textbooks, changing the lives of millions of children domestically,
and in developing countries such as China and Russia.