* 1230296
* SBIR Phase II:  Single-Channel Stationary/Non-Stationary Speech Extraction for Mobile Phones
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Amit Juneja, OmniSpeech
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,096,090.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
problem of everyday noisy environments that limit when and where people can be
heard clearly over various communication devices (phones, first-responder
radios, voice-over-IP, etc.). Given the inability of single-microphone noise-
reduction techniques to handle non-stationary noise (e.g. restaurant noise) the
industry's current solution is the use of dual-microphone techniques. However,
dual-microphone techniques cost more, require more hardware, need spatial
separation between the noise and speech, and can only process the signal on the
transmit side. The proposed technology is a single-microphone software-only
solution that effectively handles non-stationary noise coming from any direction
and can process the signal on both the transmit and receive sides. The novelty
of the approach is its use of speech-specific characteristics and knowledge of
human perception to extract speech from the noisy signal. The objective of the
proposed research is to improve the current method of detecting voice activity,
enabling better speech extraction thereby resulting in enhanced speech quality.
The resulting technology will be architecture agnostic, cost effective and have
superior performance in everyday situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is considerable and compelling. The
initial focus will be the mobile phone industry, which is now the single largest
user of noise suppression products with a market size that includes nearly all
of humanity. The technology will then be optimized to improve the listening
experience for hundreds of millions of potential hearing-aid/cochlear implant
users worldwide. According to the World Health Organization, there are 278
million people worldwide that have hearing loss. This number is expected to at
least double over the next 30 years due to the growth in the number of senior
citizens over 65 years of age and the growth in the number of younger people who
are needing hearing aids 20 years sooner than their parents due to loud-music
listening habits. Additional markets include first-responder radios, voice-over-
IP and military/intelligence/homeland-security. The research required to reduce
computational complexity will illuminate the essential aspects of auditory scene
analysis needed for improved speech perception.