* 1230929
* SEP Collaborative: Routes to Earth Abundant Kesterite-based Thin Film Photovoltaic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Timothy Anderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,010,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Timothy Anderson and co-workers at the
University of Florida, Prof. Zi-Kui Liu and co-workers at Pennsylvania State
University, and Prof. Angus Rockett and co-workers at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign to develop new Earth abundent-based thin film photovoltaic
materials. The use of Earth abundent materials is required for a sustainable
energy pathway that includes significant photovoltaic (PV) electricity
generation capacity. The recent demonstration of a 10.1% efficient cell using
earth abundant Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1-x)4 (CZTSe) has elevated this absorber to one of
the most promising sustainable material for high penetration PV. Developing a
fundamental knowledge of the material properties of CZTS is needed to underpin
its rapid development. The aim of this program is to define a self-consistent
framework that describes the thermochemistry and reaction kinetics for the
CZTSSe system. This framework can then inspire intelligent process innovation,
for example, rapid CZTSSe synthesis pathways, precursor structures defining
optimal Se distribution, or processing conditions minimizing bulk recombination
centers. The CALculation of PHAse Diagram (CALPHAD) approach will be used to
assess experimental data in the literature, supplemented by first-principles
calculations of unknown thermochemical properties, to produce a full description
of the thermodynamic properties of this 5-component system. The assessment will
also provide insight into the point defect chemistry necessary to link
processing conditions to device performance. Reaction pathways will be
investigated using high temperature X-ray diffraction (HTXRD) experiments
coupled with materials characterization and first-principles calculations to
assist in creating a species mobility database for this earth abundant system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant adoption of sustainable PV would clearly have
a tremendous global impact. The greatest benefits accrue to the &gt;1 billion
people without reliable or any access to electricity. Two programs are proposed
to facilitate bringing PV to those areas. An economist with considerable
expertise in electricity generation in developing countries will conduct
economic and behavioral studies to better understand the barriers to PV
deployment in the developing world. This activity will be complemented by
engaging undergraduate multidisciplinary capstone design teams to define
affordable and reliable individual PV systems, while collaborating with PV
manufacturers. Each PhD student will participate in an internship at one of our
collaborating national labs as well as engage an undergraduate student in their
research. The team also has an interest in new faculty development. A workshop
designed to help new faculty start quickly, now being taught to new and
prospective chemical engineer faculty, will be adapted for the chemistry and
materials science communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, solar energy is
the principal source of our energy, producing our fossil fuels, biomass, wind,
and solar thermal resources, and of course, electricity by direct conversion
using a solar cell. The cost of solar panels is decreasing rapidly as we learn
how to manufacture more efficient panels at large scale. Indeed the historical
price has decreased 22% every time the installed world capacity doubles, and
they are now providing electricity that is less than the retail cost of
electricity in many parts of the world. The installed capacity of solar panels
world-wide, however, is very small percentage of the total production (&lt;1%).
The panel manufacturing cost is mainly in the cost of the materials and building
the manufacturing plant. At high deployment of solar panels, the limited
supply/high cost of some elements will prohibit their use. This research will
focus on solar cells using the earth abundant elements copper, zinc, tin, sulfur
and a possibly selenium to ensure cheap materials cost. The rate of
manufacturing thin film solar cells is normally limited by the rate to form the
compound that absorbs the light. This program aims to understand how to make
these materials at very high rates. Higher rates translate into higher
throughput of cells, and thus more output for a manufacturing plant.