* 1230246
* SEP: Earth-abundant thin-film solar cells as a sustainable solar energy pathway
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Jiquan Chen, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Yanfa Yan and co-workers at the University
of Toledo. The highly multi-disciplinary research team consists of experts in
physics, materials science, engineering, chemistry, socioeconomics,
environmental science, and education. The objective of the project is to develop
the concepts, materials, and processes necessary to economically produce
environmentally friendly thin-film solar cells from earth-abundant,
environmentally benign (EAEB) materials including FeS2, Cu2S, CuO, Zn3P2 and
Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS). To achieve high efficiency EAEB solar cells, the research team
proposes two new concepts: (1) a bulk homojunction for EAEB inorganic materials
that have low carrier mobility and low structural stability (e.g., for FeS2,
Cu2S, and CuO) and (2) a hetero-homo dual-junction (HHDJ) for Zn3P2- and CZTS-
based thin-film solar cells. The bulk homojunction concept will be realized by
assembling nanocrystals (NCs) with surfaces that will be carefully engineered to
contain cation-rich domains. Upon assembly, the NCs will form a three-
dimensional interconnected network of electron and hole channels that can
facilitate charge separation and transfer with minimal efficiency-robbing
recombination due to the homojunction topology. The HHDJ will be achieved by
accurate control of the junction chemistry using dedicated physical vapor
deposition systems with in situ monitoring, including real-time electron impact
emission spectroscopy and real-time spectroscopic ellipsometry. The HHDJ concept
combines the benefits of the heterojunction and the homojunction: the
homojunction minimizes efficiency-robbing recombination while the heterojunction
enhances the charge separation and transfer, leading to optimal solar cell
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will concomitantly develop
and analyze the sustainability of our new solar cell systems and manufacturing
processes through life cycle tools where life cycle costing (LCC), environmental
life cycle assessment (LCA), and social life cycle assessment (SLCA) will be
developed simultaneously to create a comprehensive life cycle sustainability
assessment (LCSA). To implement LCSA, a new dynamic approach will be used
whereby different scenarios will be iteratively modeled to identify the specific
interactions of the parameters and, ultimately, the most sustainable scenarios.
To address education/workforce development, the research team will target
critical educational goals for students at all levels. The research team will
also employ an integrative approach wherein students from widely varying
backgrounds and fields of expertise will work together to solve complex real
world problems. This approach will further reinforce synergy, broaden
educational goals, and build a true team philosophy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will yield at least two scientific impacts: (1) a thorough understanding
of the fundamental science and engineering issues that are critical for
realizing a sustainable solar energy pathway using non-toxic and earth-abundant
materials, and (2) new science and education paradigms for designing
economically, environmentally, and socially sustainable renewable energy and,
specifically, solar electricity pathways. By directly integrating the needs of
society and industry in developing the materials and engineering technology,
this project should serve as a transformational model for the sustainable
development of new renewable energy technologies.