* 1230034
* EAGER: Advanced Wireless Communication Concepts Applied to Optical Fibers
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Seth Bank, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 09/30/2013
* USD 120,000.00

We seek to investigate the application of advanced signaling and processing
concepts, which have been developed for wireless communication, to multimode
fiber-optic transmission systems. Traditionally, the maximum achievable data
rate is limited by the distance-bandwidth product of the fiber; however,
multiple-input multiple output signaling enables significant increases in
bandwidth, by trading the fundamental limitations of dispersion for a
computational exercise that that is well-understood. Our preliminary
experimental results exceed what is achievable with traditional modulation
schemes by over 24-fold, with the potential for orders of magnitude in
additional performance, particularly with regard to bit-error-rate. In this
program, we seek to expand our experimental and theoretical understanding of
this new field by (1) building a low-cost, scalable, testbed using off-the-shelf
components and (2) developing a complete theoretical framework.&lt;br/&gt;The
potential for greatly enhancing the bandwidth of low-cost optical links is
particularly compelling for data centers as they rely on multimode fiber links
at the rack-to-rack and board-to-board level. A method to greatly increase the
achievable bandwidths and reduce the energy-per-bit penalty would be truly
enabling. There are also substantial pre-existing deployments of multimode fiber
in local area networks across the nation. Due to higher component costs, it is
cost-prohibitive in many cases to replace this multimode infrastructure with
single-mode fiber networks, as a means to meet future bandwidth demands. Using
our approach, the bandwidth of such systems can be upgraded without resorting to
single-mode fibers. Additionally, future drive-by-light, fly-by-light, and
optical shipboard systems could also be enabled with this approach; such systems
are attractive because of the potential to greatly reduce size, weight, power,
and sensitivity to electromagnetic interference, as compared with conventional
electrical signaling. &lt;br/&gt;We believe that this effort is ideally suited
to an EAGER because (1) the goals can be achieved rapidly and at moderately low
cost; (2) it is a dramatic departure from conventional fiber-optic communication
approaches with many fundamental questions remaining, rendering it virtually
impossible to obtain funding through conventional mechanisms; (3) the effort is
highly interdisciplinary (e.g. PI Bank is a photonic device and materials
engineer, while Co-PI Vishwanath is an information theorist); and (4) upon
answering the aforementioned questions, this approach can readily transition to
more conventional funding mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
The intellectual merit lies in advancing the theoretical underpinnings and
experimental findings associated with the application of wireless communication
approaches to multimode fibers. To this end, we will develop a framework for
modeling multiple-input multiple-output communication over multimode fiber. This
analysis will merge tools from information theory and statistical signal
processing with those from photonics. There is limited work at the intersection
of these disciplines and our efforts will make significant inroads into
developing a comprehensive framework for characterizing the fundamental limits
of multimode fiber communications. We will leverage this theory to design novel
devices that are ideally suited to harnessing the potential benefits of
multiple-input multiple-output strategies. We will also construct a system
testbed using off-the-shelf-components, to study how performance scales with the
number of transmitters and receivers, providing valuable feedback to the
theoretical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. At the conclusion of
this effort, we expect to demonstrate truly enabling capabilities in optical
fiber communications, with myriad potential new applications. In addition to our
research findings, which will be disseminated through journal publications and
conference talks, we also seek to engage students at the high school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels on the concepts and implications of optical
fiber communication systems, their underlying foundations, and the importance of
rigorous validation and evaluation. To this end, the PIs will develop
presentations and demonstrations to engage high school students and teachers
across Texas, through mechanisms including UT-Austin?s Edison Lecture Series,
Summer Nanoscience Academy, and UTeach. We will also develop new undergraduate
research projects on optical communications, to enhance the offerings of the
NSF-REU site EURECA, directed by co-PI Vishwanath. This program targets
participants from underrepresented groups enrolled at universities across the
state of Texas. Additionally, as part of the team?s commitment to the nation?s
student community, lectures generated by the PIs will be converted into course
modules and made available online through The University of Texas? World Lecture
Hall website.