* 1230766
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Translation in Conservation and Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* J Brosius, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 17,998.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports doctoral dissertation
research that explores the challenges created by differing perceptions of the
meaning and use of conservation terminology for planning and implementing
effective and equitable conservation and development projects. The two central
questions are the following. How does the movement and transformation of key
terms enable or impede coordinated conservation efforts? How does this process
influence whose voices are heard, whose goals are articulated and who wins and
who loses when decisions are made? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research adopts a mixed-methods approach
including participant observation at key meetings, interviews, social network
analysis, content analysis, and discourse analysis. These methods will be used
to trace the movement and transformation of the key terms sustainable
development, ecosystem services, and carbon sequestration as they travel through
networks of actors engaging with Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Forest Degradation in the United States and Peru. The approach will serve to
integrate the work of post-colonial scholars regarding language with political
ecology, while simultaneously addressing the need to consider the national and
international scales of conservation and development decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this project could have broad practical implications including the
promotion of constructive engagement with transnational NGOs, the training of a
Peruvian research assistant, and publications in Peruvian journals. The
increasingly global nature of conservation and development priority setting
necessitates a strong understanding of how the politics of translation
influences the ability of different sets of actors to effectively engage with
and participate in conservation and development initiatives. This research will
aid transnational NGOs in developing more effective conservation initiatives
that better integrate global conservation priorities with local needs.