* 1230442
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Molten Salt for Solar Thermal Power Generation with Supercritical Steam Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Justin Raade, Halotechnics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a novel molten salt for solar thermal power generation with
supercritical steam turbines. Solar thermal technology developers must increase
the operating temperature of their plants to lower their levelized cost of
electricity and reduce the cost of thermal storage. Building upon a successful
Phase I program, the project team has developed a prototype salt mixture that
could enable this trend. It is low cost, exhibits a melting point below 240 deg.
C, and has a high maximum temperature of 700 deg. C, a broad operating range
currently unavailable elsewhere. The project will conduct a high throughput
R&amp;D program to rapidly screen up to thousands of unique mixtures of
inorganic salts to optimize the physical properties of the prototype fluid. The
project will apply combinatorial chemistry techniques, originally developed for
pharmaceutical applications, to this new field. After screening many candidates,
the project will evaluate the materials compatibility of a few promising
mixtures with common steel and nickel-based alloys. Corrosion mitigation
techniques will be developed and evaluated. The project will conduct flow
testing in a lab-scale test loop capable of 700 deg. C
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be the enabling of low-cost electricity from the sun. It is
imperative that society reduce its usage of fossil fuels (oil, natural gas,
coal) to address pressing concerns - climate change and environmental
degradation, energy security, and price volatility. Solar thermal power, a
compelling source of renewable electricity at large scale, is the most promising
solution to reduce fossil fuel use. However, electricity from solar thermal
power currently costs too much to be directly competitive with fossil fuels.
Furthermore, solar thermal plants need a cheap way to store heat in order to
produce power after sundown or when utilities demand it. This project focuses on
the material at the heart of these plants - the heat transfer fluid - and
thermal storage system. The market for thermal storage is projected to reach
$3.7 billion by 2015. Thermal storage is growing increasingly valuable as
utilities realize the need for solar power that can deliver smooth, reliable
output regardless of weather conditions. The development of the proposed
innovation would both reduce the cost of solar thermal power and enable
economical thermal storage, bringing the nation significantly closer to
eliminating the use of coal.