* 1230426
* SEP: Sustainability of Tidal Energy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lekelia Jenkins, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Brain Polagye and co-workers at the
University of Washington to investigate amnd develop a sustainable energy
pathway based on tidal energy. Tidal hydrokinetic energy is the energy in the
currents associated with the rise and fall of ocean tides. Interest in tidal
energy development is driven by three aspects of the resource: it is renewable,
predictable, and concentrated. However, a renewable resource is a necessary, but
not sufficient condition for sustainable power generation. At present, the tools
to assess large-scale, sustainable utilization of tidal energy are
underdeveloped, and a comprehensive synthesis of pilot project results has not
been completed. The objective of this project is to improve the understanding of
tidal energy systems and to develop tools that will enable a sustainable pathway
for tidal energy. Sustainable, large-scale tidal energy development will need to
balance the benefits of renewable power generation against environmental and
societal costs. This balance can be, in part, informed by scenario analyses that
scale up information gained from pilot projects. Currently, frameworks to
implement effective scenario analysis are undermined by broad technical,
environmental, and social uncertainties. This project will integrate fundamental
research from energy engineering, ocean sciences, and social sciences to
evaluate large-scale tidal energy sustainability. In doing so, the trade-offs
between technological, environmental, and societal costs will be identified and
quantified. Research will focus on high-priority knowledge gaps and apply the
results to scenario-based analyses including technical ones: multi-turbine array
performance; assimilation between oceanographic and detailed array models;
environmental ones: turbine noise; fisheries interactions; energy removal at
estuarine scale; and social ones: public values and perception; anticipatory
governance.

The post-doctoral and graduate researchers engaged in this work are integral to
developing an interdisciplinary workforce capable of extending the proposed
framework to tidal energy applications and to other sustainability challenges.
Their professional development will involve direct engagement in all facets of
the research, and they will participate in the annual, international symposium
hosted by the International Network for Offshore Renewable Energy.

While tidal energy development has been accelerated by adapting technologies
from the wind and offshore oil and gas industries, technology convergence has
been limited for the devices intended to harness the power in tidal currents. A
wide range of competing design options and array layouts have been proposed for
large-scale development. This breadth of approaches provides a window of
opportunity for environmental and social information from early-stage projects
to influence future technology convergence. Through iterative, scenario-based
analysis this research will demonstrate that, once fundamental knowledge gaps
are addressed, environmental and social information can be incorporated into
engineering decisions to reduce the economic, environmental, and societal costs
associated with large-scale tidal energy development. This has the potential to
fundamentally alter the pathway towards technology convergence and public
perceptions of marine renewable energy sustainability.