* 1230440
* SBIR Phase II:  Biomolecular Detection of microRNA
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Masoud Toloue, Bioo Scientific Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 516,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project examines high
throughput methods to quantify intacellular microRNA (miRNA) concentrations in
cells that have shown to be associated with normal physiological processes, as
well as diseases, including cancer. Currently there are no rapid, quantitative
methods available to measure miRNA expression in living cells or tumor tissue.
All current in vitro approaches require extensive preparation involving
extraction, reverse transcription of miRNA into cDNA and amplification. These
methods are not only time consuming, but require that the low abundance miRNA be
several fold greater than background to give a meaningful result. To meet the
demand for a diagnostic/prognostic tool, development of a biomolecular detection
device is proposed based on a single electron transistor to bind and measure the
concentration of miRNAs. This will provide a researcher or clinician an accurate
profile to make proper clinical assessments. Bringing this device to market will
provide scientists with direct information on intracellular miRNA levels,
enhancing predictions of miRNAs that are essential for tumor maintenance or
metastasis, and creating new diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities.

The broader impact of this project will be to enhance current diagnostic and
prognostic tools for early detection of disease. Today, early cancer detection
and treatment offers the best outcome for patients. This has driven the search
for effective diagnostics. The identification of a universal tumor specific
epitope or marker has remained elusive. While many types of serological and
serum markers have included enzymes, proteins, hormones, mucin, and blood group
substances, at this time there are no effective diagnostic tests for cancer that
are highly specific, sensitive, economical and rapid. This deficiency means that
many cases of malignancy go undetected long past the time of effective
treatment. The goal of this research is to bring a device to market for the
research market and a device that can examine miRNA profiles from patient
samples immediately in a hospital or clinical setting. The current size of the
in vitro diagnostic market was over $40 billion in 2008. Unique diagnostic kits
developed from this technology will likely fulfill an unmet market opportunity
with the potential to exceed $100 million in the first 3 - 5 years.