* 1230603
* RCN-SEES: Coordinating Phosphorus Research to Create a Sustainable Food System
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* James Elser, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

Steering Committee: James Elser, Rimjhim Aggarwal, and Helen Rowe at Arizona
State University;&lt;br/&gt;Tauhidur Rahman, University of Arizona; David
Vaccari, Stephens Institute of Technology; Anita&lt;br/&gt;Street, US Department
of Energy; Robert Mikkelsen, International Plant Nutrition
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Phosphorus (P) is an
essential element to life and, with few exceptions, a
necessary&lt;br/&gt;fertilizer for high agricultural yield. Because P cannot be
manufactured and global supply is limited,&lt;br/&gt;this chemical element poses
a unique, double-sided threat to sustainability. P scarcity leads
to&lt;br/&gt;high prices and poverty for poor farmers in developing countries,
but in industrialized nations, excess&lt;br/&gt;P from farms and in urban waste
streams degrades downstream water quality. The issues surrounding&lt;br/&gt;P
sustainability are deeply complex and involve diverse geological,
biogeochemical, economic, and&lt;br/&gt;geopolitical dimensions that are
currently unconsolidated. Environmental degradation due to
nutrient&lt;br/&gt;runoff and potential threats to global food security urgently
call for an end to this disjointed approach&lt;br/&gt;to phosphorus. The goal of
the P Sustainability Research Coordination Network (RCN) is to spark
an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary synthesis of data, perspectives, and
understanding about phosphorus to identify and&lt;br/&gt;implement solutions for
P sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCN theme, objectives, and initial
topics build upon broad agreement on key P sustainability&lt;br/&gt;challenges
reached at a recent Sustainable P Summit (SPS) led by James Elser and colleague
Dan Childers.&lt;br/&gt;The RCN will involve two phases centered on three
Challenge Areas. Phase I groups will work&lt;br/&gt;on two Challenges: (1)
Improving P efficiency in food production; (2) Developing robust
pathways&lt;br/&gt;of P recycling. At the Kick-off Workshop, identified Core
Members will develop Working Groups&lt;br/&gt;centered around these challenge
areas. These Groups will be further populated with At-Large
Members&lt;br/&gt;recruited through a widely advertised application process that
will allow us to target qualified&lt;br/&gt;graduate students, postdocs, and
members of under-represented groups. In Year 3, a Synthesis
Workshop&lt;br/&gt;will report on the science and solution outcomes from Phase I
and develop new Phase II Working&lt;br/&gt;Groups focused on Challenge 3:
Integrating efficiency and recycling to create a sustainable food
system.&lt;br/&gt;A Wrap-up Workshop, held early in Year 5, will be held to
report on science and solution outcomes&lt;br/&gt;from Phase II and provide the
push to finalize outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Central to the
P Sustainability RCN will be recruitment of a diverse network
of&lt;br/&gt;participants of different professions, ranks, genders, races,
ethnicities, and nationalities. The Steering&lt;br/&gt;Committee will reflect
this diversity, including three students in ex officio capacity, giving them
invaluable&lt;br/&gt;experience in leadership, networking, collaborative
science, and policy. To communicate key&lt;br/&gt;aspects of RCN work, we will
produce two dynamic, high-quality videos to reach targeted audiences
of&lt;br/&gt;farmers, educators, fertilizer industry, and policy makers. The
three RCN Workshops will be held in&lt;br/&gt;Washington DC in order to
facilitate participation by policy makers, government officials,
representatives&lt;br/&gt;of agriculture and the fertilizer industry, and urban
planners with the aim of developing research priorities&lt;br/&gt;for the RCN,
presenting outcomes and planning implementation of sustainability solutions.