* 1230851
* I/UCRC:  Characterization and Bioengineering of Optogenetic Rhodopsins
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 12/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

Program Director's Recommendation Center for Biophotonic Sensors and Systems
(CBSS) Proposal # 1230851 Thomas Bifano

This proposal seeks funding for the Center forBiophotonic Sensors and Systems
located at Boston University. Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are
authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570. The solicitation invites
I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental
research.

Recent developments in membrane biophysics, neurophysiology and molecular
biology have provided the catalyst for the birth of a new field termed
"optogenetics". Optogenetics relies on the expression of several unusual
microbial rhodopsins in the neuronal membrane including channelrhodopsin (ChR)
for light activating nerves and Archaerhodopsin (AR3) for light silencing
nerves. There is a need to understand the molecular mechanisms of these proteins
followed by bottoms-up bioengineering to circumvent current limitations. This
project will focus on application of a set of powerful spectroscopic and
biomolecular engineering techniques developed at Boston University (BU) and UC
Davis. The project involves close collaboration with several industry partners
and a team of leading experts in optogenetics and rhodopsins from BU, UC Davis,
MIT, Harvard and the University of Texas.

Impact of the proposed project includes potentially transformative approaches to
study brain function, treatment for brain disorders and restoring vision for
retinal degenerative diseases. The deliverables from this project are: (1)
Improved versions of ChR and AR3 with red-shifted visible absorbance, improved
dynamics and improved voltage response, and (2) Document product requirements
for optogenetic research tools and product vision. The industry support of the
I/UCRC and active participation in this research program enhances the graduate
educational experience by providing a pipeline for talented engineers and
scientist to industry. BU's commitment to develop the academic potential of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields will be further enhanced by offering
industrial career options, informal mentorships and internships with the I/UCRC
partners.