* 1230794
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: Constructing Spaceship Earth: UN Scientists and the Cold War Origins of Sustainable Development
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Perrin Selcer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 12/31/2013
* USD 75,000.00

This study investigates a key problem in the field of science and technology
studies: how and why transnational expert communities create global scientific
knowledge, and with what consequences. To do so, the study examines how the idea
of global sustainable development became a vital concern for scientists,
activists, and politicians during the quarter-century following World War II.
Based on multinational archival research, including records at the United
Nations (UN), it investigates international social and environmental scientific
projects coordinated by UN agencies to analyze the development of a
transnational community of experts united by shared values, norms, and practices
that came to be known as sustainable development. By studying scientific
projects affiliated with UN agencies, the key role of technical experts in the
transition from an imperial to an international world order is illuminated. The
study enriches understanding of the reciprocal relationship between values and
science, demonstrating that for post-war internationalist scientists, the
objective of basic research was to cultivate a world community of shared values.
More broadly, this research contributes social and historical understanding of
how expertise and democracy can be reconciled during periods of
globalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study trains a postdoctoral researcher,
creates new course materials, and create academic publications that illuminates
the postwar origins of the divide between a transnational community of experts
that seeks solutions to local and national problems in further political and
economic global integration, and publics who often feel alienated by the
apparently irresistible forces of globalization.