* 1230456
* STTR Phase II:  Low-cost Nanostructured Anti-reflection Coatings for Solar Energy Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,11/30/2016
* Paul Ahrens, CSD Nano, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2016
* USD 848,819.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
optimize and demonstrate the scale-up of nanostructured anti-reflective coatings
(ARCs) to meet the specifications of solar energy customers using high-
performance processes along with a novel solution-phase synthesis and deposition
microreactor. Results from Phase I and industrial partner input demonstrate that
the nanostructured ARC has an optical performance that far exceeds existing
industry solutions, with a low reflectance across a broad wavelength spectrum.
The intellectual merits are not limited to a single discovery, but a series of
breakthroughs will will allow this low-cost, industry-compatible ARC solution to
satisfy the solar industry's need for increasing efficiency. This is
accomplished by leveraging the nanostructure's properties of incremental change
in the refractive index as light waves pass through the coating structure (i.e.
gradient surfaces) and an environmentally benign, low-cost microreactor
technology that can be integrated with existing industry
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project concerns an enabling competitive advantage for glass and solar module
manufacturers, which will also drive government initiatives for low-cost solar
energy. The anti-reflective coating being developed focuses on increasing solar
module efficiency by providing a low-cost method to reduce light reflection from
solar modules. The International Technology Roadmap for PV (ITRPV) calls for a
reduction in front-side module reflection from 4% to 2% in 2013 and reduction
from 2% to 0.5% by 2017. The proposed ARC can reduce front surface reflection
from 4% (bare glass) to less than 0.5%, beating the ITRPV roadmap by five years.
The increase in light reaching the solar cells will enhance electricity output
and decrease balance-of-system (BOS) costs. This performance and cost advantage
creates significant commercial opportunities in the solar module value chain.
This innovation has the potential to capitalize on the estimated 2011 $4.6
billion thin-film photovoltaic (PV) market, for which production is expected to
grow at a 30% annual rate through 2016.