* 1230320
* SBIR Phase II:  Mixed Oxide Sulfur-Tolerant Water Gas Shift Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Chris Holt, PH Matter, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2015
* USD 607,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will focus on the
refinement of catalyst compositions identified during the Phase I program for
production of fuels from biomass. New catalyst materials are needed to make
liquid fuels and hydrogen from biomass more economical and efficient. In this
Phase II project a scalable synthesis method will be utilized to prepare 1kg/day
batches of high surface area catalysts with proprietary additives to improve low
temperature shift activity. During the Phase II research, pH Matter will
demonstrate the performance of the novel catalyst compositions under additional
customer-specific gas feed environments and demonstrate a method for scaling up
the catalyst synthesis process for delivery to BTL system developers and
commercial catalyst manufacturers. The end goal is production of catalysts and
generation of performance data demonstrating that the catalyst can operate in
the full range of contaminants found in biomass sources,reducing the cost and
improving the efficiency of fuel production from
biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is potentially quite large. The production of energy and liquid fuels
from biomass will have a number of beneficial societal impacts. Biomass
gasification processes are carbon neutral, since it uses C0 2 that was captured
from plants; therefore, biomass gasification will replace energy production from
fossil fuels, thus reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Unlike fuel crops, biomass
can be garnered from second generation sources like waste products that have no
use for human consumption, so the technology does not compete with food sources.
Further,using biomass as a source of liquid fuel will reduce the dependence of
our nation on foreign sources of energy. The technology developed and refined
during the Phase II NSF SBIR program could have application to a wide range of
other catalytic reactions as well. Potential applications include: lean burn
diesel engine exhaust treatment,hydrocarbon reforming for fuel cells, electrode
materials in fuel cells,and gas-to-liquid processes. Overall,the project will
contribute novel results to the body of literature in catalysis and materials
development.