* 1230848
* SEP Collaborative: Integrating Heterogeneous Energy Resources for Sustainable Power Networks - A Systems Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Aranya Chakrabortty, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Dennice Gayme and co-workers at Johns
Hopkins University, Prof. Aranya Chakrabortty and co-workers at North Carolina
State University, and Prof. Judith cardell and co-workers at Smith College to
develop a method to integrate heterogeneous energy resources to form sustainable
power networks. The objective of this program is to examine how the control and
design of large-scale and distributed energy resources can facilitate the grid-
integration of large amounts of renewable energy. Wind energy is used as a
representative, heterogeneous and variable renewable energy source to address
the following three fundamental challenges: (I) the need to manage stability,
(II) the need to cost effectively maintain reliable operation, and (III) the
need to reflect stability and operational criteria in markets and policy. Models
of the power grid, such as continuum representations (partial differential
equations that directly support combined spatial and temporal analysis) and
network power flows that include storage and demand-side management, will be
developed and used to address stability, control, reliability, and
performance/efficiency questions. As input for these continuum and power flow
models, the project will utilize outputs from fluid dynamics ("Large-Eddy")
simulations that model unsteady wind farm and atmospheric boundary layer
interactions and have been validated using laboratory and field observations.
Analysis using the grid level models will both inform and be shaped by the
design of new regulatory and economic reforms that will enable renewable
resource purveyors to participate in power markets. Connections between
operational and market issues such as power flow regulation, grid operation and
risk mitigation strategies using storage and demand-side management will be made
by leveraging tools based on optimization, convex relaxations and optimal
control theory, which are common to the economics and controls communities.

This project will facilitate a more sustainable power system through its
technical contributions, education, training and mentorship. Research topics
will form the basis for student projects in new sustainable energy related
curricula at all three participating institutions. Summer undergraduate research
opportunities will provide students with skills for participating in sustainable
energy research and future employment in related industries. This program will
directly facilitate NSF's STEM related goals through JHU's participation in the
NSF-funded Center for Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL),
the Science House partnership between NCSU and local K-12 teachers, and the
involvement of the only all-women engineering program in the US (Smith College).
At JHU this project will operate under the aegis of E2SHI, which promotes cross-
disciplinary research, outreach, and education for critical environmental,
energy and sustainability issues. E2SHI is committed to systems-level integrated
research and outreach for sustainability.

The tools to be developed will help facilitate the transformation of our current
fossil fuel based power system to one that is safe, reliable and efficient
without compromising energy security or exhausting resources needed for future
generations. The project's results will be directly relevant to the electric
power industry and its regulators as they are faced with the challenges of
incorporating larger fractions of highly heterogeneous renewable resources, such
as wind energy, into the grid. Specifically, the results will provide system
operators with better representations of the impacts of renewables, and better
control tools to mitigate those impacts; planners and investors with a framework
for evaluating optimal resource allocation; and policy makers with a systematic
means of investigating how new regulations and market rules can incent effective
deployment of these tools and resources. Complementary educational programs and
mentorship will develop researchers and practitioners with the skills required
to create and advance this sustainable energy future.