* 1230860
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Construction & Circulation of Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Music Technology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Ana Ochoa, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

Introduction

This project examines the practices of musician-inventors in Berlin, Germany who
build and modify musical equipment. Specifically, it is an ethnographic study of
how networks of Do-It-Yourself (DIY) music technologists are formed and how
their structures, ideas, and building processes contribute to larger discourses
about the invention, use, and repurposing of technologies. The research will
bring together interdisciplinary approaches to music, technology, and society
with new participant observation, interviews, and data collection. The
overarching purpose is to provide a cogent account of independent innovation in
contemporary sonic arts. DIY music technologists and the objects they create are
entwined in socio-technical systems from which many paths and outcomes have yet
to be explained. The central research question here is to determine how sound
technologies, creativity, and knowledge production are linked and potentially
transformed through the DIY process.

Intellectual Merit

This study investigates where the contemporary DIY ethos fits within the
historical trajectory of hobbyism, amateurism, sound recording and production,
and artistic and technological innovation, establishing what is unique about
this specific, post-internet, post-globalization juncture. The topic probes the
real-world usefulness of notions such as expertise, knowledge production, and
innovation, as well as questioning barriers to access and education about
technology. Viewing DIY music technology through the frameworks of Hacking and
Folk Technology can contextualize this phenomenon within a broad range and scale
of participating communities, revealing insights into human-technology
interaction.

Potential Broader Impacts

The research may have broad implications for issues of circulation, access, and
agency worldwide, as both non-Western metropolitan sites and increasingly
connected rural sites share and create new modes of social interaction involving
sound and technology. This new comparative study in Berlin complements a prior
three years of research in New York City and ideally precedes further fieldwork
in non-Western settings as part of the researcher?s long-term commitment to
exploring nontraditional partnerships for connecting technology with the arts.
Ultimately, the project aims to provide an entry point for understanding
technologies in various geographical regions and contexts.