* 1230427
* SBIR Phase II:  Towards Precision Ultra-Portable 13C/12C CO2 Atmospheric Isotopic Ratio Monitors Using Quantum Cascade Laser Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Stephen So, The Laser Sensing Company
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2015
* USD 707,968.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
robust, ultra-portable CO2 isotope ratio sensor. Typically, portable sensors
cannot provide good sensitivity and accuracy. Sensors which do provide adequate
sensitivity and accuracy are bulky, power hungry, high maintenance, and require
a controlled operational environment. This is especially true for existing CO2
13/12C isotope ratio sensors, which require hundreds of watts of power. Portable
13/12C sensors are critical to enable new applications including remote sensor
network CO2 sequestration monitoring, environmental carbon cycle measurements,
and medical breath analysis. Novel technology using quantum cascade lasers and
the latest compact optical cells can provide a compact, power efficient,
sensitive, and accurate sensor platform for gas sensing. The research objectives
for this project aim to break the tradeoff between power consumption,
sensitivity, complexity, and size. This project targets the development of a
robust, field-deployable, outdoor sensor, and verifies its performance against
existing methods of measuring CO2 isotope ratio. The realization of the final
product will deliver a portable 13/12C isotope ratio laser spectrometer that
operates in harsh environments using less than 15 Watts of power.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project deals with enhancing
environmental monitoring by: 1) Enabling more precise measurements of carbon
sources and sinks to improve climate science; 2) Providing a map of real-time
carbon emission which is useful for research, policy, and education; 3)
Providing real-time, long-term remote carbon measurements for carbon trading
markets; 4) Enabling extremely sensitive leak detection of CO2 in carbon capture
and sequestration applications without the significant cost of mobile laboratory
infrastructure. A more powerful set of gas sensors such as the ones developed
through this project will dramatically lower the great expense currently
required to precisely monitor greenhouse gases and air pollution, a critical
global concern. Data generated by such carbon isotope ratio sensors will answer
many critical questions related to the human impact of burning fossil fuels on
the environment. These types of sensors will also simultaneously impact
industrial and medical fields, providing new solutions for industrial process
control and safety, and portable real-time medical breath analyzers.