* 1230435
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing Design for Social Acceptance: A new methodology incorporating social acceptability in the design of assistive devices
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kristen Shinohara, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Assistive technologies can negatively impact social interactions for people with
disabilities. As a result, device abandoment can occur. This problem may be
remedied by drawing on social science studies of the social impacts and
development of technologies. Using a multi-method social scientific approach,
this research (1) investigates the intersection of people, technology, and
context to understand how assistive technologies may make users feel self-
conscious; (2) determines what elements of design may be deemed socially
acceptable; and (3) develops a new approach, Design for Social Acceptance, for
creating assistive technologies that embody social acceptability. To do so, the
investigators use interviews, observations, and participatory design with people
with disabilities using assistive technologies, focusing on how design affects
social interactions. Participatory design workshops may provide opportunities to
work closely with people with disabilities to develop design practices that can
be used to create socially acceptable assistive technologies. Findings from this
study contribute to the field of science, technology, and society by providing a
systematic understanding of the relationship between stigma and technology, and
how that problem can be overcome. The study also contributes to understandings
of the intersection of people with disabilities, the technologies they use, and
the social interactions in which they engage.

The broader impacts of this research are (1) an increased ability for people
with disabilities to participate in technology design, engineering, and testing;
(2) a greater awareness of how assistive devices can be designed to meet the
social needs of users with disabilities; and (3) establishing a new assistive
technology design approach that may be adopted into existing design and
engineering processes. Findings are disseminated through a doctoral
dissertation. The course component of the study--where design students will work
on projects by using the methodology--can shape student design sensibilities and
influence their future design work. Finally, the research project broadens the
participation of people with disabilities in engineering processes.