* 1230439
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-Low Wear Coatings Based on a Novel Family of Aromatic Thermosetting Copolyesters
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Chris Mangun, ATSP Innovations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2015
* USD 591,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
commercialize a new family of polymers (aromatic thermosetting copolyesters, or
ATSP) for application to tribological surfaces for compressors used in air
conditioning and refrigeration. Surface treatments/coatings are key to improving
wear performance and durability in a wide range of applications. The main
advantages of polymeric-based coatings are their relatively low cost and simple
substrate surface conditioning. ATSP can be processed into highly effective
wear-resistant coatings by blending with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and
other additives. Key features of the new material are: (1) thermal stability at
temperatures required to process with PTFE (350-450 deg. C); (2) excellent
tribological properties, with several samples of selected compositions
evidencing "zero" wear and low friction coefficient values that remained stable
during testing - both important attributes for a long-term wear coating.
Additional advantages are the ability to undergo interchain transesterification
reactions, permitting reincorporation of wear debris into the coating, and good
adhesion to metals such as stainless steel and cast iron. Technical objectives
in the Phase II include tailoring the polymer backbone to improve powder/coating
properties, optimizing thermal spray parameters for this industrially relevant
process, and performing both in-house and customer-based
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is the potential to realize a new materials family which will
permit lower cost and more versatile wear coatings for industry. There is strong
customer demand for innovations that significantly improve the performance of
the tribopair in compressors for refrigeration and air conditioning. Recent
investigation for this specific market segment has shown that the ATSP system
exhibits the crucial features of merit: low friction coefficient and an order of
magnitude reduction in wear rate compared to state-of-the-art polymeric
coatings. With the current societal focus on energy efficiency, more attention
is being given to the fact that proper coatings and surface treatments are key
to increasing efficiency for a wide range of mechanical surfaces (bearings,
seals, turbines blades, etc.). Thus, there are opportunities in the much broader
market, with the potential for major societal impact, since engines, pumps, and
compressors are common equipment that represent a significant share of U.S.
energy demand. ATSP has also shown excellent performance in adhesives, rigid
foams, matrices for composites, and dielectrics for microelectronics, all of
which suggest additional potential markets.