* 1230017
* Preserving and Utilizing Historical Data in the PSID
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Katherine McGonagle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2016
* USD 467,697.00

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is the world's longest running
household panel survey. With over forty years of data on the same families and
their descendants, the PSID is a cornerstone of the data infrastructure for
empirically-based social science research in the the world. With its long-term
measures of economic and social well-being, the study has allowed researchers
and policy analysts to investigate the dynamism inherent in social and
behavioral processes. The long panel, genealogical design, and broad content
provide scientists a unique and powerful opportunity to study evolution and
change within the same families over decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PSID
began in an era when most surveys - including the PSID - were conducted using
paper and pencil; computer assisted interviewing, let alone web-based
interviewing, was still decades away. A paper questionnaire was printed for each
respondent, and the interviewer wrote the respondent's answers directly on the
instrument. This approach was used from 1968 to 1992, when computer assisted
interviewing was initiated. The completed paper interviews were returned to the
University of Michigan for data entry at which time data processors would create
an electronic file. For answers to questions that required coding - e.g.,
occupation or industry - the handwritten open-ended responses written on the
instrument were not typed into the electronic data file, but instead the
response was coded into a categorical variable. The instruments also contained
extensive notes in the margins made by the interviewer, providing important
information to the data processors about various aspects of the data being
reported by the respondent that was not captured by the structured interview.
These so-called "marginal notes" have been used extensively by PSID data
processors to generate accurate data values. Even today, PSID data processors
retrieve paper interviews from the secure facility within ISR that stores the
paper interviews as they attempt to reconcile conflicting information over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interview questions can often be complicated, and
even potentially ambiguous to both interviewers and respondents. Because of
this, a guide is prepared for interviewers that they use to help address any
questions that arise when administering the survey interview to respondents.
These guides, as well as other interviewer training materials, can be valuable
to researchers as they interpret responses to the questions that underlie the
data. The PSID has made available such information for interview waves 1997 and
forward, but historical documents before this time have not been
scanned/prepared and released.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to preserve and enhance utilization of historical information in the PSID.
Specifically, we propose to scan all completed paper questionnaires 1968 to
1992, consisting of an estimated 15 million document pages. Moreover, electronic
versions of all PSID interviewer training documents, 1968 to the present, will
be created and these documents will be made available to all users through the
PSID website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By converting the paper questionnaires to
electronic format, the broader impacts of the project include the preservation
of historically important data which is currently deteriorating, and at risk of
soon being too degraded for preservation. The preservation of these data will
make it easier and less expensive for PSID data processors to access this
historical information, and use it to better understand and improve the quality
of the data. The conversion of the interviewer materials, including training
materials and "question-by-question" documents, will provide users with easy
access to historically important, wave-specific information about specific
questions, and data collection procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
intellectual merit is the facilitation of future scientific research - described
throughout the proposal - through the ongoing improvement of data quality made
possible by the preservation of these historical data, and through the resulting
generation of new variables and information that would be made available to
scientists.