* 1230142
* I/UCRC:  Efficient Molecular Separation Using Polymeric Membranes Integrated with Novel Structure-Tunable Organic Nanocages
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Wei Zhang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2014
* USD 199,998.00

Program Director's Recommendation Center for Membrane Applied Science and
Technology (MAST) Proposal # 1230142 Zhang

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Membrane Applied Science and
Technology (MAST) at the University of Colorado site. Funding Requests for
Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570.
The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-
defined fundamental research.

Membrane technology represents one of the most effective, energy-saving
approaches for several separation processes, including ultra-filtration (UF),
reverse osmosis (RO), pervaporation (PV), and gas separation. Membrane materials
play a pivotal role in determining process effectiveness. Therefore, development
of new membrane materials with outstanding separation characteristics is vital
to sustain and expand the growth of membrane separation technology. In response
to this research opportunity, preparation of a novel class of polymeric
membranes integrated with structure-tunable, three dimensional (3-D) well-
defined, shape-persistent molecular cages is proposed. These cage-integrated
porous membranes are expected to not only significantly enhance the permeability
of certain target molecules, but also enable efficiently encoding both
dimensional (pore size/distribution) and functional information (guest
recognition, sensing, catalysis, etc.) into the final membranes in a modular
fashion. The performance of these membranes in separation of CO2/N2,
water/alcohol, and olefin/paraffin will be investigated.

The proposed cage-integrated membranes will open completely new directions for
fabricating novel defect-free, composite polymeric membranes that can be used
for a number of industrially and environmentally important separations, such as
CO2/N2, water/ethanol or paraffin/olefin. The proposed work will be a platform
for providing new opportunities for outreach, education, and minority
involvement on multiple levels. This interdisciplinary research will provide all
students, both graduate and undergraduate, exposure to both fields. More than
five undergraduate students will be involved in the research plan while special
attention will be given to recruit students from minorities and underrepresented
groups. The results from the proposed work will be disseminated in professional
conferences and journals, via an interactive website, and also integrated into
both undergraduate and graduate courses.