* 1230829
* Assembling the Tree of Consciousness: A Study of Scientific Methodology for Investigating the Phylogenetic Distribution of Consciousness (Postdoctoral Fellowship)
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Michael Trestman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite widespread acceptance of the idea that
humans are not the only conscious creatures on the planet, and a resurgence of
scientific work and public interest in the topic of animal consciousness,
considerable scientific skepticism and divergent public opinion remains
concerning what it actually means to say that animals are conscious. This
project addresses two related research questions. How is consciousness
conceptualized in different research contexts? Can the various and seemingly
incompatible conceptualizations of animal consciousness be integrated or related
in an evidence-based way? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the methods of conceptual and
logical analysis of scientific and philosophical positions to generate a series
of research publications on this topic, and will initiate an "Online Tree of
Consciousness" to serve as an open database for research, education, ethics, and
policy in this area. The project will provide a clear characterization of
existing concepts and methods from multiple disciplines. The goal is to
integrate these into a single domain of discourse organized around phylogenetic
relationships among the species that have been studied. This will allow
different sorts of evidence (behavioral, neurophysiological, evolutionary, etc.)
to be evaluated in their phylogenetic context, and should aid in the discovery
of patterns in existing data as well as helping to identify systematically
understudied areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to yield general
recommendations and guidelines for future scientific work, greater conceptual
clarity about the range of ideas about animal consciousness and how to study it,
improved accessibility for policymakers and ethicists concerned with animal
welfare to the latest research on consciousness, better access for social
scientists to data relevant to the historical and sociological patterns of
animal consciousness research, and easy access for educators looking to
challenge students with one of the hardest and most fascinating conceptual
problems facing any science.