* 1230057
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Scientific Evidence concerning Humanitarian Interventions in Israeli Conflict Zones
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Stephen Hilgartner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 11,439.00

Introduction

In recent years, the mental health of people in conflict and disaster zones has
attracted increasing attention among international humanitarian aid
organizations. However, as compared with food or medical aid, mental health
interventions pose unique design, coordination, and validation challenges. Amid
ongoing debate over what falls within the domain of mental health, aid
organizations are employing diverse interventions, ranging from individual
therapy, to vocational training, to human rights advocacy. This diversity stems
in part from variation in conditions on the ground and in part from disagreement
about appropriate goals and methods. To improve oversight and communication,
several multinational humanitarian consortia and research groups have worked to
develop techniques for scientifically assessing the efficacy of mental health
interventions in conflict and disaster zones. But given the varying needs of
different populations and a lack of consensus about appropriate measures of
success, producing convincing assessments poses significant challenges.

Intellectual Merit

This project examines the challenges that humanitarian organizations and
researchers encounter when trying to implement and assess mental health
interventions. It examines the methods that they employ to overcome these
challenges, and the manner in which they evaluate the effectiveness of their
assessment methods. To address these issues questions, the researcher will
interview mental health practitioners, administrators, and researchers involved
in humanitarian mental health interventions and conduct participant observation
in humanitarian organizations that operate in Israel and the West Bank. The
project will document the challenges of designing, delivering, and assessing
mental health and psychological interventions in conflict zones, illuminating
the complexities of knowledge transfer in the humanitarian sphere.

Broader Impacts

Because humanitarian actors use concepts of efficacy and oversight on a daily
basis to plan and implement mental health interventions and justify funding for
them, the analysis is likely to interest a variety of researchers, NGOs, and
policy analysts.