* 1230259
* Neural Substrates of Perceiving Status and Solidarity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Nalini Ambady, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 07/31/2013
* USD 260,219.00

Representations and impressions of relationships function as cognitive maps that
allow for the successful navigation of the social world. At the most basic
level, these representations and impressions include information about others'
roles, status, kinship and affiliative relationships. Given the ubiquity of
these judgments in day-to-day social interaction, it is important to examine the
neural underpinnings of the perception of status and solidarity cues in order to
better understand how the mind processes this form of social information. The
central goal of the proposed work is to investigate the neural structures
associated with the perception and representation of status and affiliation. In
particular, commonalities and differences with other social perceptual domains
will be examined. These domains include: the perception of emotions (e.g., fear
vs. anger) and the non-social perceptual domain of facial symmetry. Importantly,
the proposed experiments also contrast the processing of status with those of
solidarity and affiliation. Five functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
studies will test specific hypotheses related to the perception and
representation of status and solidarity. Three of these studies will examine the
perception of dominance and status across sensory modalities. The remaining two
studies will examine perceptions of solidarity relationships involving
affiliation. Two additional studies including a behavioral and ERP study will be
run to bolster the brain imaging experiments with behavioral and physiological
data. Hypotheses regarding the activation of specific brain areas will be
examined. This research will advance understanding of how core interpersonal
relationships are perceived and represented in the human brain. In addition,
this work will provide scientific training to students in an interdisciplinary
field.