* 1230453
* SBIR Phase II:  Broad-based Urine Test for the Diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax Malaria In Febrile Patients
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Edwin Agbo, Fyodor Biotechnologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 571,438.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
validate a broad-based non-invasive, single-step Urine Malaria Test (UMT-Pf/Pv)
for the clinical diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) and P. vivax (Pv)
malaria, which account for ~800,000 deaths a year. Since malaria deaths occur
within 48 hours of onset of symptoms, the ability to manage malaria at home or
in village settings where most cases occur would (i) facilitate prompt access to
antimalarial treatment, (ii) target treatment to those who need it, and (iii)
reduce malaria mortality. In this project, monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to novel
poly-asparagine protein fragments identified in the urine of febrile malaria
patients will be used to develop a UMT-Pf/Pv dipstick. The four overlapping
specific aims are to (1) perform a detailed characterization of the diagnostic
utility of MAbs developed in Phase I; (2) develop, test and optimize a prototype
to meet design input specifications; (3) implement preliminary performance
evaluation studies to evaluate sensitivity/specificity, and; (4)undertake
preliminary clinical testing. As a non-invasive alternative to blood-based
tests, the UMT-Pf/Pv could facilitate the delivery of rapid malaria diagnosis in
settings across all geographical areas where malaria is endemic, markedly
impacting the way malaria is diagnosed and treated
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the development of a broad-based one-step urine test for the home-
based or point-of-care diagnosis of clinical Pf and/or Pv malaria in persons
with fever. With the UMT-Pf/Pv dipstick, the number of steps that the operator
is required to perform is significantly reduced, permitting greater utility,
convenience and reliability in primary care settings. The test will also
facilitate the effective integration of malaria RDTs into private sector malaria
case management and encourage wider acceptability of clinical malaria diagnosis
in endemic regions, especially in rural areas and in places where mixed
infections frequently occur. Overall, the test has the potential to markedly
impact the way over 95% of all clinical malaria is diagnosed and treated, and
drive current global efforts toward home-based or point-of-care testing for
malaria prior to treatment in all cases of fever, as mandated by the World
Health Organization. Since it is based on the same platform as current RDTs,
this test can be easily integrated into current healthcare structures to provide
significant benefits to public health in most endemic countries. No such test is
currently available.