* 1230114
* Collaborative Research:  Improved Understanding of Convective-Storm Predictability and Environment Feedbacks from Observations during the Mesoscale Predictability Experiment (MPEX)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Michael Coniglio, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2017
* USD 413,155.00

The influence of organized regions of deep convection on its environment in both
space and time has been recognized for many years. For example, organized deep
convective regions are known to enhance upper-level jet streaks through
modification of the direct mass circulation in jet entrance regions through
diabatic heating. Individual thunderstorms modify the nearby surrounding mass
and momentum fields within a few hours, likely assisting in storm maintenance
and influencing storm severity. While past observational and modeling studies
have documented these nearby and more distant feedback effects, this research
represents the first attempt to conduct a careful comparison of model-simulated
convective feedbacks with those diagnosed from dropsonde and Microwave
Temperature Profiling (MTP) observations taken during the Mesoscale
Predictability Experiment (MPEX). The improved capability of numerical weather
prediction (NWP) models at convection-allowing grid spacing (1-4 km), and the
availability of the NCAR GV airborne observing systems, argues strongly that it
is time to understand how deep convection modifies the surrounding environment
in much greater detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-institutional team with
broad expertise has been assembled to pursue the fundamental scientific
questions of convective storm-environmental feedbacks and predictability. In
particular, the team will seek to: 1) quantify the observed environmental
modifications and upscale feedbacks from deep convection, and relate these back
to the characteristics of the convection; 2) evaluate model simulations of
upscale feedbacks from deep convection with MPEX observations; and 3) explore
the predictability of convectively disturbed atmospheres. These objectives will
be met using various diagnostic approaches applied to the dropsonde
observations, including calculation of heat and moisture budgets; numerical
model simulations with ensemble Kalman filter data assimilation at convection-
allowing resolutions; and careful comparisons between MPEX observations and
model simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;Results
from this project will lead to a much better understanding of the convective
storm-environmental feedback. Upscale feedbacks from deep convection will be
documented carefully for the first time with the unique MPEX observations that
will surround the convective region. Model analyses, constrained via the
ensemble Kalman filter approach, will allow for a novel assessment of the
capability of a convection-allowing model simulation to reproduce these upscale
feedbacks. Improved understanding of the predictability of convectively
disturbed atmospheres will provide new insight into the rapid decrease of
forecast skill in research and operational numerical weather prediction models
of high-impact convective weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will yield new information on the
observations needed within and nearby convective regions to extend the
predictability of numerical model forecasts of hazardous weather events. It will
also provide insight on how well upscale feedbacks are represented in current
model parameterizations of deep moist convection, and how this might affect
predictions on seasonal and longer time scales. Research results will be
integrated into teaching materials and published to reach broad audiences. Three
graduate students will be trained through participation in MPEX data collection,
research and teaching activities, and participation at conference and workshops.