* 1230543
* INSPIRE:  An Ecologically-Driven Strategy for Ensuring Sustainability of Anthropogenically and Climatically Impacted Lakes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 450,709.00

1230543 (Paerl). This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Environmental
Sustainability Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems Division (CBET) in the Engineering Directorate (ENG), the
Ecosystems Studies Program of the Division of Environmental Biology (DEB) in the
Biological Sciences Directorate (BIO), and the Office of International Science
and Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient enrichment (eutrophication) in freshwaters has promoted
global proliferation of harmful (toxic) cyanobacterial blooms (CyanoHABs), and
this problem is exacerbated by global warming. This award is based on a new
hypothesis that challenges the prevailing paradigm that CyanoHABs can be
countered by control of the single nutirent, phosphorus (P). The new paradigm-
challenging hypothesis is that nitrogen (N) loading in large lakes controls
phytoplankton community structure, and that magnitude, spatial extent, and
duration of CyanoHABs in large lakes are strongly dependent on both N and P
inputs. This award is appropriate for the INSPIRE program due to the proposed
transformational paradigm shift as well as the proposed problem-driven research
that requires a comprehensive and integrative approach (ecosystem science as
well as engineering analysis) to the grand challenge issue of ensuring
availability of adequate quality freshwater resources. The fundamental questions
raised are at the interface of biological science and engineering research. An
additional challenge is addressing this new paradigm in the context of evolving
climatic conditions. While it is crucial to understand how input reductions of N
and P substrates can beneficially shape phytoplankton communities, this needs to
be accomplished while accounting for climatic variations that are known to favor
CyanoHABs. Managing nutrients requires an engineering solution, but
implementation can only be successful if it is ecologically-constrained, so that
the resulting biological species are desirable (e.g., non-toxin producing
genera). Moreover, given the time frame required for traditional surveys of
remediation success (i.e., years), the development of more rapid indicators is
needed that will show more quickly whether an ecosystem is on a trajectory
towards desired sustainability. How future climatic conditions will favor
CyanoHAB formation must and will be considered. As more external pressure is
placed on aquatic systems to provide ecosystems services, interdisciplinary
(molecular, toxicological, biogeochemical, geohydrologic) efforts are needed to
address the problem and ensure long term sustainability. In this research, in
situ bioassays will be employed as well as quantitative mapping of gene
expression to determine how various amounts of anthropogenic N (including
ammonium and nitrate) and P (as phosphate) shape phytoplankton community
structure and function and also CyanoHAB potential under ambient and elevated
temperatures consistent with warming trends in a large lake basin. The
particular place-based study will done on Lake Taihu, the third largest lake in
China. The Lake Taihu study will be accomplished using mesocosms in a recently
constructed flow-thru pond system, located at the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Taihu Lake Laboratory for Environmental Research field station. In collaboration
with Chinese researchers, data from sites in Taihu will be collected to compare
experimental conditions to seasonal in situ bloom dynamics. Results will be used
to calibrate and verify eutrophication-CyanoHAB modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;An immediate societal product
will be a science-based nutrient input reduction strategy for Chinese
provincial/central governments that will bring and maintain Taihu below the
CyanoHAB threshold and be transferrable to shallow hypereutrophic lakes
worldwide that are experiencing both N and P over-enrichment. Student
journalists and a U.S. (UNC/UTK) - China (Hohai, Nanjing Universities, NIGLAS,
Chinese Academy of Sciences) student exchange will disseminate successes and the
emerging scientific results to the general public. This project will train
graduate, undergraduate, and secondary school students in interdisciplinary,
cross-cutting research combining ecological analysis and environmental
remediation within the context of socioeconomic policy issues concerning the
sustainability of ecosystem services. While the lead U.S. institution is UNC-CH,
the U.S. partner institution (UTK) is an EPSCoR institution, so this study will
support students that are historically under-supported and typically limited
with hands-on research experience. Teacher-training workshops will demonstrate
the utility of land-water interface research in developing STEM knowledge for
students, with a focus on making projects tractable with limited resources. This
project will employ an interdisciplinary (ecology, molecular biology,
toxicology, ecohydrology, water management) and international team of
researchers (including a new female faculty member) and students to assess,
control and mitigate CyanoHABs. This will enhance conceptual and technical
understanding of interactive environmental drivers of long-term change in large
lake ecosystems, information that will help ensure their sustainability in a
warming world.