* 1230469
* Student Travel for PerMIS 2012
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* M. Ani Hsieh, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,244.00

This proposal requests travel funds from NSF to assist 20 US students to
participate in PerMIS 2012, which will be held at the University of Maryland
University College in Hyattsville, Maryland. The purpose of this Group Travel
Grant Proposal is to make it possible for US students and postdocs to attend the
conference, present their work, and forge connections with colleagues from
around the world.

The Performance Metrics for Intelligent Systems workshop is the only one of its
kind dedicated to defining measures and methodologies of evaluating performance
of intelligent systems. This years theme revolves around Cyber Physical Systems,
an important area of research highlighted in the recent PCAST report. As part of
this award, students will also have the opportunity to participate in special
events and learn more about the field of performance metrics and cyber physical
systems. Travel funding will be in the form of partial airfare reimbursement and
full reimbursement for student registration to approximately 20 U.S. students
who plan to present at least one paper at the Conference.

Broader Impacts: The importance of performance metrics for engineered systems
cannot be overstated. The benefit to student learning and mentorship by
encouraging attendance of students by direct monetary means brings large
dividends in student confidence, knowledge and expertise.