* 1230220
* Controlling the Flow of Sensitive Knowledge in an Interconnected World (Standard Research Grant)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* John Krige, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 178,578.00

Introduction

The scope of the regulations controlling the circulation of sensitive but
unclassified knowledge between the United States and other countries is of
growing concern. This is especially so for researchers in academia and in
industry. The ever-closer linkage between basic research and application in
civilian/military dual-use technologies and the determination of foreign
countries to exploit American scientific pre-eminence have brought International
Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) into the core of collaborative research with
foreign nationals. Communities that prize scientific openness and regard it as
the bedrock of American scientific and technological leadership and economic
competitiveness are increasingly frustrated by ambiguities surrounding the
interpretation of the regulations and the severe penalties for violating them.

Intellectual Merit

This project will trace the history of the debate between scientific openness
and national security that began in the 1980s, primarily using reports produced
by the National Academies, Congressional Reports (such as the Cox Report),
studies by the Congressional Research Service, and supporting materials. This
historical study will be supplemented by an empirical study of the day-to-day
implementation of ITAR using in-depth interviews with senior researchers, and
administrative and legal personnel, at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Policy conclusions will be drawn from the experience of those who conduct their
research in this regulatory framework. The project will throw new light on the
mechanisms that regulate the circulation of knowledge in a global,
interconnected world. It will identify the changing circumstances that define
cutting-edge science and technology that is both unclassified and subject to
regulation. It demands that we expand the meaning of "technology transfer" to
accommodate the exchange of knowledge in face-to-face encounters between
American researchers and foreign nationals in a laboratory setting.

Potential Broader Impacts

The results will be of interest to historians of science and technology, and to
stakeholders involved in implementing ITAR. They should stimulate public debate
on how best to balance the freedom of inquiry with the needs of national
security.