* 1230268
* Workshop: Race, Risk, and Resilience among Black Youth in the United States and South Africa: Conceptual, Methodological, and Application Considerations
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Tabbye Chavous, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 07/31/2014
* USD 39,655.00

This a proposal to support a symposium and workshop to be held at the 2012
International Congress of Psychology (ICP) Conference (July 22-27, 2012, in Cape
town, South Africa). The goal of the project is to promote cross-national
discussion and collaboration around conceptual and methodological issues in
studying risk and resilience processes among Black youth. What makes this
project so important and timely is that it incorporates, indeed hinges upon, a
natural cross cultural comparison of South African and North American contexts.
The symposium is focused on review and dissemination of expert knowledge of
race-related psychological processes related to risk and resilience in South
Africa where Blacks represent the majority population and the U.S., where Blacks
are a minority population. The proposed structure of the symposium includes
scholarly presentations by South Africa-based and U.S.-based scholars and panel
response and audience discussion led by expert scholars from South Africa and
the United States. The session will begin with an introduction of panelists and
presenters and an overview of the issues to be addressed in the session. This
includes the following: (1) why resilience is an important and meaningful
construct to study among Black youth in South African and American contexts; (2)
important conceptual, contextual, and cultural considerations in understanding
resilience across these settings; and (3) what scholars and professional
psychologists in U.S. and South African contexts can learn from one another
about studying race, risk, and resilience and using knowledge to promote
positive youth outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium includes a mix of
junior and senior scholars who will each give brief presentations of research
related to risk and resilience processes. A panel of scholars from South Africa
and the U.S. will pose critical questions and comments to the presenters and
encourage audience interactive discussion around considerations and challenges
in conceptualizing, studying, and applying knowledge about risk and resilience
to Black youth populations. Notably, this includes a discussion of the parallels
and divergence across national contexts. The goal is that by the end of the
session, scholars participating in the session will have a set of articulated
theoretical and research questions related to the study of risk and resilience
among Black South African and American youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
symposium has considerable potential for scholarly development and contributions
to multi-disciplinary literatures on psychological resilience processes among
Black populations in multiple life domains (e.g., education, psychological well-
being and life-satisfaction, health, political empowerment), potential
extensions to other groups experiencing historical structural and social
oppression, the rigorous demonstration and examination of multiple theoretical
and methodological approaches, and the systematic examination of context effects
and interactions among contexts on the life outcomes and adjustment of Black
populations. The project's explicit attention to the application and use of
scholarship on resilience represents broad impact in both theory and
programmatic efforts around changing risky contexts to better support positive
youth outcomes.