* 1230611
* Disaster Science and Technology Studies (DSTS): Advancing an Emerging Subfield
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Kim Fortun, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a two-day
interdisciplinary workshop on Disaster Science and Technology Studies (DSTS), an
emerging subfield of STS. The workshop will take place in late summer or fall
2013. The frequency and severity of disasters are increasing in the United
States and worldwide; many are caused or conditioned by technological systems
and processes. Disasters also unleash a torrent of engineering and scientific
activity, including basic and applied research, policy innovations, technology
development, etc.; activities that have important implications for how
governments, industries, legal systems, communities, and other institutions deal
with disaster, risk management, emergency response, and longer-term recovery. To
date, however, there remains a pressing gap between the concepts, theories and
methods that social scientists have developed to understand the social dynamics
of science and technology and the rich but largely untapped body of empirical
data on the dynamics of disasters. The workshop seeks to remedy this
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will serve to promote the development of DSTS. It will do so in a variety of
ways. First, it brings together North American DSTS scholars to critically
assess the state of the emerging field. Part of the workshop plan is to organize
an active DSTS research network capable of rapid domestic and international
expansion, and to develop a research agenda that emphasizes reflexive,
comparative, and collaborative studies. The workshop will also generate
strategies for funding and outreach that supports DSTS research and communicates
knowledge to the larger disaster research community and to
policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop organizers will prepare and circulate
the results of DSTS research through a workshop report, and through press
releases and other outreach to researchers, journalists, and policy makers. They
will also create a website to facilitate communication and idea sharing among
workshop participants and to support continued development of DSTS beyond the
workshop.