* 1230464
* SBIR Phase II:  Autoligation Chain Reaction: DNA Amplification Without Enzymes or Nucleotides
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Ricardo Mancebo, GenEndeavor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2015
* USD 620,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop novel products for routine genetic testing by demonstrating feasibility
of an innovative technology called Autoligation Chain Reaction (ACR). The
intellectual merit of ACR is an enabling nucleic acid amplification technology
that requires no nucleotides or enzymes. Polymerase inhibitors are found in many
laboratory samples and clinical specimens, and contribute to the high cost of
molecular-based assays in routine genetic tests because labor-intensive sample
preparation and assay development are required to optimize around these
inhibitors with current molecular technologies. Because ACR does not involve any
reagents sensitive to polymerase inhibitors, the requirement for sample
preparation is expected to be low and overall assay development and testing
turnaround times are expected to be much faster. Specific key research
objectives of the project include design and synthesis of thermal-stable ACR
reagents, and the demonstration that ACR can exponentially amplify DNA target
sequences without enzymes or nucleotides. Research will be carried out using low
copy-number target nucleic acid sequences containing bio-relevant SNPs across
multiple loci. The anticipated technical results should show robust, specific,
and reproducible amplifications of multiple SNPs on multiple loci in the absence
of enzymes or nucleotides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts of
the proposed activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project, if successful, is the innovation of an enabling
technology that could dramatically reduce sample preparation and assay
optimization times, and significantly increase the efficiency and quality, and
lower the cost of clinical diagnostics and routine genetic testing. Since non-
enzymatic amplification coupled with the inherent simplicity of ACR makes this
technology more amenable to standardization in clinical and lab settings across
different sample types than existing molecular technologies, it is expected that
ACR technology will drive the development of a new generation of molecular
diagnostic and screening products. These products are expected to provide more
efficient, simpler, cheaper, faster, and accurate routine genetic testing of a
broad range of biomarkers for a wide range of diseases and genetic disorders,
including those currently unattainable by traditional molecular methods. As a
result, ACR will potentially not only advance the understanding of diseases at
the genetic level, but also bring broader benefits to human health and society
at large through enhanced biomedical discovery, diagnostics, and personalized
medicine.