* 1230055
* EAGER: Collaborative Analysis of Doppler Lidar Data from Canopy Horizontal Array Turbulence Study (CHATS)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Ronald Calhoun, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2014
* USD 31,501.00

Like many sources of remotely-sensed measurements of atmospheric boundary layer
structure and motions, Doppler lidar data present a formidable analysis
challenge both owing to their voluminous and highly detailed nature and
potential for contamination by interfering signals such as those returned from
the earth's underlying surface and/or plant canopies. This tightly-scoped
research effort will support collaborations between a principal investigator who
is well versed in lidar measurements and a canopy-induced turbulence expert at
NSF's National Center for Atmospheric Research to pursue improved techniques for
accurate yet cost-effective means for more automated processing of lidar data
previously collected with NSF support during the Canopy Horizontal Array
Turbulence Study (CHATS) in 2007.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this effort centers on development and application of idealized models of
expected coherent structures (such as roll vortices and other phenomena evident
in large-eddy simulations and via other means) to provide a labor-saving
framework in which raw radial velocity measurements may be more intelligently
processed and interpreted. This will in-turn support extraction of improved
representations of coherent structures above plant canopies that are responsible
for exchange of momentum and trace gases (such as CO2) with the planetary
boundary layer. The availability of tandem in-canopy, high-resolution turbulent
flux measurements obtained during CHATS to evaluate this previously unproven
analysis approach represents a potentially high-payoff research approach.
Broader impacts of this effort include improved downstream knowledge of
biogeochemical cycles and sources of low-level atmospheric turbulence, as well
as enhancements to the lead investigator's classroom education efforts.