* 1230294
* SBIR Phase II:  Vacuum Insulation Panels with Tensile Structural Elements
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Prateek Gupta, Thermal Conservation Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2015
* USD 655,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an
ultra-thin high-R-value robust vacuum insulation panel (VIP). Thermal models
indicate that with a half-inch thick VIP, an R-value of 40 can be achieved with
an expected cost of ~$3 per square foot. The technology uses tensile structural
elements as thermal impedances and is based on a 2011 patent which has been
exclusively licensed from the University of Illinois at Chicago. The VIP is
expected to be suitable for installation in industrial and residential
structures, since it has a stainless steel foil exterior as opposed to current
VIP technology, which uses a laminate of polyester and aluminum foil as its
vacuum barrier. The aluminum foil creates a thermal short (edge losses) in
current VIPs which can greatly reduce their effective R-value. The use of
stainless steel has the additional advantage of significantly reducing edge
losses as well as increasing puncture resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a drastic reduction
in the energy required to heat and cool buildings, or to refrigerate trucks used
to transport perishable goods. In transportation, a refrigerated hi-cube trailer
with two inches of polyurethane foam has an R-value of ~10, which can be
increased to 50 by incorporating a half-inch-thick VIP. Most refrigerated
trailers in the US consume ~1 gallon of diesel fuel each hour to keep their
loads cold. Since there are ~330,000 refrigerated trailers operating for ~1,500
hours/year, this translates into a fuel savings of 80%, or nearly 1% of the
total diesel fuel consumption in this country each year. Compact and inexpensive
thermal insulation can allow better use of space inside new dwellings, and be
used to retrofit existing dwellings with more effective insulation. Finally, a
2002 review prepared for the US Department of Housing and Urban Development
cited low puncture resistance as a key factor slowing the adoption of vacuum
insulation panels in the residential market. The proposed innovation will
mitigate this factor and speed adoption in this market.