* 1230884
* SEP: Collaborative:  Achieving a Sustainable Energy Pathway for Wind Turbine Blade Manufacturing
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* James Sherwood, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,510,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Christopher Niezrecki and co-workers at
the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, and Prof. Janet Twomey and co-workers
at Wichita State University. The objective of this highly multidisciplinary
study is the preparation of new forms of bio-derived materials for next
generation wind turbine blades. These blades will be designed with the
mechanical performance, economic viability, and environmental life cycle to
enable sustainable wind energy pathways. Past research on biobased polymers has
focused on thermoplastics that do not have the creep resistance and other
properties necessary for significant structural applications. This project will
focus on thermoset epoxies that are only a single reaction step from vegetable
oil (a consistent, readily available feedstock), thus minimizing energy use and
cost. Additionally, by developing an understanding of molecular-level thermal
reworkability in composites through the inclusion of an appropriate catalyst,
this work will enable a new end-of-life paradigm. Scaled test structures with
mechanical and dynamic features comparable to utility-scale wind turbine blades
will be constructed and their performance evaluated. Using these results new
materials will be able to be quickly assessed without full scale tests. An
environmental life cycle impact analysis will highlight areas for improved
sustainability in the design of the biomaterials and end-of-life options for
blades. An economic evaluation along with life cycle cost and toxic use analyses
will provide a comparative economic evaluation of bio-derived alternatives to
traditional petroleum-based thermosets along with the impact of converting to
bio-based wind turbine manufacturing on job creation, education, and skills
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an expectation of growth in the U.S. to
170,000 turbines in 2030, wind energy represents a renewable resource to address
20% of the U.S. energy demand. From a systems point of view, this growth creates
a need to dispose of well over 34,000 blades/year (each as large as 62 m long
and weighing 18 tons) in the U.S. and approximately five times as many globally.
Presently, nearly all of these blades are manufactured from glass fiber
composites containing large amounts of petroleum-based epoxy resins and at their
end of life they are very difficult to recycle. Spent blades are either land-
filled, burned to extract heat for co-generation of electricity, or cut up and
used as filler in construction. This project will determine how to effectively
replace existing petroleum-based epoxy resins with bio-based materials that are
reworkable so that they can be repaired and/or their materials can be reused at
the end-of-life. Concurrently the impacts of the new blades on the economy, wind
industry, environment, and society will be studied. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be exposed to technical and nontechnical problems
important to industry, and a strong outreach effort will be implemented using
demonstrations to motivate the interest of women and K-12 students in science
and engineering. Wind Energy Research Workshops will be organized to serve a
national audience of industry participants, scientists, and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a transformative
approach to the manufacturing of composites in general and wind turbine blades
in particular. This work will lead to composite manufacturing that is more
sustainable and less reliant on petroleum-based resins while enabling effective
composite repair and recycling. The research will impact not only the wind
industry, but many other areas of composite usage.