* 1230627
* Workshop: STS Forum on Fukishima: Building a Transnational Research Agenda and Strategy for Engagement through a Social Scientific Understanding of Disasters &amp; Disaster Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Kim Fortun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Disaster science is emerging as distinctive field that incorporates a range of
scientific disciplines, and has implications for many aspects of disaster
governance. This workshop investigates the social, technical and organizational
factors that contribute to or limit disasters, disaster mitigation, and the
remediation and recovery efforts that follow major disasters. To address these
issues, Japan- and US-based participants use the Fukushima nuclear accident and
the closely related disasters that affected Eastern Japan in 2011 to develop new
knowledge, making explicit comparisons to Chernobyl, the 1995 Kobe Earthquake,
September 11th, Hurricane Katrina and the Kanto Dai Shinsai disaster. Science
and Technology Studies theories of epistemic cultures, scientific and
disciplinary fields, public and institutional responses to crises, and the
relationship between embedded research and policy engagement are used to address
key workshop questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes include a NSF Workshop
Report that lays out major new directions in social scientific studies of
disaster, the creation of a transnational network of disaster science
researchers with deeper expertise in the intersection of social and technical
aspects of disaster, and web site distribution of conference papers and
materials.