* 1230803
* SEP: Sustainable Forest-Based Biofuel Pathways to Hydrocarbon Transportation Fuels: Biomass Production, Torrefaction, Pyrolysis, Catalytic Upgrading, and Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Shonnard, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. David Shonnard and co-workers at Michigan
Technological University. Drop-in, renewable replacements for petroleum-based
liquid transportation fuels is a national strategic goal for energy security.
The four-year Wood to Wheels (W2W) SEP project will achieve this goal by
conducting transformative, multidisciplinary, comprehensive, and integrated
research in the area of forest-based infrastructure-compatible liquid biofuel
for vehicular transportation. Hypothesis-driven research is to be organized into
three main thrusts plus a cross-cutting thrust integration activity; 1)
Sustainable Forest Systems, 2) Two-Stage Torrefaction/Pyrolysis-Based Conversion
Processes, 3) Energy Utilization of Advanced Biofuels, and 4) Integrated
Sustainability Assessment and Decision Making. The Sustainable Forest Systems
research thrust will feature research in forest productivity modeling, ecosystem
nutrition and productivity, and genomics-guided feedstock (poplar) improvement.
The Conversion Processes thrust will investigate a novel two-stage torrefaction
and pyrolysis based processing strategy to prepare an improved bio-oil for
multi-functional catalytic upgrading to a hydrocarbon green diesel fuel product.
The Energy Utilization thrust will incorporate a surrogate fuels approach to
determine the relationship between fuel component classes and combustion
characteristics, and to provide feedback to the Conversion thrust team on
targets for optimal GD composition. The Sustainability Assessment thrust will
produce decision support tools including indicator sets, perform process
simulation and optimization, technoeconomic analyses, life cycle assessments,
greenhouse gas analyses, and energy balances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to achieve scientific and engineering breakthroughs for
production of an infrastructure-compatible green diesel (GD) with system-wide
benefits; such as clean combustion in engines (low particulates and NOx),
reduced life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions compared to fossil fuel, low cost
per gallon, rural job creation, increased energy independence, high productivity
per acre of forest biomass, plant genotypes with favorable composition for
conversion, and engines optimized to use the prescribed component makeup of the
GD. Researchers, including 11 faculty, 7 PhD students, and one postdoc from
Forestry, Social Sciences, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, will
develop new knowledge about complex coupled natural/industrial/societal systems.
This SEP project will create a diverse highly skilled biofuels workforce with
the technical research experiences and broad sustainability education needed to
support a renewable transportation fuels industry. The research team will
interact with local communities to gain information on what they believe to be
important measures of sustainability in their communities. Through this
interaction, these communities will receive education on biofuel production
technologies and what sustainability means, how it can be measured, and whether
trade-offs among goals are necessary to institute sustainable biofuel systems in
their area. The team will implement a W2W SEP diversity plan to: (1) recruit
women, under-represented minorities, and persons with disabilities as graduate
students, and (2) implement integrated practices that enable the academic and
professional success of the SEP students and postdoc. Results from the
Sustainability Assessments research thrust will be fed back to the other thrust
teams in order to guide research and overcome sustainability challenges that
arise at key processing stages along the life cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to the development of biomass-based biofuel production
in the US in order to displace nearly all imported petroleum, to support
domestic jobs, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Project deliverables will
help establish a new forest-based biofuels industry featuring high productivity
forest energy crops, sustainable forest management practices, catalysts and
process technologies, innovations in engine systems, sustainable decision-making
databases, and analysis methods/software tools.