* 1230743
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: "Dangerous" Dogs and the Fuzzy Sciences of Animal Profiling
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Corinne Hayden, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 74,999.00

The moral and social qualities attributed to animals often draw on animal
sciences; these attributions, in turn shape the interactions that humans,
including scientists, have with them. Given the important role that animals play
in contemporary life, and the high stakes debates that exist over their
treatment in sciences and other settings, understanding how moral attributions
about animals come to be made is critically important. Yet most research studies
on this topic treat science, social qualities, and ethical sources of these
moral attributions separately, rather than investigating how they are shaped and
are shaped by the intersection of scientific, ethical and social concerns. This
research study fills this gap by examining how some members of a species with
considerable popular interest and long a subject of scientific investigation,
the dog, come to be labeled as dangerous. One of the key advances that this
research makes is the concept of "fuzzy science," or science that is fungible
and used by varied actors to make moral and ethical claims that intersect with
racialized and gendered attributions of animal behavior and motivation. Major
research methods are participant observation, analysis of scientific and other
documents, and interviews. Theoretically, the research provides new tools for
understanding how the wide range of sciences and scientific practices - both
formal and informal - involved in social and ethical conflicts about animals
shape and are shaped by social factors, and in doing so, contributes to the
fields of science and technology studies, animal studies, and critical race and
gender studies.

More broadly, this research provides new knowledge to a wide range of users
about the ethical, scientific, and social basis of attributions of danger and
safety to particular kinds of animals. This knowledge can be used by scientists,
zoos, animal shelters, and publics. Findings are disseminated in a book
addressed to an interdisciplinary and popular audience, in a course disseminated
to teachers, via a podcast for public radio, through popular press articles and
via workshops at the UC Berkeley Science, Technology, and Society Center.