* 1230458
* SBIR Phase II:  SBIR Phase II Spray-Formed Soft Magnetic Material for Efficient Hybrid-Field Electric Machines
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Martin Hosek, Persimmon Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,027,658.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a novel soft magnetic material and fabrication process for magnetic circuits of
electric machines, such as winding cores of electric motors. The technology
utilizes a unique single-step near net-shape fabrication process based on metal
spray deposition to produce an isotropic metal microstructure characterized by
small domains with high permeability, high saturation and low coercivity with a
controlled formation of insulation boundaries that limit electric conductivity
between neighboring domains. The resulting material provides an excellent three-
dimensional magnetic path while minimizing energy losses associated with eddy
currents. It can replace anisotropic laminated winding cores, which currently
constrain the design of conventional electric motors to geometries with two-
dimensional magnetic paths. As a further objective of the project, a new hybrid-
field motor topology, with three-dimensional magnetic paths enabled by the
proposed material and fabrication process, is being
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to enable production of electric motors with improved performance and
efficiency while reducing cost and material scrap associated with manufacturing
of motor winding cores. Electric motors are used extensively in a growing number
of applications, including robotics, semiconductor and LED process equipment,
industrial automation, electric vehicles, heating, ventilation and air
conditioning systems, appliances, power tools, medical devices, and military and
space exploration applications. These markets drive an increasing demand for
electric motors with improved performance, higher efficiency, and lower cost.
Considering the extensive use of electric motors globally, the disruptive change
resulting from the proposed hybrid-field motor technology with spray-formed
winding cores is expected to provide significant commercial, societal and
environmental benefits, including improved manufacturing efficiency, waste
reduction, and energy conservation.