* 1230075
* SBIR Phase II:  Targeted Production of Spider Silk Fibroins in Plant Trichomes
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Ryan Shepherd, PhylloTech Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2015
* USD 620,892.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a platform for the production of spider silk fibroins in plant
trichomes. Synthetic spider silk has great potential as an environmentally-
friendly biomaterial because it is very flexible yet has a tensile strength
greater than steel. A great need exists for a scalable strategy for spider silk
fibroin production in a renewable heterologous system that will allow efficient
harvest and recovery. The platform is a natural mechanism for protein production
and purification in the plant Nicotiana tabacum. The technological innovation is
the targeted expression of spider silk fibroins within the gland cells of leaf
surface structures called glandular secreting trichomes. The research objectives
will be to optimize the production of spider silk fibroins and generate fibers
from harvested proteins. The goal is to drive the expression of different spider
silk fibroins in trichomes using patented promoters, and refine methods of
fibroin recovery, so that fibers with differing physical properties can be
generated and tested. This work will demonstrate further that spider silk
fibroins can be produced by plant trichomes in a cost-effective manner, and will
allow the large-scale, photosynthetic production of next-generation
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts of the proposed
activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, will be to demonstrate that a variety of synthetic
spider silk fibroins can be produced in a plant-based system, and to better
understanding the biosynthetic hardware of the specialized plant structures
called glandular secreting trichomes. This work will allow the development of
novel ways of achieving industrial biomaterial production without the use of
toxic chemicals, and will thus have great societal impact by decreasing the
necessity of utilizing large amounts of hazardous compounds in industrial
processes. The commercial impact of this project will implement a platform for
the photosynthetic production of environmentally-friendly biomaterials.