* 1230933
* Neuroeconomics and risk-sensitivity in movement adaptation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alaa Ahmed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2016
* USD 406,650.00

In this project the Principal Investigator will use a combined experimental and
theoretical approach to understand the role of risk-sensitivity in movement
adaptation. Movements will be analyzed within a decision-theoretic framework.
The central hypothesis is that risk-sensitivity is a fundamental determinant of
movement adaptation. Young and older adults will perform whole-body movement
tasks that involve adaptation to novel reaching dynamics under increasing
conditions of risk. Risk will be modulated by altering the subjective value
associated with a given movement error. Risk-sensitivity will be quantified
based on the relationship between movement error and movement-to-movement
adaptation. Older adults are an ideal population to test model predictions
because the subjective value of an error is greater. They have a reduced
capacity to produce rapid corrections when an error elicits an unwanted action
and have a greater prevalence of injurious falls. Together, these studies will
determine whether risk-sensitivity provides a mechanistic explanation for the
effect of the subjective value of movement error on adaptation.

In terms of broader impacts, this research will test the idea that risk
influences movement adaptation. It articulates a conceptual framework that could
potentially transform current analyses of the decision-making processes
underlying movement adaptation. The proposed work will develop a decision-
theoretic, risk-sensitive model of movement adaptation that can be broadly used
in the field of motor control to investigate learning in a range of movements
and movement contexts, to inform studies on the generalization of risk-sensitive
behavior to non-motor tasks, and how this behavior changes across the lifespan.
It can inspire future studies that leverage risk-sensitivity to facilitate
adaptation, and significantly advance the state-of-the-art in the areas of
sensorimotor control, rehabilitation, and decision making.