* 1230071
* "Semiparametric Estimation and Inference in Partially Identified Econometric Models"
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Hiroaki Kaido, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The econometrics literature has made substantial progress on estimation and
inference methods for economic models, in which the parameter of interest is
identified as a set. Yet, little is known about their properties when such
partially identified models contain both finite and infinite dimensional
parameters. Semiparametric models have been used widely in various empirical
studies to make predictions and to conduct policy evaluations. They combine
tractable parametric specification on key features of an economic model with
flexible nonparametric restrictions on the rest. The main objective of this
project is to expand the scope of semiparametric inference to major classes of
partially identified econometric models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular
focus will be placed on the theory of semiparametric efficiency. Recently, Kaido
and Santos (2011) proposed an asymptotic efficiency concept for an important
subset of partially identified models: the class of models defined by convex
moment inequalities. The proposed research aims to expand the scope of this
framework by studying other major classes of semiparametric partially identified
models. Specifically two topics are considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
topic is on semiparametric regression models with an interval-censored variable.
Interval censoring occurs frequently in micro-level data. The goal is to
estimate a parameter that captures the marginal impacts of covariates on an
interval-valued outcome variable without assuming any specific functional form
of the regression function. The weighted average derivative of the regression
function is one of such parameters. Although this parameter is not point
identified in the presence of interval censoring, this approach may characterize
its identified set. The researchers plan to study asymptotically efficient
estimation of this set. The proposed efficient set-valued estimator will be
useful for conducting empirical studies with survey data such as the Health and
Retirement Study (HRS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second topic studies efficient
estimation of parameters indexed by a nuisance parameter. Many econometric
models contain such parameters. Entry game models, for example, that are used to
study various industries, contain structural parameters that could be fully
recovered when the equilibrium selection rule were known. By varying the
selection rule, the identified set can be equivalently viewed as a function of
it. This project aims to to extend the efficiency concept developed in Kaido and
Santos (2011) to study efficient estimation of this type of identified sets.
Successful developments of inference methods for this class of models will be
useful for conducting policy evaluations efficiently while allowing partial
identification and flexible semiparametric specification.