* 1230463
* SBIR Phase II:  Game-enhanced Interactive Physical Science
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Beth Quinn, Filament Games, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 633,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will produce a
set of engaging educational video games and associated teaching compendiums for
middle school physical science classrooms that are optimized for students with
diverse sets of learning needs, including those with learning disabilities and
reading difficulties, via the application of the Universal Design for Learning
(UDL) framework. Educational video games are the next generation of technology-
enhanced instruction, with a growing body of research suggesting that game-based
learning helps students think systemically, collaboratively, and creatively
about Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM), while creating interest
and motivation toward these topics that extends beyond the classroom. The
company targets middle school since this is the critical period when students
may begin to disengage from STEM topics. The process of developing the games
will include iterative input from educators and students from around the
country, from focus groups to classroom observation. The efficacy of the
resulting set of games will be evaluated in a formal field test. This test will
also provide evidence of the value of UDL in designing educational technology
tools. The resulting product will be available for purchase via the SBIR?s web
store and distributed through the nation?s leading educational
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the development of a cutting-edge solution to a urgent need for more
effective tools for teaching STEM subjects. The President's Council of Advisors
on Science and Technology recently noted (2010) that while the United States
remains at the top in STEM research, we are on the cusp of a stark decline over
the next generation. American students are falling behind other countries in
both STEM-related abilities and desire to enter scientific careers. By creating
a game-centered physical science curriculum, teachers gain the tools they need
to make STEM-subjects accessible and appealing to all students, building the
next-generation's STEM workforce, and promoting scientific literacy among all
citizens. Using the UDL framework and commercial-level production values, GIPS
represents an important innovative to engage and empower students, including
those who are disenfranchised by traditional STEM education methods. Indeed,
advocates for students with disabilities point to the potential of UDL-enhanced
games to increase the accessibility of learning materials for all students. This
game-based learning solution will encourage students to apply the kind of
creative thinking and ingenuity to STEM that will be the driving force behind
the next generation of American scientific innovation.