* 1230217
* SEP Collaborative: Development of Economically Viable, Highly Efficient Organic Photovoltaic Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Lin Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Luping Yu and co-workers at the University
of Chicago, Prof. Yang Yang and co-workers at the University of California at
Los Angeles (UCLA), and Prof. Lin Chen and co-workers at Northwestern
University. The objective of this multidisciplinary collaborative project is to
develop organic solar cells with power conversion efficiency competitive with
amorphous inorganic solar cells. Novel materials (both donor and acceptor
materials) with the best power conversion efficiencies and controlled absorption
windows will be synthesized. Detailed structural and spectroscopic studies will
be performed to probe and understand exciton generation, charge separation, and
transport mechanism in these newly developed materials, which will form the
foundation for device fabrication. Novel geometries of tandem solar cells will
be developed to maximize solar energy conversion. Close collaborations with
active feedback among the team will lead to rapid realization of the research
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall viability of organic photovoltaics (OPV)
as a sustainable energy technology will be assessed based on their
environmental, health, and economic impacts via collaboration with a Dr. Peter
Sinsheimer on urban planning, Prof. Zhu Yifang on public health, and Mr. Timothy
Malloy on societal impact. Issues associated with technology diffusion and
possible commercial, institutional, legal, policy, technological, and cultural
barriers associated with the design, development, and adoption of new
sustainable technologies will be evaluated experimentally and/or based on viable
models. This collaborative effort will be used as a platform to attract
underrepresented undergraduate students to the research area of sustainable
energy pathways. The project will provide great opportunity to educate and train
graduate students and postdoctoral associates in system-based research in the
area of sustainable energy pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this project
succeeds, it will result in alternative solar energy harvest materials and
devices that can be manufactured in an environmentally friendly approach, with
flexibility, and at a low cost. It will change the landscape of renewable energy
and exert significant impact on sustainable economic development and
environmental protection. The resulting technology may penetrate into our daily
life, as it may be used in a wide range of electronic devices like portable
battery chargers, energy saving computer displays, and house decorations.
Students working on this project will be prepared to become leaders in renewable
energy research and development.