* 1230609
* SEP Collaborative: Alkaliphilic microalgae-based sustainable & scalable processes for renewable fuels and products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Sasidhar Varanasi, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 950,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Sridhar Viamajala and co-workers at the
University of Toldeo, Prof. Robin Gerlach and co-workers at Montana State
University, and Prof. Gregory Characklis of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. This project will focus on high lipid-producing native alkaliphilic
algae which are less susceptible to detrimental contamination (due to their
extreme growth environment) and able to accumulate large amounts of lipid. In
addition, the project will develop and test low-energy options for cell
harvesting as well as for fuel and high value product generation. Through
integration of unique and robust advances in algal culture stability and
productivity as well as research targeted on the critical processes of algae
harvesting and conversion of biochemicals, scalable, environmentally and
economically acceptable processes to produce renewable fuels and chemicals will
be developed.

The results of this project will be of interest to industry, local communities,
regulators, and academia. Specific outreach efforts will be directed towards
each of these primary stakeholders through: (1) dissemination of research
outcomes to local community members and industry stakeholders at conferences,
trade meetings and by local community and legislator engagement; (2) engagement
of underrepresented Native American students from Montana high schools and
tribal colleges in summer research activities as well as undergraduate
researchers in the PIs' laboratories; (3) education and training at the K-12
level through training of high school teachers; (4) development of an
interdisciplinary distance-learning course sequence on "Sustainable Biofuels"
that will cover broad topics on the fundamental biology, chemistry, engineering
and sustainability aspects of biofuel production; (5) generation of information
useful in making informed judgments regarding tradeoffs between cost and
environmental impact using the results of the life-cycle analyses.

This sustainable energy pathway minimizes energy and materials requirements
through use of low-energy chemical and biological processes coupled with
nutrient and water recycle. The global warming potential (GWP) of such
biorefineries would be significantly lowered through the use of energy-efficient
cultivation, harvesting and conversion methods as well as by minimizing external
demands for nutrients and water. Overall, these solutions to the challenge of
economic and sustainable energy from algae will be transformative through the
development of novel scientific and technical advances, balanced with
environmental, economic and societal merits. These algal farms will not compete
with arable lands, food production, or use high quality water.