* 1230132
* Pilot Project: A Multidisciplinary Exploratory Study of Alpine Cairns, Baranof Island, Southeast Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2016
* William Hunt, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 10/31/2016
* USD 290,992.00

This pilot project is an exploratory study of alpine cairns on Baranof Island in
Southeast Alaska. This is an archeological investigation engaging experts in the
fields of archaeology, botany, and ethnohistory in a multidisciplinary study of
upland cairns (artificial arrangements of stacked rocks or mounds of stones) in
southeastern Alaska. The PI argues that very little has been done to explore the
upland archaeology of the region and nothing is known about the functions of the
cairn sites. It has been hypothesized that these structures were used for
hunting blinds, burials, boundary markers, etc. The research team proposes to
survey the sites and disassemble selected cairns in order to gain data on their
age and function. It will also gather oral history from Tlingit elders in the
region to determine the extent of their knowledge about traditional Tlingit
activities in the alpine areas, the cairns, and perhaps some insights into their
function.

The project will recover data relating to ages, functions, and distributions of
cairns on mountains Southeast Alaska. Cairns appear to be quite prevalent in
this region of Alaska but their distribution, specific topographic settings, and
functions remains unknown. This investigation has the potential to feed into a
much broader research agenda that examines the evolution of social complexity
among hunting and gathering groups, one that sheds light on early native North
American social and cultural organization. In addition, the project will test an
innovative methodology, lichenometry, for dating these rock cairn sites; and is
in addition, an innovative project that brings together archaeology and oral
historic methods and data to provide new insights on these structures.

Finally, the project includes partnerships with the US Forest Service (USFS) and
local Alaska Native communities interested in the data uncovered by the project.
Native communities are very interested in learning more about their ancestors.
Native high school and/or college students will be included in the field team
and communications with tribal leadership will be enhanced through daily/weekly
information exchanges between the PI and tribal liaisons. Investigative data
will be utilized by the USFS in developing their plan for protection,
preservation and interpretation of their alpine cultural resources.