* 1230364
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Throughput Agile Robotic Manufacturing System for Tile Mosaics
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Edward Acworth, Artaic LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,305,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
a prototype of a&lt;br/&gt;high-throughput, agile, low-cost manufacturing system
for tile mosaics. Mosaics have been a source of&lt;br/&gt;visual splendor for
millennia, but they have always required arduous and painstaking hand
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;Our Phase I proved the feasibility of a programmable, high-
throughput robotic tile-assembly system to&lt;br/&gt;enhance the production of
mosaic tilings. Phase II R&amp;D will build upon Phase I success to further
speed&lt;br/&gt;up, automate and scale the system, develop an effective agile
manufacturing management system, and&lt;br/&gt;analyze the economic viability of
robotic mosaic assembly for Phase III. We will accomplish this
by&lt;br/&gt;enhancing the mechanical processes and reducing operator time - in
addition to developing a productionflow&lt;br/&gt;information system. After
Phase II system optimization, we will evaluate the commercial
potential&lt;br/&gt;of the Artaic technology. The anticipated technical result
will be providing a 5x faster manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;process with a 75%
reduction in the price per square foot of customizable mosaic tilings produced.
The&lt;br/&gt;intellectual merits of this SBIR project involve Artaic?s
disruptive robotic technology, which transforms&lt;br/&gt;mosaic installation
from its current, time-consuming manual labor processes to a rapid,
robotically&lt;br/&gt;directed customizable process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project expands the utilization of
artisanal mosaic work&lt;br/&gt;while increasing the competitive advantage of
U.S. manufacturing processes through increased&lt;br/&gt;automation and
customization. Successful development of this technology will enable a
breakthrough&lt;br/&gt;pricing structure that is 75% lower than the competition
(based on manual and rudimentary automated&lt;br/&gt;processes), leading to
broad market affordability and widespread commercial adoption. Our
robotic&lt;br/&gt;system has the potential to revolutionize the $76B global tile
industry, while creating numerous&lt;br/&gt;domestic job opportunities. Artaic
expects that the 5x increase in manufacturing speed realized
during&lt;br/&gt;Phase I will be maintained in Phase II during manufacturing
scale-up without loss of placement&lt;br/&gt;accuracy. The increased
understanding of robotic agile manufacturing-enabled mass
customization&lt;br/&gt;processes will expand the scientific understanding of
related robotic processes that utilize highthroughput&lt;br/&gt;flexible
assemblies, such as for medical or pharmaceutical technologies, or for
consumer&lt;br/&gt;products. In addition, classical mosaic techniques will
become more accessible as an art form to all&lt;br/&gt;students, while
undergraduate students will increase their understanding of STEM concepts
through&lt;br/&gt;engineering courses utilizing this technology. Artists and
designers will find the realization of their&lt;br/&gt;design work much more
practical and affordable as a business enterprise.