* 1230201
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Historical and Philosophical Analysis of the Genetic Maps in Seymour Benzer's Research on Genetic Fine Structure
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Sandra Mitchell, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 10,865.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models are widely used tools in biological
research, but their uses by biologists in their day-to-day research activities
are not well understood. What roles do models play in everyday research? Should
we think of models as serving various aims in science or as serving some
overarching aim despite the apparent diversity of their uses? This project will
address these questions by developing a case study of Seymour Benzer's uses of
genetic maps, meaning diagrammatic models of genes, in his research during the
1950s and 1960s on the fine scale structure of
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
analyzes Benzer's research notebooks and correspondence at the Caltech Archives,
extending the existing work on Benzer's research. Using the detailed account of
scientific practice generated from the archival research, the project will
explore possible philosophical perspectives on the aims of models and identify a
perspective that is well motivated by the detailed analysis of the uses of
genetic maps. The project will thus enrich a long-standing debate in general
philosophy of science over positions regarding the aims of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address diverse concerns of researchers in history, cognitive
science, and philosophy. First, from the historical analysis of Benzer's genetic
maps, historians will be able to gain a detailed understanding of what the maps
did in the everyday research of one of the key figures in the history of
genetics. Second, since genetic maps are diagrammatic models drawn on paper,
those historians interested in similar tools in other sciences may gain a new
perspective on their own work. Third, the study of Benzer's notebooks may also
uncover novel cognitive phenomena that may become the subject of future studies
in cognitive science. Finally, by firmly grounding a philosophical debate over
models in the details of a biologist's practice, this project has the potential
to transform this debate in philosophy of science.