* 1230118
* Cognitive Structural Equation Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Joachim Vandekerckhove, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

This project will combine two types of data analysis strategies that are common
in different fields. In cognitive psychology, the state of the art is cognitive
process modeling. Data are analyzed by fitting mathematical representations of
cognitive functions to data and interpreting the obtained parameter estimates.
In psychometrics, the most common form of data analysis involves latent variable
modeling. Batteries of small tests, each individual test imperfect, are jointly
analyzed to uncover unobservable underlying factors, such as general
intelligence or specific abilities. Cognitive modeling succeeds in extracting
more information from data, whereas psychometrical methods are useful for
pooling information across tasks or participants. Combining these two traditions
involves the formal challenges of applying latent variable structure to
cognitive model parameters, integrating the mathematical assumptions of both
strategies, and investigating the effects of those combined assumptions. The
project also involves technical challenges, such as implementing the methods in
software. A new hybrid method called cognitive structural equation modeling will
be applied in a retrospective analyses of data on cognitive executive functions
and data on facets of working memory. Additionally, a cognitive structural
equation model will be used to investigate the stability of participants'
behavior in cognitive tasks over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new method will
be particularly well suited for the simultaneous analysis of different cognitive
tasks in order to uncover underlying structure in participants' aptitude in the
tasks. Improvements in psychological measurement are potentially useful in a
variety of contexts, ranging from fundamental research in perception, cognition,
memory, decision making, emotion, and development, to applied measurement in
educational testing, job selection, and psychodiagnosis. Software developed as
part of this project will be made freely available to researchers.