* 1230447
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Tactile Online Nursing Trainer for Clinical Breast Exams
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Mark Goldstein, MammaCare Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 616,223.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is about a
devastating medical error that affects millions of women, a breast cancer that
can be felt by hand but remains unconfirmed and untreated for months or years.
Known as missed, palpable breast cancer, the cause is plainly, lack of training
and skill. The result is delayed diagnosis for millions of women and disease
that is more extensive, painful, and costly. Poorly performed breast exams also
result in unnecessarily high rates of false positive findings, which means
?detecting? disease that is not truly present. MammaCare scientists developed
and standardized training and certification for nurses and physicians to perform
proficient and effective breast exams. This training is taught by expert
instructors who teach practitioners how to reliably detect small, suspicious
breast tumors, about the size of a pea. However, this training is costly and
time consuming. It cannot reach the thousands of nursing and medical students
and practitioners who perform these exams.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to reduce the toll of
breast cancer by giving all nurses who examine women the skill to detect the
smallest, earliest signs of the disease. To do this we created a new skill-based
teaching technology using high-fidelity breast models, computers and the
Internet to provide practitioners with essential breast exam skills. The
training is self-administered, inexpensive, and effective. Our colleagues at the
Mayo Clinic found that nursing students and nurses were much more accurate in
detecting breast tumors after the training than they were before receiving it.
The potential benefits of this technology for millions of women are reduced
medical errors, improved breast cancer screening accuracy, and a better chance
for disease-free survival.