* 1230248
* SBIR Phase II:  Hybrid Question Answering Combining a Search Index with an RDF Store
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Marta Tatu, Lymba Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 702,026.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will provide
integrated, seamless access to structured and unstructured information. At
present there is no easy way to perform a single federated search across
structured databases and unstructured text documents, and complex applications
over diverse data sources require considerable time and effort to develop. The
multilingual Hybrid Question Answering (HQA) engine will change the way people
access heterogeneous data by answering complex questions over semantic models
from the database and free text from the search indexes of product literature,
call center data, social media, etc. HQA will answer a broad range of questions
including factoid, procedural, explanation and scenario-matching. Users will
also be able to discover facts, relationships among events, and sentiments; to
identify trends and enable predictions. Finally, to ensure high precision, HQA
will process information in its native form for 11 languages, including English.
A minimum score of 70% MRR is expected for the English HQA system and 60% MRR
for the other 10 languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project spans several key areas. The HQA engine will surpass
existing Questioning Answering technology by answering a wide range of complex
questions with information found in both structured and unstructured data
sources. Social media-based applications such as trend finding, sentiment
detection, and predictive analysis operating in international markets will
greatly benefit from the availability of the multi-lingual HQA
system.&lt;br/&gt;Customer Relation Management (CRM), Business Intelligence and
Social Media are among the primary commercial applications benefiting from the
development of the HQA engine. The impact of this technology will result in
businesses being able to develop more personalized relationships with customers
as a result of a better understanding of customer needs and motivations.
Traditional business relationships will become more responsive, resulting in
greater understanding and trust, which will mitigate destructive, wide swings in
financial markets caused by poor predictive models.