* 1230240
* Collaborative Research:   Characterization of the Two-dimensional/Temporal Mosaic of Drop Size Distributions and Spatial Variability (Structure) in Rain
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Larsen, College of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 325,402.00

Characteristic scales and structures of precipitation particle distributions
have generally been explored over dimensions considerably larger than 1 km, yet
for several reasons it is important to characterize their variability on far
smaller scales. These include the need to: (1) optimize interpretation of
observations made by simple rain gages and disdrometers and the translation of
such measurements to much larger scales, as needed for validation of numerical
weather forecasts and flood warnings; (2) better understand drop interactions
and evolution in a multi-dimensional context rather than just the classical time
dependent treatment in the vertical for falling precipitation (as has often been
considered adequate for representation of processes including raindrop
collision, coalescence and break-up); (3) achieve a more complete description of
how radar-emitted microwaves interact with rain; and (4) ultimate connection and
perhaps translation of 1-D observations of drop size distributions to larger 2-D
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project derives
from quantification of small-scale precipitation structures via combined use of
a 2-D video disdrometer in conjunction with a networked array of optical
disdrometers, through which investigators will calculate pair-correlation
functions in rain to derive improved measures of any given precipitation field's
horizontal geometry. Disdrometer observations (whose horizontal separation may
be readily adjusted) will also allow examination a wide range of distances for
possible scaling, self-similarity and functional structures of drop size
distributions so as to better connect with remote-sensor measurements of
precipitation covering large areas. The over-arching objective of this work is
to collect and analyze time-series observations of rainfall over horizontal
scales ranging from centimeters (as observed using a 2-D video disdrometer) up
to several tens to perhaps a hundred meters or more. Broader Impacts will come
through potential contributions to improved flood prediction and monitoring as
well as better processes relevant to soil erosion, through support of hands-on
student involvement in, and through improved observational infrastructure at an
undergraduate institution serving underrepresented groups.