* 1230451
* SBIR Phase II:  A Pneumatically Actuated Robot System
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Michael Kriegsmann, Sunstream Scientific Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2016
* USD 715,880.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
challenge of coupling direct drive servo actuators to industrial robotic plants
with uncertainties. Enhanced productivity sought in many applications requires
higher cycle rates placing great demands on machine kinematics, actuators and
control systems. Further increase in operating speed must resolve dynamic
challenges intrinsic in directly coupling servo actuators and robot linkages.
When compared with existing electromechanical servo actuators - which route
power through complex mechanical transmissions - direct-drive actuation of robot
linkages enables simple mechanics and rapid motion, but does not provide dynamic
isolation between the actuator and robotic plant. Consequently, direct-drive
servo actuators are sensitive to variations in plant parameters, unknown
disturbances, and un-modeled dynamics. This project will investigate and develop
a prototype of an innovative, direct-drive pneumatic robot actuator that employs
an advanced control strategy to rapidly accommodate dynamic system variations.
Effectiveness of a new control strategy that relies on limited specific
knowledge of the plant to optimize robustness to bounded uncertainties will be
researched and developed. Success of this project will provide for significant
advances in speed, load capacity, and affordability in contemporary industrial
robotic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project involves engineering research conducted to enhance
understanding of the dynamic interaction between direct-drive servo actuators
and robotic mechanisms, and further to enhance the effectiveness and
understanding of a control strategy which provides for an advantageous coupling
between them, heretofore not practically feasible. This has the potential of
introducing transformative change in the robotics industry, and to industrial
automation in general. Furthermore, the controls knowledge gained from this
research can be extended to many electric servo systems and to industrial
control systems in general. Two market segments will be targeted: robotics and
general motion control (GMC), both estimated at $7 billion. If software,
peripherals and systems engineering are included, the robotics market is
estimated at $19 billion. Both the robotics and GMC industries significantly
support the national economy with applications ranging from manufacturing and
food processing, to medical advances such as remotely controlled surgery, and to
national defense. Well-paying new hi-tech jobs are created in engineering and
technical services. This research will develop new applications in robotics and
industrial automation, educational STEM opportunities, enhanced scientific and
technological understanding, making the U.S. more competitive globally.