* 1230663
* EAGER: Telehealth and Wellness for Senior Citizens Utilizing In-Home Gigabit HD Multipoint Videoconferencing
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Marvin Schwartz, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

High-Definition Multipoint Videoconferencing is a core application for Gigabit
and faster networks. Commercial systems, designed for 10 megabit and slower
networks, employ expensive conferencing bridges that have to be managed, limit
the number of concurrent video conferences, and limit the quality of the video.
In this research project, the endpoints discover and exchange their capabilities
and determine the usable network bandwidth between them to negotiate parameters
for the best quality video conference. Since the video conferences are
established between two or more endpoints directly, the solution is scalable.
And since no conferencing bridge is used, the solution is affordable. By taking
advantage of the Gigabit or faster network bandwidth, the endpoints can send
reduced-compression video or uncompressed video that is higher quality than that
offered by current systems. In GENI-enabled networks, layer 2 routing is used to
increase effective bandwidth and GENI slices are used for enhanced privacy.

The Case Connection Zone, a Gigabit fiber-to-the-home research project of Case
Western Reserve University, is demonstrating how the Gigabit network can be used
to improve quality of life for the residents in several national priority areas,
including health and wellness. Next generation HD multipoint video conferencing
is an essential tool for several initiatives. In about 200 senior residences, it
enables seniors, without leaving home, to consult clinicians, participate in
chronic disease support groups, in social groups, and in lifelong learning. Many
Gigabit applications will incorporate this technology or be built upon it.