* 1230424
* SBIR Phase II:  Laser-Based Replacement for FTIR Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Miles Weida, Daylight Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2015
* USD 871,163.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will realize the
full potential of a new quantum cascade laser (QCL) infrared microscope for
medical diagnostics. Infrared microscopy can be used for tissue identification
without staining, potentially allowing quick, in situ diagnostics for diseases
such as cancer. Present infrared microscopes based on Fourier transform infrared
(FTIR) spectrometers and cooled detectors have a high cost and slow image
acquisition speed that limits their usefulness in standard medical clinic
settings. New QCL technology makes compact, broadly tunable laser light sources
a reality for the mid-infrared region (3 to 12 um) where these microscopes
operate. The high power of these lasers also makes it possible to use less
sensitive (and lower cost) room temperature focal plane arrays for image
acquisition. The Phase I research demonstrated that microscopy and imaging are
indeed possible with coherent light sources like QCLs. The performance
enhancements available with the rapid tuning and high intensity of QCLs will
allow cancer screening via infrared tissue analysis at unprecedented speeds. The
intellectual merit in the proposal is to create a useful product based on this
new technology that can benefit cancer researchers and medical diagnostics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is that infrared microscopes with increased capabilities and reduced
cost can be developed and made available for medical diagnostics at the clinic
level. Recent research demonstrates that infrared microscopy offers the
resolution and tissue identification capabilities necessary for it to be used in
automated algorithms for cancer screening. In spite of this potential
usefulness, infrared microscopy has been confined to select labs. This is in
part due to existing FTIR technology that does not allow the reduction in size
and cost, nor increase in acquisition speed and resolution, necessary to make
infrared microscopy a common analytical technique. The QCL microscope to be
built in Phase II will revolutionize infrared microscopy instrumentation. Based
on demonstrated performance of components in Phase I, it is estimated that the
time to screen a tissue array for signs of cancer will be reduced from six days
with a FTIR microscope, to just three minutes with a QCL microscope. This kind
of performance is a game-changer for infrared microscopy, and will help drive
larger adoption of the technique in clinical settings, and in automated systems
that aid in rapid screening for disease.