* 1230521
* Scholars Award: An Envirotechnical Approach to Batteries, the Environment, and Questions of Sustainability
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* James Turner, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 92,899.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Batteries are currently seen as essential to a
new generation of environmentally friendly technologies, such as electric cars
and renewable energy systems, but they also have a long history as key
components in modern transportation, communication, and electrical systems. This
research is organized around a central question: How can social and
environmental analysis of the history of battery technologies inform efforts to
advance sustainability policy and technology? This project proposes to answer
this question by examining three case studies: Lead-acid batteries, alkaline
batteries, and lithium-ion batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The history of modern energy systems and their social
significance is a central topic in Science, Technology, and Society (STS)
research. Most STS scholars have focused on large-scale systems of energy
generation and distribution, such as hydroelectricity and fossil fuels, which
met the energy demands of modern society. This project highlights a different
and often under-addressed set of social, political, and environmental factors
related to the life cycles of metals and chemicals important to batteries and
the systems in which they are used. This project takes an enviro-technical
approach, grounded in environmental history and history of technology, that
examines batteries and the systems in which they are embedded as both social and
natural. To engage a consumer industry that is global in scope, this project
extends that approach conceptually and methodologically by drawing on global
commodity chain analysis and industrial ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this STS research project
will contribute to specific policy discussions, including waste and recycling
policy, trans-boundary pollution issues, strategic and conflict mineral
sourcing, renewable energy policy, and transportation policy. They will be
broadly disseminated to a broad audience including engineers, policymakers, and
the general public, interested in the role of technology in advancing a
sustainable future. They will be disseminated in multiple ways, including a
series of oral histories with individuals involved in the battery industry,
policy-relevant research articles, and, with the support of undergraduate
research students, public outreach including a website, high-school teaching
curricula, and museum presentations.