* 1230311
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Rules for Human Rhythmic Motor Coordination
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Tim Kiemel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2016
* USD 393,685.00

Walking for a healthy adult seems easy. However, underlying this apparent
simplicity our nervous system is performing a task of astounding complexity.
Using sensory information about body movement, the nervous system coordinates
the activation of dozens of muscles so that we stably and efficiently move
through our environment. For example, if our nervous system senses that our foot
will strike the ground too soon, it will adjust muscle activations so we do not
stumble and fall. In this project, an interdisciplinary team of investigators
aims to uncover the rules the nervous system uses to make such adjustments.
Using a general theoretical framework taken from engineering (used to
understand, for example, the rhythmic control of the angle of attack of rotating
helicopter blades), the method depends on gently perturbing a person's senses
and body in various ways and observing how the nervous system adjusts muscle
activations in response. The investigators will first test their methods on a
simpler type of rhythmic movement, repetitive hitting of a virtual ball with a
paddle, then extend the findings to coordination during walking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By constructing a general approach to understanding the
control of rhythmic movements, including swimming in fish, flying in insects and
birds, and walking in people and robots, the investigators may provide a
foundation for understanding how control breaks down for people with
neurological conditions such as stroke and incomplete spinal cord injury. This
has the potential to advance neuromuscular rehabilitation and the design of
assistive devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[Co-funded by CISE and SBE]