* 1230911
* Comparative Histories of Scientific Conservation: Nature, Science, and Society in Patagonian and Amazonian South America
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Emily Wakild, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 195,761.00

Introduction

South American nations were among the first to create parks; they protect the
highest number of large reserves, and they retain the highest percentage of
protected areas with people living inside. But little comparative work has
contextualized their initial declaration, their evolution, or their societal
meaning. As a result, generalizations are being made about parks globally that
overlook the role of scientists in transforming the landscape. This project asks
how the development of natural field sciences has led to the establishment,
maintenance, and promotion of national parks in Amazonia and Patagonia.

Intellectual Merit

This research merges a history of science approach to understanding technical
research with environmental history's insights into social, political, and
cultural influences within and across societies. As a comparative study, it will
use the long twentieth century (1870s to present) to chart the contours of
scientifically-informed conservation through attention to six park groups in
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Peru. The project methodology involves document
analysis of archival sources (such as exploration journals, research station
records, published studies, and correspondence) as well as oral histories of
scientists and social groups interacting with scientists. Abundant literature on
conservation exists in disciplines like conservation biology, geography,
anthropology, and political science but few studies give the comparative
perspective of time and place. Careful historical research will bridge current
debates in these disciplines by contextualizing the competing systems of
knowledge and scientific traditions.

Potential Broader Impacts

Despite their seemingly benign presence, national parks have a contested
history. That history explains much about how science becomes policy, how
scientific understandings shape the landscape, and how global networks of
scientific knowledge have influenced the protection of nature. Understanding the
past with greater clarity will provide a better framework for understanding the
role of science in shaping conservation policies. The results of this project
will be disseminated in multiple ways (a book, a teaching website, and an
international symposium) to enhance the prospects for having these impacts.