* 1230352
* SBIR Phase II:  Method for Genetic Detection Using Interspersed Genetic Elements
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Sudhir Sinha, InnoGenomics Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 875,999.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
develop the next-generation DNA test kits for forensic DNA testing. DNA
profiling has developed significantly over the past 20 years and is routinely
used to solve crime. Despite improvements in DNA testing technologies and
equipment, a significant number of investigative biological samples do not yield
informative results, due to excessive degradation of DNA. A significant number
of crime scene and mass disaster samples are still unable to produce useful
profiles due to current technology limitations. This research project utilizes a
proprietary primer design approach in to analyze a significant number of
degraded DNA samples. This project will also contribute to a basic understanding
of human populations and their ancestral origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this proposed project, if successful,
will allow society to obtain answers to identification questions that could not
previously be obtained, due to the limitations of current technology. Some of
the benefits that can be expected from the development of this technology
include: Solving more crimes using next generation DNA tests, including cases
that were previously not testable, due to excessively degraded samples;
assisting in the resolution of missing persons cases; provide closure to
families of mass disaster victims such as the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Hurricane
Katrina as well as identifying human remains of soldiers who lost their lives on
foreign soil; provide ancestral origin information for individuals seeking
information regarding their genealogy; provide a powerful intelligence tool that
can be used for national security, military and in-combat efforts; and provide
data for the educational and research studies of human anthropology. Overall,
the resulting commercial impact of this transformational technology and the
positive contribution it will have to society is immeasurable.