* 1230680
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Fundamental Research: Foaming and Frothing Behavior of Green Surfactants and Fine Particulate Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2014
* USD 97,306.00

Program Director's Recommendation Center for Particulate and Surfactant Systems
(CPaSS) Proposal # 1230367 & 1230680 Moudgil and Somasundaran

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Partculate and Surfactant Systems
(CPaSS) located at the University of Florida (lead site) and Columbia
University. Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF
approved solicitation, NSF 11-570. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit
proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental research.

This proposal will investigate foaming properties of green surfactants and the
effects of presence of fine particles on foaming and frothing behavior. The
primary goals of the proposal are 1)to understand physico-chemical aspects of
the foaming/defoaming properties of green surfactant formulations and surface
modified fine particles; 2)study the structure of surfactant films at the
liquid-gas and solid-liquid interfaces; and 3)to develop efficient
foaming/defoaming formulations. Experiments will involve the macroscopic
measurements of foam/froth stability and a vibrational FTIR and Raman)
spectroscopic study of the molecular organization of green surfactants in the
liquid films of foams. A new FTIR spectroscopic method will be employed to
acquire spectra of unstable bubbles. Dissipative Particle Dynamics (DPD)
computational simulation will be used to simulate the green surfactant systems.
The DPD modeling will be adapted to facilitate interpretation of experimental
data.

Results of this study will advance the fundamental understanding of the
parameters that govern the antagonistic and synergistic effects of green
surfactant formulations and their mixtures with modified fine particles on the
foamability, frothing, and defoaming of the solutions and suspensions. The
industries interested in the proposed fundamental studies include green
surfactant producers, mineral processing, petroleum, paints and coatings
industries, biochemical separation, cosmetics, personal care, and household
products industries, as well as those interested in the environmental
remediation. Specifically, a comprehensive understanding of the foam stability
of green surfactants will lead to the development of new formulas for their
applications in personal care and cosmetics products, while the knowledge about
the fine particles interactions with green surfactants will lead to the
development of cost effective foaming, frothing, and de-foaming systems.