* 1230312
* I/UCRC:  Looking beyond catastrophic brain injuries to mild traumatic brain injury -fundamental research to advance new frontiers in injury prevention
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Flaura Winston, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2014
* USD 195,662.00

Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies (CChIPS) Proposal # 1230312 Flaura
Winston

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies
(CChIPS) located at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Funding Requests
for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF
11-570. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of
industry-defined fundamental research.

Concussions (also known as mild traumatic brain injuries - mTBI) are not only
the most common injury sustained by children in crashes but often lead to poor
outcomes that affect a child's quality of life. Understanding the biomechanics
of mTBI for children goes beyond automotive injury prevention and advances a
CChIPS strategic goal of expansion into sports injury prevention. This
Fundamental Research proposal addresses industrys need for data to drive safety
innovation on preventing mTBI in children. The primary objectives in this
proposed research are to: 1) validate the ability of helmet-based sensors to
measure the head acceleration of a helmeted youth hockey player and 2) quantify
the head biomechanics experienced by youth hockey players across a typical
season and correlate these to measured neurocognitive deficits.

By providing an in-depth understanding of injury mechanisms and injury metrics
associated with concussion linked with medical data, this research will lead to
new ATD (anthropometric test device), injury criteria and testing protocols.
These new tools will fuel the cycle of product development for technology to
prevent mTBI in children both for the automotive and sports equipment
industries. The proposed work will contribute novel data relating engineering
metrics to neurological and cognitive outcomes associated with head impacts to
the pre-adolescent. This project also facilitates creation of an international
site of CChIPS in Sweden and provides a platform for attracting new members from
the sports injury prevention industry.