* 1230418
* SBIR Phase II:  Serious Gaming Platform for Mastering the Physician-Patient Diagnostic Interview
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* David Baker, IntelligentSimulations LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/28/2015
* USD 551,483.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will complete
development of the Artificial Intelligent (AI) Patient platform. This immersive
simulation platform helps medical students hone their listening and rapport-
building skills by interacting with ?virtual? patients. The student asks
questions and the video clip response from the patient depends on the specific
question asked, how that question is asked, and when it is asked in the
interview. If the student asks the wrong question, or asks inappropriate
questions, then the patient will respond in a way that will prevent a positive
doctor-patient relationship from developing. Because it combines video clips and
artificial intelligence and is web-based, we anticipate that this training
platform will teach a medical school student (and other health professionals)
how to really pay attention to their patients, and that it will do so more
effectively than other training products already on the market. In Phase II, we
will complete the platform build, incorporate additional artificial intelligence
and speech recognition capabilities, create versions of the platform that will
work on smart phones and tablets, and develop a set of six patient scenarios.
This work will result in a platform that closely approximates a natural
conversational experience.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to achieve a
significant advancement over currently available computer-based training and
other instructional tools. Medical schools are experiencing a transition from
passive to active methods of teaching, as professors and students both have the
desire to replace passive learning methods of PowerPoint slides, lectures, and
instructional videos with more interactive methods of learning. The active
experience provided by the AI Patient platform will help students learn to be
more effective listeners and better health practitioners, which will result in
better patient outcomes. The platform will also allow researchers to track and
measure the effectiveness of using this kind of training tool. By working with
our medical school teaming partners (West Virginia University School of Medicine
and the West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine), we will develop a set of
scenarios that we can license to other medical schools. Sales to the medical
school community will support the development of more medical scenarios and
enable us to expand into other sectors?such as law enforcement, HR training, and
social work?where trust and rapport-building skills are critical.