* 1230127
* SBIR Phase II:  Dissolvable Microneedle Study for Migraine Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Seajin Oh, TheraJect
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a new sumatriptan delivery method for effective migraine therapy that offers
both rapid and sustained relief from pain. Triptans are the mainstay of
treatment for acute migraine. Migraines are typically treated using tablets or
nasal sprays that provide a slow drug release or via injection that provides the
fastest drug release. However, the administration via injection is not
accessible to patients at the moment of need. The proposed patent-protected drug
delivery patch will target over nine million chronic migraine patients who are
dissatisfied with currently available pain relief treatment options. The
technology is based on the use of dissolvable microneedles that do not cause
pain because of their small size. The method will provide a non-invasive, rapid
release of migraine medication (e.g. sumatriptan) with minimal inconvenience to
patients. It also incorporates a sustained mechanism of drug delivery. The Phase
II project objectives are to further optimize the formulations for fabrication
of the dissolvable microneedles, scale-up the manufacturing and validate the
patch application in animal tests.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is as follows: The
proposed dissolvable microneedle technology for painless drug delivery through
the skin is generic and its use is envisioned for a wide variety of drugs. The
microneedle technology will enable new ways for novel drug delivery for both
small and large drug molecules through the skin. The total potential market size
for this platform technology may include protein drugs ($27 billion, expanding
rapidly due to advances in biotechnology and DNA recombinant technology),
vaccine ($7 billion), and cosmetics ($8 billion). The delivery of migraine
medication that is being developed under this project has a $5.0 billion market
worldwide because there is an immediate customer need for non-invasive,
immediate release pain-relief methods. The potential impact of the proposed
technology is very broad, bringing migraine pain relief to about 10% of the
adult population worldwide that suffer from moderate to severe chronic migraine
pain.