* 1230413
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Memory Having Both Volatile and Non-Volatile Modes For High Performance, Low Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Yuniarto Widjaja, Zeno Semiconductor, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2016
* USD 842,464.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project seeks to continue the
development of a novel one-transistor memory device, which has both volatile and
non-volatile functionality, through collaboration with a commercial foundry
partner. Such memory combines the non-volatile memory's ability to retain
information in the absence of power (such as Flash memory) and the fast access
speed and reliability of a volatile memory (such as Static Random Access Memory
(SRAM)). In addition to the memory cell development and optimization, a memory
block will also be developed to initiate commercialization effort of the memory
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to enable power-efficient computing applications and mobile devices.
For example, it can be used to reduce power consumptions in data centers. Data
centers' annual energy consumption is estimated to be 150 billion kWh, about
twice the capacity of the current US solar panel. A power-efficient memory such
as the one proposed in this proposal can reduce the overall data centers' power
consumption by up to 75%. Another application is to provide an integrated memory
solution. Many electronic devices currently employ multiple types of memory, due
to their own distinct characteristics. The proposed device will be able to
combine the different types of memory into a single memory device, simplifying
the manufacturing process for embedded memories.