* 1230334
* SBIR Phase II:  Martha Madison's Marvelous Machines
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Victoria VanVoorhis, Second Avenue Software, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,008,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes the
development, testing and commercialization of a collaborative educational game
aimed at middle-school physical science students that will improve educational
outcomes and increase interest in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math) fields across a broad spectrum of students. Martha Madison's Marvelous
Machines, a serious game based on pedagogical best practices, correlated to
curricular standards and supported by lesson plans, challenges students to work
as a team to solve progressively harder physical science problems. Sophisticated
scaffolding guides learners and helps them achieve full potential by encouraging
exploration yet minimizing frustration without giving the answer away. By
tracking play mechanics, the game will test for student engagement, enhancement
of scientific inquiry skills and knowledge of physical science principles. The
game will cover a full year of physical science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses a
need to ignite interest in STEM study and careers at a critical time in
students' education. There is a current lack of research-based, efficacy proven
innovative digital STEM teaching materials. Research shows that middle school is
a pivotal time for encouraging students to pursue math and science related
fields. If interest and engagement in science are not maintained through middle
and high school, successful pursuit of STEM fields drops significantly. Math and
science assessment test results show that U.S. students consistently perform
lower than international counterparts. In addition, women are significantly
underrepresented in STEM careers, filling only 24% of STEM jobs while they hold
48% of all jobs in the U.S. Educational games provide a goal-driven, social
framework for thinking about relevant topics and practicing skills. Through play
and experimentation, games can provoke curiosity, enthusiasm and creativity
about content. While games' merits for increasing engagement are clear, their
role in improving educational content is even more important. As a scalable
solution to a persistent problem, Martha Madison's Marvelous Machines has the
potential to significantly impact U.S. learning and achievement in science.