* 1230069
* Interactional Influences on Survey Participation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Nora Schaeffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2016
* USD 260,596.00

This research focuses on the critical challenge of recruiting participants for
social research surveys, a problem highlighted by the recent National Research
Council?s Panel on the Future of Social Science Data Collection. The refusal
component of nonresponse has grown steadily in recent years, threatening the
ability of surveys to represent the populations from which the samples are
drawn. The proposed research examines the moment-by-moment unfolding reciprocal
influence between interviewers and sample members. For example, when an
interviewer engages in persuasive actions, is it because she has somehow
perceived cues that this sample member is persuadable? When the interviewer
engages in actions that appear to be successful in persuading the sample member,
is it simply that a persuadable sample member has provided her the opportunity
to do so? The research uses new substantive and methodological approaches,
drawing on theories of social exchange and reciprocity; conversation analysis
and the interaction order; and content analysis. The empirical investigations
exploit a unique collection of pairs of acceptances and declinations in a case-
control design that uses observations from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study that
are matched on the sample members' propensity to participate. The matching of
observations provides for comparison between calls that end in acceptances and
declinations of the request for the interview. The project fills a gap in
knowledge about whether sample members' voices provide interviewers with
information that they can use to rapidly form accurate assessments of the
likelihood that a call will lead to an interview. An acoustical analysis of the
sample member's initial speech provides variables such as pitch that can be used
with the case-control design to estimate whether these properties of the sample
member's voice predict acceptance of the request for participation. By
selectively and strategically adding to the existing data transcripts of
subsequent contacts and attempts to obtain cooperation, the research also
expands previous descriptions of ways interviewers tailor and maintain
interaction to describe whether empathic responsiveness and interactional
responsiveness (as specific forms of tailoring) make a difference for
acceptances of the request to participate.

The intellectual merit and importance of the project are rooted in its
contributions to improving the accuracy of social scientific research, which is
key to the nation's data infrastructure. The quality of information that
describes an entire population can be compromised if participation is restricted
to highly selected segments within a sample. This research expands theories of
survey participation and their application to the development of practical
methods for increasing participation in survey interviews for social research.
The broader impacts of the research include identifying specific techniques for
improving recruitment to participation in social research, disseminating
information about these techniques in refereed journals and presentations at
conferences, and training of both graduate and undergraduate students as they
participate in the research effort. The project is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey and
statistical methodology.