* 1230363
* SBIR Phase II:  A low-cost real-time bio-electrochemical nitrate sensor for surface water monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Justin Buck, Cambrian Innovation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 574,865.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will continue
the development of a low-cost real-time bio-electrochemical nitrate sensor for
surface water monitoring initially funded as an NSF SBIR Phase I project. In
Phase I, Cambrian Innovation demonstrated the feasibility of a bio-
electrochemical sensor for measuring the level of nitrate in a water sample.
Following the initial proof-of-principle, a microscale sensor prototype was
developed and tested. The Phase II project will continue the development of the
bio-electrochemical nitrate sensor to reach a detection level of less than 1
mg-N/L with a stable deployment of 6 months. Phase II development will optimize
the sensor architecture and operational conditions for improved performance and
develop a long-lasting substrate for microbial growth. Phase II will also
include the design and construction of prototype electronic components,
including the signal processing algorithm for interpreting the signal emitted by
the bio-electrochemical cell. Finally, the sensor performance will be validated
by extensive laboratory testing under controlled conditions followed by the
initiation of field testing. Upon Phase II completion, Cambrian will be prepared
for final development and testing of a first-generation nitrate sensor system in
a Phase IIB project.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses environmental
nitrogen management, one of the most pressing issues facing society in the 21st
century. Nitrate contamination of waterways has become a high profile topic due
to anoxic dead zones and drops in fish populations. A significant portion of
this environmental impact has been attributed to agricultural run-off (USGS,
DOI, 2000). The need for regulation, monitoring, enforcement, and remediation of
nitrate pollution is limited by a lack of cost-effective technology for
continuous monitoring of nitrate in the environment. Simultaneously, an
increased thrust in precision agriculture has been fueled not only by
environmental concerns but also by the dramatic improvements in crop yield and
quality that can be obtained through careful control of nutrient addition. The
development of a low-cost real-time nitrate sensor will transform the management
of agricultural facilities, resulting in dramatic improvements in fertilizing
efficiency and the environmental impact of the food production industry.
Cambrian Innovation is developing a bioelectrochemical nitrate sensor to fill
this unmet need and establish a new paradigm in environmental sensing.