* 1230081
* Diagnosis and Reduction of Bias in Respondent-driven Sampling
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Krista Gile, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,938.00

Respondent-Driven Sampling (RDS) is a type of link-tracing network sampling used
to study hard-to-reach human populations. Beginning with a convenience sample,
respondents are given uniquely identified coupons to distribute to other
population members, making them eligible for enrollment. This is effective at
collecting large diverse samples from many hard-to-reach populations. Despite
often highly-effective sampling, statistical inference from RDS data is under-
developed. Estimates are based on strong assumptions allowing the data to be
treated as a probability sample. This project develops methodology for RDS in
three ways: (1) Identifying sources of bias and elevated variance in real
populations; (2) Extending the network model-assisted inferential framework to
address additional sources of bias; and (3) Expanding the network model-assisted
framework to arbitrarily large populations. In (1), the research will use
simulated RDS samples from fully-observed network data to both explore features
of real-world network structures that induce bias or elevated variance in
estimates, and also to calibrate diagnostics of such features based on sampled
data. Parts (2) and (3) involve advances of the network model-assisted estimator
for RDS data. This is the most flexible estimator currently available for RDS
data, but is quite computationally burdensome. In (2), the project will extend
the existing network model-assisted estimator to adjust for additional features
of the network and sampling process. In (3), the project will develop a new
variant of this estimator that is more computationally practical in large
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hard-to-reach populations are often at the low
end of disparities in wealth, opportunity, and acceptance and at higher risk for
negative social and health outcomes. These populations couple reduced social and
health opportunities with a difficulty in collecting traditional probability
samples. Thus, RDS is widely used and is of special interest to social and
behavioral scientists as well as public health officials. This project will
allow practitioners to confidently use RDS data in a wider variety of contexts.
Specifically, researchers will (a) better understand which network and sampling
conditions might induce bias into their estimators and have better tools to find
evidence of these features in their samples, (b) have more options for adjusting
their estimators to account for non-ideal network and sampling conditions, and
(c) be able to compute the resulting estimators with greater efficiency, making
the methods practical even in cases of very large target populations. The
project is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and
a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part of a joint activity to
support research on survey and statistical methodology.