* 1230329
* Refinement of Historical Variability and the Baseline for Hydroclimatic Conditions within the Walker Basin: A Multi-Elevational Dendrochronological and Ecohydrological Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Franco Biondi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 344,999.00

Hydroclimatic variability is an increasingly important aspect of water supply
planning in arid and semi-arid regions of the United States and the world. Our
understanding of past processes at relevant timescales (i.e. decadal to
centennial) is often derived from high resolution palaeorecords such as tree
rings. This research project will use tree-ring records to quantify wet and dry
episodes within the Walker River watershed in western Nevada/eastern California.
Along with the collection of long tree-ring chronologies that will stretch from
the present back over 1000 years, this project will establish baseline
conditions at multiple study sites with respect to climate and ecology. To
capture tree-ring responses to individual hydroclimatic variables, such as
summertime temperatures and wintertime precipitation, the researchers will
target four tree species across a range of elevations as well as multiple
topographic aspects. Baseline ecological surveys will be conducted at each study
site to allow for comparison of conditions among a wide range of other surveyed
locations across the Great Basin region. The researchers will use in-situ, free-
air temperature sensors to better interpret microsite conditions relative to
modeled and regional climate data. A climate monitoring station will be
installed at high elevation in an isolated portion of the watershed, which will
capture not only temperature and precipitation, but also solar radiation, wind
patterns, and soil conditions. Both the ecological and sensory data will aid
interpretation of palaeoclimate records, as existing data for most of the
conifer zones in the watershed are limited to modeling products. A primary goal
of this project is to reconstruct seasonal climate variables which would serve
as inputs to water balance modeling over the last 1200 years, a time period
which has seen tremendous variability based on previous tree-ring and lake
sediment studies. Evaluation of watershed behavior during past time periods that
exceed the envelope of our modern observations will aid water managers and users
in decision making and planning as we move into an uncertain future. Records of
past processes show how landscapes respond to variations in climatic and energy
input, and regardless of the cause of future changes in conditions, it is
critical to understand watershed dynamics in arid and semi-arid environments.

This research approach will bolster knowledge in tree-ring science, increase our
understanding of climatic variability at the watershed scale, and clarify
relationships between tree-ring records and water budgets. Reconstruction
results from the project will be of immediate use to scientists, water managers,
and water users within the Walker Basin and adjacent watersheds. Climatic and
ecological data acquired as a result of the project's surveys and installations
will be available to a wide range of public users, with sensor data provided in
real-time. By bringing together Federal, University, and Community College
researchers, this project provides a unique opportunity for collaboration and
outreach across diverse levels. Educational opportunities will be provided to
graduate, undergraduate, and Community College students, who will be able to
participate in field and laboratory work as well as scientific conferences.