* 1230633
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Contesting Maasai Livestock-Herding and Saving Kenyan Wildlife in Creating Amboseli National Park
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Amanda Lewis, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 17,924.00

Introduction

This project will examine the historical relationships between stakeholders
involved in wildlife conservation in protected areas of Africa. She will conduct
research in Amboseli National Park in Kenya. Building on the scientific
literature regarding conservation science in Amboseli, this research will add a
new dimension of historical analysis by examining the perspectives of
scientists, wildlife managers, and the population living around the park,
comprised largely of Maasai. This research will provide a wide scope, from 1940
to the present, for examining changes in conservation policies and how they were
received and implemented by the Maasai population.

Intellectual Merit

The purpose of this research is to understand the impact of conservation on
Maasai livelihoods and how conservation science was influenced by local
knowledge systems. This project will analyze this relationship through oral
histories, participant observation, and archival document analysis. This will be
the first project in this region utilizing ethnographies of scientists as well
as local Maasai residents to understand the local impact of national and
international conservation policies. The methodology will allow for analysis of
the deeper influence of conservation on the lives of groups of people who are
often marginalized through poverty and whose pastoralist lifestyle is often
critiqued for conflicting with conservation.

Potential Broader Impacts

This research has implications for developing community-based conservation
programs, designing social impact research, and understanding scientific
authority regarding local knowledge systems. Local and national authorities will
gain insight into the long-term implications of land use policies and how to
plan for drought management that takes into account both conservation needs and
sustainable livelihoods of local communities, both in this savannah region of
southern Kenya and other regions with fragile biodiversity.