* 1230137
* SBIR Phase II:  Proposal for Research into Low-Cost Distributed Wireless Sensing of Operational Condition in Industrial Electric Motors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Anthony Simon, Energizing Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2014
* USD 499,982.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will result in a
commercially viable network of low cost wireless sensors that predict electric
motor failure before failure occurs. American industries and manufacturers rely
heavily on electric motors to power their equipment and processes. To minimize
motor downtime costs, many use labor intensive preventative maintenance
programs, manually inspecting motors on a fixed schedule. These inspections cost
an average of $500 per motor per year, with 80% of that cost wasted. This waste
can be eliminated through the use of sensors that monitor motor performance in
real time, 24x7. Unfortunately, current systems cost thousands of dollars per
motor on average. This is too expensive for most 1-150 HP motor applications,
which comprise 98% of the motor market. This research will quantify and refine
the performance of a low cost network of sensor nodes, and algorithms used by
the nodes to predict motor failures, through controlled laboratory testing and
field testing. It will also integrate vibration energy harvesting technology
into the nodes. The result will be a network of sensor prototypes that are
demonstrated to meet key performance and price metrics, and are commercially
viable for use with 1-150 HP motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is that a prototype low cost sensor
system will facilitate predictive maintenance of electric motors in US
industrial and manufacturing facilities at a fraction of the cost of the current
alternatives. As a result, tens of thousands of facilities around the US will be
able to afford the initial investment to implement predictive maintenance on
their motor systems, maximize up-time, and minimize motor maintenance costs.
This will increase the competitiveness of these US industrial and manufacturing
firms and ultimately help create and preserve American jobs. Additionally, the
prototype system produced as a result of the research will provide an important
proof-of-concept for low-cost, low-power wireless sensor nodes that should help
spur future development and investment in this field, which is in turn
instrumental for the development of "smart grids", "smart cities", and other
intelligent infrastructure.