* 1230126
* SBIR Phase II:  Secure SMS and Web Service Transactions for Mobile Commerce
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Joshua Cross, Hermes Commerce, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will deliver a
mobile payment&lt;br/&gt;communications infrastructure, mobile device apps for
utilizing that payment infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;point-of-sale solutions for
merchants that utilize the payment infrastructure, and will
establish&lt;br/&gt;the framework for a local advertising network. The mobile
payment system takes advantage of&lt;br/&gt;the speed of contemporary mobile
devices to enable secure web-based transactions. This&lt;br/&gt;payment system
revolutionizes payment by bypassing existing legacy credit and debit
card&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure. New security algorithms and models will be
developed to enable the secure&lt;br/&gt;transfer of banking information. The
proposed payment system empowers consumers to control&lt;br/&gt;privacy,
security, and localization settings in their mobile payment apps. The local
advertising&lt;br/&gt;network changes the value proposition for both merchants
and consumers with respect to ads and&lt;br/&gt;coupons, creating an environment
in which merchants ?push? ads to ?pulling? customers. The&lt;br/&gt;local
advertisement network will fundamentally alter the way users think about
localization,&lt;br/&gt;privacy, and data anonymity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the creation of a
payment&lt;br/&gt;system that revolutionizes commerce. The system will
dramatically reduce or eliminate payment&lt;br/&gt;interchange fees for
merchants, will move consumers much closer to the concept of a
fully&lt;br/&gt;digital wallet, and will create a new level of engagement
between merchants and consumers that&lt;br/&gt;is mutually beneficial. Small,
independent merchants will immediately realize many of the&lt;br/&gt;benefits of
the payment network. These merchants typically pay between $15,000 and
$200,000&lt;br/&gt;annually in credit and debit card interchange fees. The
proposed payment system will reduce or&lt;br/&gt;eliminate these fees enabling
business expansion and job creation. The payment system&lt;br/&gt;effectively
creates local commerce zones where ?buying local? is implicitly strongly
encouraged&lt;br/&gt;through in-network, in-app local advertising, coupons, and
loyalty programs. The payment&lt;br/&gt;system includes seamless peer-to-peer
digital funds transfers. The ultimate goal is a payment&lt;br/&gt;system to make
all commerce - all transfers of funds - frictionless, fast, simple, and easy.
The&lt;br/&gt;mobile commerce market is expected to grow from over $200B this
year to over $600B by 2015.&lt;br/&gt;The technology developed herein will be a
vital driver of that growth.