* 1230091
* Collaborative: Return migration of academic scientists and engineers from the United States to India
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Meghna Sabharwal, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 146,617.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Return migration rates among foreign-born
scientists and engineers in the United States are rising, a trend which is
commonly referred to as Reverse Brain Drain. This qualitative international
collaborative project focuses on the decision process underlying return
migration of Indian faculty in science and engineering by pinpointing key
economic, political, social and cultural factors. The research focuses on Indian
faculty because of their increasing presence and contribution to the science and
engineering workforce in the United States and to economic growth. The
comparative study features primary data collected through more than 150 in-depth
interviews with both stayed and returned faculty in 12 Indian and academic and
research institutions in the United States, as well as department heads at each
of the locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the project lies in its
development of theoretical understanding of how the notion of space and place is
changing with transnational migration, and how the social construction of
nationality is being transformed across borders. The findings will potentially
inform research on human capital, science and technology development,
transnational migration, and immigration patterns and policies. Given the
contributions of foreign-born academics to the scientific innovation of this
country, this research deepens the bonds between the United States and India as
they build upon their national resources and expertise toward furthering joint
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will be integrated
into the classroom and the learning experiences of graduate and undergraduate
courses on human resource management, workforce diversity and science policy.
The findings will also be disseminated through journals publication and
conference presentations. The project has potential to be expanded to include
larger samples of faculty members from China, South Korea and Vietnam, which are
the leading exporters of talent to the American scientific enterprise.