* 1230147
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Activated Swelling Organosilica-Metal Composites Filter Media in Bioretention Systems for Enhanced Remediation of Stormwater Runoff
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Hanbae Yang, Absorbent Materials Company LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 739,163.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop innovative
Osorb bioretention systems for enhanced remediation of stormwater quality. PI,
Dr. Hanbae Yang, is using novel engineered glass-metal hybrid materials
developed by ABSMaterials, Inc. of Wooster, Ohio to remediate environmental
pollutants. Runoff control is an immediate and growing concern in the US.
Stormwater often laden with nutrients, hydrocarbons, herbicides, and
pharmaceuticals, damaging surface water and carrying persistent chemicals
impacting humans and ecosystems. Dr. Yang's innovations for controlling runoff
pollutants using engineered glass (Osorb)-metal composites mixed into
bioretention systems have demonstrated effectiveness on atrazine, estradiol,
endocrine disruptors, BTEX, and nutrients. The Osorb-metal composites combine
two advanced remediation materials: (1) a high-capacity organosilica sorbent,
Osorb, and (2) reactive embedded metals. The composite materials absorb
pollutants by removing them from the water and degrade the pollutants within the
glass. The key technology developments to be achieved in Phase II include (1)
formula optimization field testing with clients, (2) formulation performance
improvements, and (3) development of commercial and modular bioretention
packages. Compared to older bioretention systems, it is expected some of these
systems will see orders-of-magnitude improvement in effective stormwater
pollutant remediation and set new standards for best management practice.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project conducted by Dr. Yang
and ABSMaterials will include: (1) providing an entirely new tool for resolving
combined sewer overflow challenges with green infrastructure for dozens of
cities, (2) substantial reduction of environmental pollution with lower
treatment cost for contaminated stormwater, (3) improvement of aquatic and human
health, and (4) facilitation of green stormwater reuse. The EPA and state
governments are mandating many stormwater programs control non-point-source/CSO
pollution. The tools for runoff treatment are often lacking to meet stricter
regulations. Developing economical and effective Osorb-based stormwater
solutions will substantially reduce negative effects of runoff pollutants on
human and aquatic health. Seattle estimates economic impact of uncontrolled
stormwater runoff at $113M and plans to build 12,000 bioretention systems to
reduce urban runoff by 16,000,000 gallons annually. Other cities, including
Cleveland, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and New York, are developing similar green
infrastructure strategies. ABSMaterials is further developing an integrated
curriculum for science courses at high schools and colleges and providing
internships and training experiences involving advanced materials and water
remediation. The company expects to create 6 new full-time positions working
directly on the commercial activities during the period of this grant.