* 1230148
* SBIR Phase II:  Self Calibrating, Wireless, Needle Implantable Sensor for Continuous Glucose Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michail Kastellorizios, Biorasis Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2016
* USD 696,404.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a wireless, needle implantable miniaturized (0.5 x 0.5 x 5 mm) sensor for
continuous glucose monitoring, with provisions for internal self-calibration
that ultimately eliminates the need for frequent, external finger-pricking. As
part of Phase I project, the internal calibration routine has been developed and
its ?proof-of-concept? has been demonstrated on an implantable glucose sensor
unit operating in porcine serum for a period of 3 weeks. Along these lines, a
proximity communicator (wrist-watch like unit) has also been developed which is
in operable communication with the implantable unit. Phase II aims to further
enhance the reliability of this calibration routine by demonstrating its
efficacy in an in vivo environment (rat model) along with advancement of the
proximity communicator unit in order to establish a two-way communication with a
smartphone capable of real time data processing and implementation of the
internal calibration routine. At the end of Phase-II, the completion of
developmental activities for the self-calibrating glucose monitoring platform is
envisioned, thereby, bringing it a step closer to commercialization in the pre-
clinical animal research market (first market of Biorasis Inc.)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this project are
enormous considering that there is an urgent need for continuous glucose
monitoring devices in view of the growing number of diabetic patients.
Implantable glucose sensors that afford minimal user intervention present a
viable alternative, although their ?user-independent? nature is often undermined
by the need for frequent external calibration via painful finger-pricking. The
proposed project will result in a truly ?user-independent? operation of
implantable glucose sensors. The successful implementation of such an advanced
glucose monitoring technology, which can also be adapted for the management of
other disorders (such as obesity and cardiovascular complications) will pave way
for new jobs in our Stare of Connecticut and neighboring regions in the sectors
medical devices, wireless communication and biosensors. The project will be
performed in the University of Connecticut (UConn) Technology Incubation Program
(TIP) in partnership with UConn collaborators. This industrial/academic
collaboration provides training for the graduate and undergraduate students in
the field of biosensors, optical powering, chip design and wireless data
communication and will motivate them to US industrial competitiveness.