* 1230524
* Scholars Award: The Coming of Age: The Formation of the Global Science and Policy of Aging
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Kavita Sivaramakrishnan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 173,604.00

The formation and dynamics of global science and policy fields are important to
understand because fields shape the kinds of questions that are asked and
answered, who participates in decisionmaking, and who acquires benefits or is
harmed by processes and frameworks. Studies of global science and policy fields
are relatively rare, and those that exist have typically assumed that knowledge
and policy flows are from the global north to other parts of the globe. Recent
research has suggested that this framework is unsound, and misses the critical
exchanges of ideas and people that operate in multiple directions, including
from the global south to the global north. This research project intervenes at
this point, examining how global science and policy fields are formed through
critical exchange points at multiple institutional, state, and extra-state
levels, using a case study of the formation of the science and policy of aging.
More specifically, this study investigates how the science and policy of aging
took form at the local, community, nation and global level, by addressing three
critical questions: 1) how and why specific policymakers and scientists have
conceived of and shaped knowledge about aging and its policies; 2) how and why
specific geographic areas came to be sites of scientific and policy intervention
around aging; 3)what critical arenas and conjuctures played the greatest role in
field formation. Evidence is drawn from archival data and existing documents
from international institutions and NGOs, analysis of scientific publications,
and in-depth interviews with experts and policymakers to explore these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study contributes to social scientific
understandings of the emergence of new science fields by showing how politics
and science intersect to produce transnational networks of experts who can
interact across ideological and political settings. It advances social
scientific knowledge of how fields evolve, gain credibility, and ebb from global
policy agendas, with persistent legacies in contemporary
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Around the globe, the rapid aging of populations
is transforming societies in profound and pervasive ways. The social and
political implications of an aged population have raised concerns in national
and international governance organizations, in scientific communities, and among
medical researchers. New policy interventions and fields of scientific study
have been established to address these concerns, knowledge of the norms,
assumptions, institutional junctures that have and continue to shape the science
and policy of aging, activities are undertaken without the comparative knowledge
necessary to make valuable interventions. This study will address that gap, and
provide knowledge about the critical arenas and conjunctures that have played
and may play important causal roles in future aging science and policy. Research
results are disseminated through the development and delivery of course
materials, briefings and presentations to NGOs and other institutions, and
through scholarly publications.