* 1230261
* Collaborative Research: Modeling DOC dynamics from landscapes to coasts: hydrological connectivity and estuary processes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Yong Tian, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 188,641.00

Intellectual Merit: The origin, function, and fate of dissolved organic carbon
(DOC) in terrestrial ecosystems and its transport processes from landscapes to
sea are only partially understood. In this proposed research, statistical and
GIS-based transport models are used to study DOC dynamics in terrestrial
ecosystems and rivers. The research objectives are three-fold: &lt;br/&gt;1) To
analyze the spatial variability of DOC contributions from land surfaces to
streams at sub-basin scales. &lt;br/&gt;2) To identify the transport and
transformation mechanisms behind long (decades) and short (days to months) term
DOC fluctuations due to natural and anthropogenic influences. &lt;br/&gt;3) To
predict DOC concentration from remote sensing reflectance, turbidity and
chlorophyll in rivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past several years, a large
amount of field data, has been collected including 5-years of monthly DOC
measurements in 30 sub-basins, high spatial and temporal resolution riverine
observations, and remote sensing imagery. Equipped with these data, the team
will rely mainly on an approach that integrates statistical modeling and GIS-
based transport modeling. Specifically, they will &lt;br/&gt;1) Use an adaptive
varying coefficient mixture model to derive monthly DOC loads from uniform land
use types. &lt;br/&gt;2) Construct a GIS-based transport model for routing DOC
mass in the drainage stream network. &lt;br/&gt;3) Use a varying coefficient
functional linear model and nonparametric functional model to predict DOC
through remote sensing &lt;br/&gt;4) Validate the above models with independent
data sets from two specific river watersheds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
geosciences contribution from this project lies in the improved understanding of
the DOC export processes influenced by interactions among human activities,
natural events, watershed characteristics, and climate. The statistical
contribution lies in the innovative estimation and inference procedures that are
particularly adapted to this complex geoscience data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This proposed research will improve the
scientific understanding of carbon export processes from land to coastal waters.
Funding of this project will potentially change the public?s perception of the
influence of their actions in coastal communities. This research will result in
a modeling technique that is suitable for studying interactions among watershed
properties, human activities, natural events and climate change. The project
provides learning opportunities for all participating students. The methods,
models, and data from this research will be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate teaching programs in a broad range of disciplines (statistics,
biogeochemistry, remote sensing, hydrology, and modeling). The collaboration
offers students access to cutting edge modeling techniques and environmental
sciences through an equal partnership of two diverse research institutions.
Especially, the two female PIs will be valuable assets in guiding female
graduate students to become future fellow scientists (statisticians and geo-
scientists) with their own experiences. Coastal carbon research-related
instructional materials will be developed and disseminated through existing
educational programs and The Bridge website. These outreach efforts will
strongly benefit from early experience on the COSEE-New England and Watershed-
Integrated Sciences Partnership (GK-12) programs.