* 1230459
* SBIR Phase II:  Planar ZEBRA Battery Development
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Greg Tao, MATERIALS & SYSTEMS RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 599,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to develop a planar,
highly compact, sodium-beta rechargeable battery using sodium-ion conducting
beta?- alumina solid electrolyte (Na-BASE) sandwiched between liquid sodium and
nickel chloride-based salt, (a p-ZEBRA battery). The commercially available
sodium-beta batteries are all constructed with BASE tubes having wall thickness
of over 2 millimeters to maintain the battery mechanical integrity, thus leading
to relatively low specific energy densities and large thermal masses that
inhibit fast thermal cycling. The primary objective of this program is to
overcome the limitations of the state-of-the-art sodium- beta battery
technologies by the development of an advanced battery with a thin planar
architecture. High performance Na-BASE discs possessing high strength and high
resistance to moisture and CO2 attack will be developed and manufactured using
the MSRI?s patented vapor phase process. A unique battery design accompanying an
advanced sealing technology development and degradation mitigation
implementation will enable the p-ZEBRA battery integration and operation
flexibility suitable for intermittent renewable energy storage applications
(wind, solar power and geothermal) with high round-trip efficiencies. It also
enables thermal integration with internal- combustion engines or solid oxide
fuel cells for plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) applications with extended
driving range.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide a low
cost, highly reliable electrical energy storage system, which integrates a broad
spectrum of power generation systems. It includes fast market penetration of
renewable energy power systems that mitigate issues of grid transient and
national energy dependency, and gasoline internal-combustion engines or advanced
solid oxide fuel cells for PHEVs with extended driving distances. The successful
development and deployment of the proposed p-ZEBRA battery technology will
assist the US in building critical new industry and reinstating US leadership in
large-scale electrical energy storage systems.