* 1230357
* CAREER: Generation and Fate of Distonic Radicals derived from Methionine-containing Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 12/16/2011,05/31/2015
* Michelle Claville, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2015
* USD 290,041.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 0847742 Date:
December 25, 2008&lt;br/&gt;PI: Claville Institution: Southern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic
Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Michelle Claville of the
Chemistry Department at Southern University in Baton Rouge LA, will afford new
insights into the effect of ionizing irradiation on methionine (Met) and
methionine-containing peptides (Met-peptides). More specifically, the overall
goal of this project is to determine the reactivity of distonic radical cations
that derive from modified Met and Met-peptides. The modifications chosen will
afford the formation of distonic radical cations and distonic radical anions,
depending on the substrate. The presence of the positive or negative charge
determines the reactivity of the radical site, or promotes novel reactions that
have gone unreported thus far. This project will discover how charges within a
peptide framework affect the reactivity of a radical within the same framework,
and provide a comparison for radicals that derive from the analogous uncharged
systems. It will also show how neighboring amino acids affect, or respond to the
reactive intermediates formed within the substrate. The study of each reaction
in aerobic versus anaerobic conditions will afford insight into how different
distonic radicals respond to the presence or absence of oxygen. Any subsequent
formation of newly formed distonic peroxyl radicals will form new species that
may have deleterious effect on the peptide substrate. Ultimately, by studying
the proposed reactions in the suggested conditions, insight will be provided
regarding the potential reactivity of distonic species that may form in peptides
as a result of ionizing radiation in aerobic versus anaerobic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Claville will pursue a project where a number of
different sectors (e.g. government, industry and scientific education) will
benefit. Some government and industry groups within the United States of America
(USA) currently advocate the use of gamma irradiation for the purpose of food
purification, in accordance to the current practices of countries such as
Belgium, France, The Netherlands, and India. The NSF CAREER award will also
impact the research and teaching community at Southern University and A &amp; M
College, and the Chemistry departments at other campuses within the Southern
University System (SUS), a system of primarily undergraduate institutions (PUI).
Faculty members who participate in the educational component of the project will
get the opportunity to collaborate in a structured setting for the purpose of
positively impacting each represented campus. This effort will result in a
network of ACS-approved Organic Chemistry programs throughout the SUS that will
serve as a model for other comparable PUIs. Ultimately, both the research and
educational components of the proposed CAREER award will not only impact
students and faculty within the SUS, but will also impact other PUIs within the
USA.