* 1230387
* SBIR Phase II:  High Power and Energy Density VN-based Asymmetric Supercapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Saemin Choi, Inmatech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2017
* USD 945,369.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
asymmetric supercapacitors that meet or exceed the cost and performance targets
set by the United States Advanced Battery Consortium for FreedomCar
applications. These devices will be based on low-cost VN and NiOOH with aqueous
electrolytes. Currently available commercial products are based on carbon with
organic electrolytes and deliver 3-6 Wh/kg with power densities of 700 W/kg at a
cost of ~$0.10 per Farad. The cost must be decreased by at least a factor of two
for broader market acceptance, and the energy density improved to reduce the
supercapacitor size. The proposed SBIR program will lead to next generation
supercapacitors with energy densities that approach 15 Wh/kg and costs that are
as much as 10 times lower than those for currently available commercial devices.
The superior performance and cost are derived from the use of inexpensive, base
metal nitrides and oxides tailored to give high specific capacitance, low
impedance aqueous electrolytes that enable fast, efficient high power cycling,
and an asymmetric design that maximizes the operating potential window. This
combination of performance and cost will enable significant expansion in the use
of supercapacitors for a number of important
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project lies in efficient peak power management of electric loads, such as
automotive start/stop systems, acceleration and regenerative braking of hybrid
electric vehicles (HEVs), and uninterruptible power supplies. Supercapacitors
offer a combination of energy and power that complements other electrochemical
storage and conversion devices, including batteries and fuel cells. With
improvements in energy density and reductions in cost, the markets for
supercapacitors are expected to grow rapidly. Transportation and smart grid
applications represent large markets with &gt;30% annual growth. The automotive
supercapacitor market totaled $55 million in 2009 and could grow to $243 million
by 2015, fueled by the demand for HEVs. The smart grid market for
supercapacitors is forecasted to reach $2.5 billion in 2015 driven by peak-load
management and regenerative braking for light rails. The devices developed
during this SBIR program could support minimizing our nation?s production of
greenhouse gases and dependence on foreign energy sources. Federal agencies
including the Department of Defense will also benefit, in particular, for
applications such as extended range vehicles, exoskeleton systems, and
electromagnetic armors.