* 1230265
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficient Comparative Effective Research Tools In Real Time Environment
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Jeremy Miller, Transmed Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus on
the enablement of comparative effectiveness research (CER), evidence based
medicine (EBM), and personalized medicine (PM) by researchers utilizing both
clinical and complex biomolecular data. The first phase of this grant was
focused on a feasibility study working with customers to determine the extent to
which the tools we were creating would and could be utilized in practice. This
phase is focused on implementation of these tools in real-world health care
environments and creating systemic improvements of healthcare by improving tools
available for self-evaluation by hospital administrators and clinicians alike.
There will be four key objectives accomplished as a result of this proposal. The
first is the development of care-improvement algorithms for pediatric ICU
patients with sepsis and congenital heart disease. The second will be a
reporting engine that mines electronic medical records to create CER reports for
patients. The third is an easy-to-use enterprise level reporting engine to check
compliance with national standard health care quality metrics and to create new
metrics for care improvement. The final objective is to create a personalized
medicine reporting system based on next generation sequencing data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is significant because it capitalizes on two trends in health care -
digitizing patient clinical data and the increasing use of molecular sequencing
and microarray data. The commercialization of the technical innovations
referenced in this project will enable researchers and clinicians to generate
true Comparative Effectiveness Research (CER), Evidence-based precision medicine
(EMB) and Personalized Medicine reports (PMR). The ultimate objective of this
technology is improving patient outcomes. Leveraging historical patient data in
CER to eliminate ineffective therapies from the health care system, coupled with
utilizing genetic information to create a more personalized model of health
care, will focus precious health care dollars on effective therapies optimized
for the individual. Ultimately, this tool will be appealing to every segment of
the health care industry including clinicians, researchers, pharmaceutical
companies, and insurance companies due to the increases in quality and cost
savings that will be created.