* 1230377
* Mechanisms of attentional rejection
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joy Geng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 458,801.00

The ability to pay attention to information relevant to our current goals is a
cornerstone of successful behaviors. However, distraction is inevitable when we
are engaged in activities that take time to accomplish. To act efficiently, our
brains must rapidly identify distracting sensory signals as being task-
irrelevant and move our attention to a new object or location with greater
potential relevance. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Joy
Geng of the University of California at Davis is investigating how people
suppress processing of distracters that have captured their attention in order
to continue on with goal-oriented behaviors. The investigators use eye-tracking
and behavioral psychophysics to determine how object processing is prioritized
based on the current behavioral and environmental context. Analyses of these
data reveals the critical features of objects that determine the likelihood of
distraction in the first place and then the efficiency with which attention can
be disengaged from it and returned to current goal-oriented task. In conjunction
with the behavioral experiments, the investigators use functional magnetic
resonance imaging and event-related potentials to identify the brain networks
involved in terminating attentional processing of distracters, and the timing of
the cognitive components involved. The behavioral and brain projects are
synergistic in identifying the key cognitive mechanisms that support the ability
to control goal-oriented behaviors and the neural systems in humans that
underlie them.

Goal-oriented behaviors require time to accomplish, but today's world is filled
with constant sources of distracting information that frequently cannot be
ignored. This project investigates the mechanisms by which efficient rejection
of distracting information occurs. The research will help explain how to limit
the amount of time that a distracting event interrupts an ongoing goal. The
broader impacts of this research are likely to be significant, given the
incredible quantity of information we encounter on a daily basis in the
classroom, workplace, and even while driving or interacting with friends and
family. For example, findings from the proposed research may promote the
development of procedures that help children to actively deal with distraction
(rather than to try to avoid it) in a way that allows them to return to their
current task more efficiently. In addition, a better understanding of how
attention resolves interference will provide insight into psychiatric disorders
characterized by dysfunctions of attention to relevant and away from irrelevant
sources of information.