* 1230199
* SBIR Phase II:  High Efficiency Electrochemical Compressor Cell to Enable Cost Effective Small-Scale Hydrogen Fuel Production and Recycling
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Kathy Ayers, Proton Energy Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 569,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses current
limitations in hydrogen compression and enables reduction in hydrogen
requirements for several applications through recycling of exhaust hydrogen
containing water and other benign impurities. In Phase 1, feasibility of
operating a proton exchange membrane (PEM)-based device as a high efficiency
electrochemical compressor/purifier was demonstrated at up to 3 A/cm2. In Phase
2, refinement of the microporous plate will be performed for optimal water
distribution, which will enable more uniform fluid distribution and high current
densities. Poison-tolerant catalysts will also be developed to enable a broader
range of applications. The objectives of this phase also include additional test
stand modifications to enable a broader range of test conditions, demonstration
of gas purity through analysis to determine the separation efficiency, and
development of system schematics and product requirements. The anticipated
result will be an improved hydrogen recycler which will enable substantial
reduction in hydrogen production cost and new market
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes applications ranging from power plants to heat treating to
backup power and fueling. For example, over 16,000 power plants worldwide use
hydrogen as a cooling fluid in the turbine windings. Currently, increases in dew
point cause significant decreases in cooling efficiency and increase windage
losses by several percent, requiring purging of the hydrogen chamber and
increased production to backfill. Thus, significant energy waste is generated.
Current solutions for hydrogen compression are also noisy, bulky, and
inefficient. In applications where hydrogen is being evaluated as an alternative
fuel, high pressure storage is needed. Having a mechanical compressor that
represents half of the size and material cost of a home fueling or backup power
device is not commercially feasible. The device proposed has the opportunity to
decrease the energy required to produce pure hydrogen by 75% over generating
additional hydrogen from water, and to compress the hydrogen with as little as
200 mV of overpotential even at high current density. Advances in these areas
would find immediate commercial interest, and address key strategic areas on the
government agenda related to energy savings and green technology.