* 1230495
* Conference: Dark Matters: Contents and Discontents of Cold War Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Jessica Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

States are known to play a critical role in shaping scientific research.
Inaccuracies in how states and science intersect can mischaracterize
relationships between science and power, incorrectly treat contemporary state-
science interactions as thoroughly innovative breaks with the past, and draw
attention away from non-state actors in shaping science. To understand state-
science relationships, social scientists, policymakers, and historians of
science have relied heavily on a conceptualization of science and states in the
decades following the second world war known as cold war science. In this
characterization, the conflict between the USSR and the US was the critical
determinant of state-science relations, and consequently, when the cold war
ended, science-state relations changed dramatically. Analysts of cold war
science have recently raised questions about this framework, and have shed new
light on how long-term and durable geopolitical trends, including decolonization
and the evolution of an internationalist world order, have shaped and continue
to shape science.

The goal of this conference is to build on this recent scholarship by bringing
together a wide range of analysts of science and power to exchange new global
perspectives, share new knowledge of the complex dynamics of knowledge and
power, and to investigate cultural dimensions of scientific inquiry, in order to
enhance understanding of science in the cold war, question the basic validity of
the cold war framework, and generate new insights about long-term science-state-
power relationships.

The Dark Matters conference offers a rare opportunity for scholars working on
diverse national, regional, organizational, and disciplinary contexts to cross
the boundaries of specialization, encourage cross-fertilization of ideas, and
foster collaborative research in the future. Conference papers are incorporated
into an edited volume accessible to students and that serves as resource for
established analysts of science studies, science policy, and history of science.