* 1230691
* SEP: A Novel Method Using CO2 and Geothermal Resources for Sustainable Energy Production and Storage
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Martin Saar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Martin O. Saar and co-workers at the
University of Minnesota - Twin Cities. This project is motivated by the need to
simultaneously reduce emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere while
expanding the production of electricity, preferably using renewable resources.
The project will develop CO2 Plume Geothermal (CPG) technology as a method to
achieve both goals. CPG injects CO2 that is captured from a CO2 emitter (e.g., a
coal-fired power plant) underground where the majority is permanently stored.
CPG can also be used as an energy storage technique by compressing the CO2 into
the subsurface reservoirs. In this case, slightly heated CO2 is circulated to
the surface for electricity production to offset demand or to arbitrage prices.
This is an approach to energy storage that uses CO2 to moderate differences in
timing between the time electricity is produced by variable sources, such as
wind and solar, and the time electricity is demanded by society. The objectives
are to investigate the feasibility of CPG technology options, the implications
of their deployment, the potential for broader spillovers, and the production
educational material about geothermal energy, CPG, and their potential roles
within the broader energy system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance
the transition to sustainable energy systems in part by training researchers in
interdisciplinary teams and by raising the awareness of geothermal energy and
CPG as parts of the low-carbon, renewable energy portfolio. The overall purpose
of CPG is develop an environmentally benign energy source that uses fewer
resources (e.g. water) and with less negative externalities (e.g., CO2
emissions) than conventional approaches. This research will thoroughly
investigate environmental returns that can be gained by storing and using CO2 to
produce electricity. In addition, investigations of CPG deployment produce
fundamental understanding in areas of electricity market dynamics, decision
science, the economics of low-carbon energy sources, and energy policy. In
association with the Hubert Project at the Humphrey School of Public Affairs
(www.hubertproject.org), a CPG case study detailing the challenges and benefits
of developing geothermal energy into a significant sustainable energy resource
will be developed. Interactive online visuals will be produced to explain CPG to
the public and for use in undergraduate courses. Collabration with the
University of Minnesota's Diversity and Outreach program will increase the
diversity of the participants in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transformative nature of the project involves its investigation of (a) CPG for
economically storing CO2 and for using the stored CO2 to utilize geothermal
energy to produce electricity and/or distribute heat, (b) the economic,
financial, and operational issues of CPG technology development and commercial
deployment, and (c) how the CPG technology may enable the deployment of other
renewable and low-carbon energy technologies. If successful, this project will
produce the understanding necessary for the development of a new environmentally
benign approach to energy production or storage. The understanding and awareness
of the challenges and opportunities for increasing the sustainability of
renewable energy systems will be increased. In addition, the CPG technology has
the potential to make carbon sequestration economically possible, thereby
mitigating global warming.