* 1230133
* Studying Field Emergence: HPV and the Expanding List of Oncoviruses
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Laura Mamo, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,178.00

How scientific fields and collaborations are formed is important to understand
because they define problems, acceptable products, and methodologies, and shape
career trajectories. Most studies of field formation are longtitudinal,
investigate collaboration separately from fields, and do not investigate the
role of knowledge content. This study addresses those gaps by investigating the
role of gendered knowledge in the twin processes of scientific field formation
and collaborations. To do so, a social worlds analysis of the gendered nature of
the formation of the biomedical field of onconviruses is undertaken. A multi-
sited qualitative research design is employed, including participant observation
at key scientific meetings; analysis of documents, products, and other texts
distributed through product placement; and in-depth interviews with key
scientists, technology developers, and leaders of organizations central to STI-
cancer science.The research contributes to science and technology studies
theories of field formation, collaboration, and the relationship between gender
and scientific knowledge.

This broader social implication of this research is that it sheds light on how
scientists and publics understand the complexities of human cancers and the
current scientific approaches to cancer causation theories and cancer prevention
technology. It does so by investigating the putative causative role of sexually
transmitted viral infectious agents in the development of human cancers. The
most well known case is the human papillomavirus (HPV), which gained public
awareness with its vaccine technology, approved immunization guideline, and
direct-to-consumer advertising campaign. This case and five other "oncoviruses"
(HBV, HCV, HHV-8, EBV, and HTLV-1) constitute an expanding conceptualization of
cancer causation and field of biomedical scientific research. By illuminating
how scientists and industry have come to see these viruses as a cause of cancer,
and distributing research results through publications and presentions, publics,
policymakers, and scientists have more information about how to address an
important social and scientific issue.