* 1230444
* SBIR Phase II:  Vibration-Based Cleaning for Ash Removal from Diesel Particulate Filters
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Alexander Sappok, Filter Sensing Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 733,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
vibration-based cleaning system, the AccelaCleanTM, to dislodge and remove
contaminants accumulated on ceramic filters. The feasibility of the concept was
demonstrated in Phase I, and diesel particulate filters (DPF) are targeted as a
promising application. Nearly all new diesel engines are equipped with DPFs to
meet stringent emissions limits. The DPF is a porous ceramic honeycomb mounted
in the exhaust, and traps up to 99% of soot emissions. Over time, ash builds up,
plugging the DPF channels, negatively impacting fuel economy, and limiting the
filters life. Efficient removal of the ash is challenging, as it generally packs
in plugs toward the end of the channels. Current cleaning systems are
ineffective, resulting in added fuel and maintenance costs, and reducing the
life of these expensive filters that may cost more than $5,000. This research
will investigate the use of controlled vibrations to target and break-up hard-
packed ash in the DPF. The Phase II work will build on the efforts of Phase I,
specifically focusing on increasing ash removal rates through anharmonic
excitation of the filter, and ensuring filter integrity is not compromised by
the cleaning method.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will enable improved
engine efficiency and extend DPF component life. Over 33% of DPFs can not be
cleaned to acceptable levels using currently available technologies, and nearly
all cleaning methods leave some amount of residual ash in the DPF. Despite their
inefficiencies, commercial ash cleaning systems are expensive. More effective
DPF ash cleaning can provide considerable annual fuel and maintenance cost
savings to the end-user, and enables more effective emission control system
operation. The US and European DPF cleaning service market is large and rapidly
growing, due in part to increasingly stringent emissions regulations. FSTs
proposed DPF cleaning technology provides a more effective, simpler, and less
expensive DPF cleaning solution. It reduces DPF ash-related fuel economy
impacts, extends filter cleaning intervals, and improves emission control system
durability and performance. This technology is not limited to emission control
applications, but a wide range of filtration applications where effective filter
cleaning is required.