* 1230534
* Stories about self and society under strain: A longitudinal study of unemployed southern Californians
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Claudia Strauss, Pitzer College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 76,464.00

How are formulaic narrative structures for life stories and conventional
discourses about society incorporated, adapted, and changed during a time of
personal and national difficulties? To answer this question, Dr. Claudia Strauss
(Pitzer College) will undertake longitudinal research among unemployed American
workers to see if their sociopolitical outlooks and ways of narrating their life
shift as a result of either continued unemployment or subsequent re-employment.
Qualitative research among the jobless in the United States has typically
consisted of community studies following a plant closing. Today, however, plant
closings are less common as a cause of unemployment. Furthermore, while
unemployment benefits took care of the immediate needs of most of the jobless in
the past, around half of currently jobless Americans have exhausted their
unemployment benefits and are experiencing high levels of financial hardship.
American workers once interpreted their own and others' economic situations
through the belief that economic opportunities are readily available, so
individuals are responsible for their economic fate. This project asks to what
extent is that still the case?

The researcher will follow displaced workers in Southern California for a period
of two years and use a mix of qualitative research methods to collect narratives
for analysis. She will conduct participant-observation in networking groups for
the jobless. She will complete in-depth interviews with 60 jobless workers,
selected to represent a variety of socioeconomic levels and ethnic backgrounds,
including immigrants from Mexico, Central America, and South America, as well as
native born Americans. She will stay in contact with her interviewees over the
course of the study and re-interview them at its conclusion. The data collected
will be analyzed to determine what interpretive frameworks workers are using to
understand the current economy and their position in it. The researcher will be
looking for change and variability in formulaic ways of talking about job
situations, possibly reflecting more inchoate understandings that reflect
current realities.

Findings from this research will contribute to greater understanding of how
personal narratives and sociopolitical opinions are constructed from formulaic
elements. The research will also help to understand coping strategies of the
unemployed and the kinds of conventional narratives that may give them practical
help, as well as the potential for exacerbating social tensions. In addition,
funding this research provides undergraduate and graduate student research
training.