* 1230896
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Cognitive MIMO Communications for Dynamic-spectrum Wireless Networks
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* J. Aberle, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2015
* USD 70,000.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;Center for Connection One (C1)
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 1230896 &amp; 1231043 &lt;br/&gt;Kiaei and Krunz
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Connection
One (C1) located at the Arizona State University (lead site) and the University
of Arizona. Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF
approved solicitation, NSF 11-570. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit
proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive radio (CR) and multi-input multi-output (MIMO)
technologies have received great attention in recent years. While the former is
viewed as a key enabling technology to improve spectrum utilization, the latter
has already proved itself as a powerful signal processing technique for
increasing spectral efficiency. Through sensing and/or probing, CRs can
opportunistically communicate on temporarily available spectrum bands while
avoiding interference with spectrum-licensed primary users (PUs). This project
is focused on developing novel techniques for optimizing network resources in a
cognitive wireless network with multi-antenna capability. Both centralized and
distributed solutions will be studied, in homogeneous and heterogeneous
opportunistic spectrum environments. Adaptive rate and optimal antenna beam
forming strategies will be developed. The proposed work also explores new ways
for reconfiguring the antenna elements of a cognitive MIMO system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is expected to have significant
technological impact in the areas of cognitive MIMO communications and
reconfigurable antenna design. Efficient solutions will be developed and
validated theoretically and experimentally. These solutions will facilitate the
introduction of a new generation of high data rate opportunistic services and
applications, including opportunistic media delivery. Networked consumer
electronics will particularly benefit for the proposed research. The PIs
extensive collaboration with Raytheon on CR systems will be leveraged to enable
prototyping possibilities of the proposed solutions. Graduate students involved
in this project will gain valuable theoretical and practical experience on CMIMO
designs.