* 1230040
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Small-Gain Theorems for Nonlinear  Networked and Quantized Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Zhong-Ping Jiang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,562.00

This project deals with hybrid systems regarded as feedback interconnections of
simpler subsystems with continuous and discrete dynamics. An advantage of this
viewpoint is that tools developed in nonlinear system theory for analyzing
system interconnections, most notably small-gain theorems, become applicable to
general hybrid systems. The project will systematically explore and apply this
idea to develop new results in stability and robustness of nonlinear hybrid
systems, with strong emphasis on applications in networked and quantized systems
design and cooperative nonlinear control design. The technical tools that will
form the theoretical core of this research are input-to-state stability and
constructions of Lyapunov functions (strictly or nonstrictly decreasing along
trajectories) for interconnected systems.The main application domain for these
results will be the analysis and design of control strategies for systems with
communication constraints. Specific classes of such systems are networked
control systems and quantized control systems, as well as systems combining both
types of effects and their large-scale variants. The small-gain approach is
expected to provide insightful interpretations of existing results, enable
generalizations, and allow a unified treatment of problems that so far have been
studied separately.

Intellectual Merit: This work will bring modern tools of nonlinear system theory
to bear on important and challenging problems arising in analysis of hybrid
systems. By connecting the two domains in a natural and synergistic way, it will
generate new results and enrich both fields, facilitating further progress in
each.

Broader Impacts: Due to the pervasive nature of hybrid systems in applications,
the results of the project are expected to be useful in many areas. Applications
that go beyond control theory and engineering, such as hybrid models for
predicting the behavior of bio-molecular oscillators and kinetics models of
biochemical reaction networks, will be explored. The project includes graduate
and undergraduate student education, curriculum development, and outreach
activities.