* 1230051
* RAPID:  Does dinitrogen fixation occur in oxygen minimum zones?
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Margaret Mulholland, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

Recent and multiple lines of evidence suggest that dinitrogen (N2) fixation and
denitrification may be more closely coupled in space than previously suggested
and nifH genes and their expression have been identified from within the oxygen
minimum zone (OMZ) of the Arabian Sea. In this OMZ, isotopic evidence and N2
supersaturation suggests N2 fixation is a significant process. However, despite
the geochemical inferences regarding the location and magnitude of N2 fixation
in the Arabian Sea, and the importance of this basin in removing fixed N from
the ocean via denitrification, it is thought that OMZs do not harbour
diazotrophs (nitrogen fixing bacteria). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of
researchers at Old Dominion University believe that OMZs may be sites of active
N2 fixation, and with funding from this Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID)
they will participate in a cruise of opportunity in the Eastern Tropical North
Pacific (ETNP) to determine whether N2 fixation is an important process within
or adjacent to this OMZ. They expect to achieve a better understanding of where
N2 fixation occurs with respect to the OMZ and areas of active denitrification.
In collaboration with other marine nitrogen cycle colleagues onboard, they
expect to be able to simultaneously compare rates of denitrification and N2
fixation while also examining the diversity, community structure, and
juxtaposition of denitrifying and N2 fixing organisms within the ETNP OMZ. Armed
with this more comprehensive understanding of the distribution of
denitrification and N2 fixation with respect to the OMZ, a more realistic view
of the N cycle within should be gained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Results will contribute to current understanding of the controls on marine N2
fixation in general, as well as the balance between N inputs and losses from
OMZs. IT is reasonable to think that this project will be transformative in
shaping our view of the marine N cycle, particularly as regards to N inputs.