* 1230236
* SEP: Non-Aqueous Redox Flow Battery Chemistries for Sustainable Energy Storage
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Melanie Sanford, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Levi Thompson and co-workers at the
University of Michigan Ann Arbor to develop new non-aqueous redox flow battery
chemistries for sustainable energy storage devices. Electricity accounts for
~40% of the energy consumed in the U.S. and most is derived from non-renewable
resources including fossil and nuclear fuels. Pathways to greater energy
sustainability will require the use of renewable resources. The lack of
reliable, low-cost energy storage is one of the key challenges to large-scale
integration of renewables, with their intermittency, into the grid. This
Sustainable Energy Pathways (SEP) project will deliver the transformative
scientific and engineering outcomes needed to demonstrate cost-competitive, non-
aqueous redox flow batteries (RFBs) for grid storage applications. The research
has three objectives. Objective 1: Detailed structure-composition-function
relationships will be developed for metal beta-diketonate complexes in organic
and ionic liquid electrolytes. These relationships will be used to identify the
most promising chemistries for characterization of the kinetics and mechanisms
at engineered electrodes. Objective 2: The results will be used to design and
fabricate small-scale flow cells to evaluate large-scale RFB relevant
performance characteristics. Objective 3: An integrated sustainable design and
assessment framework will be developed and used to guide the research and
evaluate sustainability performance across the electrochemistry, device, and
grid integration levels. The results will be compared to those for other storage
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SEP research project will consider the
scientific, technical, environmental, economic, and societal issues associated
with energy storage, and establish a new sustainable energy pathway for
advancing fundamental battery chemistries to large-scale RFBs for utility scale
storage. The students, post-doctoral scholars and other researchers
participating in the project will be part of an interdisciplinary team working
on technology that address key societal and economic and environmental
challenges facing our nation. On completion, they will be well prepared for
leadership positions in industry, government, and/or
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistries developed in this SEP project
will provide the basis for RFBs with an attractive combination of benefits
including low cost when compared to other energy storage solutions being
considered for grid applications; flexibility in design due to the decoupled
energy and power (like fuel cells); simplified thermal management leading to
enhanced safety; little or no self-discharge resulting in high efficiencies; and
modularity allowing easy scaling, maintenance and modification. The introduction
of sustainable, low-cost RFB-based energy storage technologies will improve the
integration of intermittent renewable energy sources such as wind and solar into
the electricity grid and significantly reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and
other pollutants produced from fossil resources including coal and natural gas.