* 1230274
* Wideband Silicon-Based Receivers for RF/Microwave Spectrum Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kamran Entesari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 08/31/2016
* USD 287,254.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive radio systems offer
the opportunity to use dynamic spectrum management techniques to adapt to
immediate local spectrum availability over huge swaths of spectrum when the
primary users are not present. The objective of this research is to develop a
unique wideband silicon-based spectrum sensing receiver for cognitive radios.
With respect to intellectual merit, the proposed receiver enables spectrum
sensing over multi-octave radio/microwave frequency range without the need for
any complex tunable image-reject filter and a broadband frequency synthesizer to
drastically reduce the power consumption and the complexity of the receiver. The
realization of this receiver is possible by two-step down conversion and
employing a narrowband frequency synthesizer, an integer frequency divider and
switchable harmonic mixers in the front-end architecture. Given the wide
variations in signal bandwidth and formats that must be reliably sensed, a type
of programmable energy detection method is employed to further relax challenging
requirements for cognitive radio front-ends.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, simple implementation,
miniaturization and low power consumption of wideband spectrum sensing receivers
are essential features for cognitive radios operating in a battery-powered
environment for applications including man-portable military radios, avionics,
electronic warfare, eavesdropping, surveillance and commercial wireless mobile
systems. The results of the project will advance microwave integrated circuits
and wireless communication fields. The proposed project allows talented students
to train in microwave integrated circuits and wireless communications through a
variety of research, and educational/outreach activities. Educational
opportunities for under-represented groups will be explored by (1) attending
annual Electrical and Computer Engineering?Unplugged program and Society of
Women Engineers summer camp to inspire high school and women students to join
the engineering program, and (2) collaborating with Enrichment Experience
Engineering program at Texas A&amp;M University to provide workshops for
minority high school teachers in engineering.