* 1230676
* Idealized Models in Scientific Explanation: Some Lessons from Geomorphology (Scholars Award)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Alisa Bokulich, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 187,957.00

Brief Description

In disciplines ranging from physics to economics, scientists regularly use
scientific models to explain various phenomena. However, that use of models is
puzzling. Models involve all sorts of idealizations, abstractions, and
omissions; meaning that they are not literally true descriptions of their
targets. This project aims to develop and test a new model-based account of
scientific explanation; it will show how and when such idealized models can
nonetheless be properly used to produce scientific knowledge. The project
focuses on how idealized models are used to explain phenomena in geomorphology
(the study of physical structures on the surface of the earth and how they
evolve) through a detailed examination of scientific case studies.

Intellectual Merit

This project will significantly advance our understanding of the nature of
scientific explanation and the nature of scientific modeling. It will also
articulate a number of novel theses including the different kinds of
explanations in geomorphology, the different roles robustness analyses play in
evaluating explanatory models, and the relevance of model lineages to the
problem of model validation.

Broader Impacts

The results of this project will be disseminated in the form of a book, which
will be the first book in a new subfield, the philosophy of geomorphology. The
book will facilitate the building of new bridges between philosophers of science
and researchers in the Earth sciences. More broadly, this project will be
important for the public's perception of science. Many of the claims,
predictions, and explanations offered by climatologists regarding global climate
change are dismissed by skeptics on the grounds that they are derived from
incomplete models that make idealized assumptions. This project will highlight
the pervasiveness of such models in science and it will give an account of how
such models can nonetheless generate true predictions and explanations. As a
result, it will be of wide significance.