* 1230345
* The Many Facets of Sustainable Development
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Martin Green, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 03/31/2013
* USD 40,000.00

TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;A forum, entitled The Many Facets of Sustainable
Development supported by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate
(MPS) Divisions of Materials Research (DMR), Chemistry (CHE), and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA), as well as the Engineering (ENG) Directorate
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) will be held
April 9, 2012 at the Materials Research Society (MRS) Spring Meeting in San
Francisco. The primary objective of this forum is to introduce different
perspectives on sustainable development to a community comprising chemists,
physicists, materials scientists, and engineers from many disciplines. The forum
will place a special emphasis on developing the viewpoints of economists, social
scientists, industrial ecologists, and resource experts to help create a
holistic approach in the field of sustainable development. In particular, the
forum goals are well aligned with the Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) initiative and many other disciplinary programs across
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This forum will
have broader impacts by fostering a holistic approach toward the science and
engineering of sustainable development. Many researchers working in the field of
sustainable development (e.g. industrial ecology, economics, social and
behavioral sciences) are currently not part of the materials science and
engineering community at large. Typically, they do not attend the conferences
that are centered around the materials community. The broader impact of this
forum will be significant in that it would provide a platform to connect these
experts and their outstanding work and create opportunities to integrate their
ideas into the materials community. The forum will feature a diverse set of
speakers and panelists, including women, underrepresented minorities, and early-
career scientists. The forum will expose a national and international group of
researchers to the field of sustainable development. This group includes
academic faculty, undergraduate and graduate students, post docs, and industrial
and government researchers in all fields of science and engineering. The forum
will foster new interdisciplinary, and potentially transformative,
collaborations in this important research area. Thus, the broader impact on
education, research and training of faculty members as well as graduate and
undergraduate students will be substantial.