* 1230080
* Workshop: Non-volatile Memories Workshop 2012; Held on March 4-6, 2012 at Univ. California, San Diego in La Jolla, CA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Paul Siegel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Advances in data storage technology have been crucial to the evolution of the
modern information age, enabling and accelerating the invention of new
information-related applications in consumer entertainment, personal and
business computing, enterprise data management, and scientific research.
Recently, high capacity solid-state drives (SSDs) based upon NAND flash memory
technology have begun attracting significant attention and finding broader use
in many of these applications. SSDs have a number of advantages compared to
conventional disk and tape drives, including better shock resistance, reduced
power consumption, no moving parts, and faster data access. Although they remain
less competitive in some storage applications with respect to cost per bit,
overwrite constraints, and product lifetime limitations, it is becoming
increasingly clear that continuing advances in the technology of SSDs and other
non-volatile memories (NVMs) are setting the stage for a revolution in how
computer systems and applications access and manipulate persistent data.
Improved flash memories ? along with emerging technologies such as phase-change
memories (PCM), spin-torque transfer memories (STTM), and the memristor ? are
driving designers to rethink how they integrate these and other storage devices
into future computing systems, how operating systems manage data, and how
applications create and process information electronically. Realizing the full
potential of these technologies is an exciting and important challenge with
enormous societal consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop is a
sequel to the Non-volatile Memories Workshops that were held on the campus of
the University of California, San Diego in April 2010 and March 2011,
respectively. Archival websites from these workshops may be found at
http://nvmw.ucsd.edu/. The primary objective has been to further the development
of a ?vertical? vision for research on the role of NVM technologies in data
intensive computing systems. It is essential that researchers at each level of
the system ?stack? be aware of the needs, challenges, and opportunities
associated with the other levels. The workshop will give researchers in relevant
fields the opportunity to gain a broader understanding of what is needed to move
NVM-based storage technology forward, to learn from each other, and to establish
relationships and collaborations that will provide the basis for further
scientific and engineering advances. This will be accomplished through a wide-
ranging program containing a half-day tutorial sesssion, two keynote addresses,
and contributed technical presentations covering important topics related to:
NVM device technologies, data recording and recovery techniques, system
architectures and software design, and future NVM applications in personalized
health, green computing, and enterprise-scale information management. Open
registration for the entire workshop is intended to encourage broader
participation by interested individuals from academia, industry, and government.
The technical program is structured to provide a unique educational opportunity,
particularly for students and researchers who are new to the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This workshop will address
fundamental problems in the science, engineering, and application of high-
performance data storage systems based upon non-volatile memories. This includes
the study of nano-scale physical phenomena that permit storage of information;
the development of coding algorithms for reliable, persistent, and secure data
storage; the analysis of system architectures for data intensive computing; and
the conception of new paradigms for non-volatile storage of data in a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The exchange of knowledge and
the generation of novel ideas that result from the workshop will have
significant impact on the computing and data storage industries, both vitally
important to the national economy. The educational component of the workshop
will benefit students and postdoctoral researchers, as well as more senior
participants. An archival website will provide a lasting record of the workshop
proceedings and a resource for the scientific community and general public.