* 1230732
* SEP: Sustainable co-synthesis of cement and fuels
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peter La Puma, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,690,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Stuart Licht and co-workers at the George
Washington University to develop a new method for the co-synthesis of cement and
fuels. To produce cement in a green electrochemical process, "solar cement," the
research team will take advantage of the unexpected low solubility of lime in
carbonate molten salts, and form cement without any CO2 emission. The latter co-
product, when combined with a parallel process for solar hydrogen generation,
will be used to form syngas fuels. The objectives of the project are: (i)
fundamental reaction optimization of the co-generation of cement and fuels, (ii)
studying geological resource availability/non-carbonate mineral effects for
solar cement, (iii) behavioral study of a paradigm shift to a green technology,
(iv) life cycle assessment, (v) component and system modeling, and (vi) solar
cement outdoor optimization. The research program will be conducted in George
Washington University's state-of-the-art solar/electrochemical research
laboratories, and modelled with our on-site NSF supercomputer "George." The
cement will be produced at 50% solar energy conversion efficiency. Marketable
graphite and carbon monoxide products will be co-produced. This could
potentially decrease the cost of solar cement to below that of conventional
cement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines advance the topical areas of
(i) Energy Harvesting (ii) Energy Storage, (iii) Critical Materials for
Sustainable Energy (iv) Reducing Carbon Intensity by combining George Washington
University expertise in solar chemistry (Licht), life cycle assessment (LaPuma),
computational science (El-Ghazawi), sociology/cinematography (McCormick) and
geochemistry (Teng). This research project will advance a new solar synthesis
process, which can yield 30-50% solar chemical energy conversion efficiencies,
and store this energy as transportable, energetic chemicals. This represents a
paradigm shift over existing processes to distribute electricity and convert
solar energy. The project will expedite a path to bring forward a transformative
process for green production of the staple, cement and eliminate a major source
of anthropogenic atmospheric CO2. After power production, cement production is
the largest single contributor to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Solar
cement can produce lime at less cost than that of conventional industry cement
processes and without CO2 emission. Videos will be produced to expedite this
green shift in the cement industry. Videos will contrast the traditional
scientific process of cement production with the proposed innovations and
communicate the science and potential impacts of the new solar synthesis process
for general consumption. The project will contribute to training the next
diverse generation of renewable energy scientists. Two postdoctoral fellows, as
well as 4 graduate and 10 undergraduate students will be trained in state-of-
the-art electrochemistry, renewable energy and CO2-free industrial processes.
The project will expand the knowledge base of energy conversion as a path
towards a "Sustainable Chemical Economy." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cement
industry releases 9 lbs of CO2 for each 10 lbs of cement produced. Today cement
production accounts for 5-6% of all anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions. An
alternative to this CO2 intensive process is needed and has been introduced by
researchers at the George Washington University. Rising carbon dioxide levels,
and the associated climate consequences, provide one the most daunting
challenges of our time. If successful, this four year NSF funded research
program will produce cement and fuels in a green electrochemical solar process
without any CO2 emission.