* 1230351
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Durability and Life Cycle Performance of Pultruded and Infused FRPs for Infrastructure
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Rakesh Gupta, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,448,610.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;Center for Integration of
Composites into Infrastructures (CICI) &lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 1230351 &amp;
1230284 &lt;br/&gt;GangaRao &amp; Rizkalla &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
seeks funding for the Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructures
at West Virginia University and North Carolina State University sites. Funding
Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved
solicitation, NSF 11-570. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals
for support of industry-defined fundamental research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) composites
made of thermosets and thermoplastics have been growing steadily. Even though
FRP composites can provide longer-service life because of more beneficial
thermo-mechanical performance over conventional materials, lack of understanding
of durability and life-cycle performance is a major technical obstacle for their
high volume application. The durability response is identified typically in
terms of chemical, physical and mechanical aging and their combinations.
Therefore, the objectives of the proposed research are to: i) evaluate the
mechanisms that lead to the degradation of pultruded and infused composite
material properties at micro- and macro-levels, ii) minimize manufacturing
(pultrusion vs. infusion) and durability related defects, delaminations, and de-
bonding, and to iii) develop a unified model(s) to predict life-cycle
performance of FRP composites so that master curves can be developed as a
function(s) of time, temperature and pressure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will help the center to be in forefront (leader) of conducting
fundamental durability research and offer solutions to the issues that are
critical for composite industry/end-users. Results will create better
industry/university/end-user interaction leading to higher volume use of FRPs,
and to spur economic growth, in addition to attracting and help attract talented
students to our research program. Results of this work will be widely
disseminated through conference presentations, technical journals, short-courses
and other means, and will be further Integrated into the design, codes of
practice, and academic curricula as desired by the industry/ end-users.