* 1230389
* SBIR Phase II:  Liquid Crystal-based Next Generation e-paper Devices by Micro-engineered Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Hailiang Zhang, Hitron Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on
development of low power consumption, bistable memory nematic liquid crystal
display (LCD) devices for e-book and mobile applications, based on the micro-
engineered surface alignment (MESA) technology. The MESA-LCD innovatively
implements new photoaligment materials and processes, combined with unique
maskless UV pattern generator, to achieve bistability and performance
requirements for portable devices. It is suitable for mass production and also
on flexible substrates, also compatible with existing manufacturing infra-
structure of LCDs. In Phase-I, the controlled weak anchoring have been
successfully demonstrated, and the process has been developed to reduce the
driving voltage by one order of magnitude. The main challenge in Phase-II is to
reduce the driving voltage down to 0.1v/Ã¬m. The main objectives and approaches
in Phase-II are: (1) to develop a passive matrix MESA-LCD prototype (the first
generation) for presenting to the potential investors; (2) to optimize the
photoalignment process for driving voltage reduction, (3) to develop an active
matrix MESA-LCD prototype (second generation) with the optimized photoalignment
material and process, with establishment of large scale manufacturing processes.
Anticipated Phase-II results would be the successful development of MESA-LCD
prototypes for commercialization.

The broader impacts/commercial potential will be that the MESA-LCD related
technologies will benefit from the low power, high contrast ratio and high
resolution. Success of this project will enable a high performance and low cost
MESA-LCD that have a significant market opportunity in mobile devices to bring
users information and Entertainment, offer users a convergent display
experience, with paper-like readability, significantly less power consumption,
and video-rate response times. The most important market the MESA-LCD addresses
is e-paper and e-book market. When the MESA-LCD based e-book and e-paper are
fully developed, one device can hold tens or hundreds of books or content,
decreasing the burden of students' backpacks, saving bookshelf space, and
reducing shipping costs. Also huge amount of paper will be saved, which is a
good contribution to the environment. Besides the e-book and e-paper market,
MESA-LCD can also be used in various applications such as price tag and sale-
announcement displays on shelves and throughout the retail stores, cell phones
and other hand-hold devices, display products for security and hospitality, and
display for industrial controls.