* 1230494
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Club Apple Society: What this New Economic Organization Says About The Biology of Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Katharine Legun, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,458.00

New developments in the biological sciences and in marketing are transforming
relationships between people and plants. Although plants have long been bred and
patented, and vertically integrated science-economic systems have grown in
recent years, new forms of economic organization are reshaping these
relationships. Increasingly, small-scale producers are re-organizing biological
and economic systems to patent and protect plant varieties and manage their
economic distribution. Through a study of patented apple varieties called club
apples, this project examines the causes and dynamics of this new set of
economic and biological arrangements. Club apples are often developed by
breeders and managed by a group of growers, and associated with planned
marketing strategies and licenses that restrict the number of trees that can be
planted. By considering how and why club apples have become popular among
growers, and with what consequences for plants and orchard economies, this study
provides new knowledge about emergent economic-biological practices that may be
increasingly common and standardized. Evidence is gathered through interviews
with growers, breeders, processors and retailers, and through analysis of
textual materials, such as patents and industry magazines, and observation of
industry conferences. The broader theoretical importance of this study is its
contribution to research on the institutionalization and deinstitutionalization
of hybrid economic-science practices.

Research findings are disseminated through conference presentations, academic
journal publications, a dissertation, and a book, and on a blog,
amazingapples.blogspot.com that is accessible to publics. Findings are also
disseminated to club apple orchardists. This dissemination plan provides results
of value to academic analysts of science and markets, while also engaging
growers and a general consumer public in conversations about clubs and
contemporary farming practices.