* 1231468
* Using Next Generation Sequencing to Quantify the Symbiotic Prokaryotic Communities of the Coral Montastraea cavernosa and the Response of the Holobiont to Thermal Stress
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Lesser, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2015
* USD 294,190.00

Intellectual Merit: There is much to be learned about the roles of prokaryotic
microbes (bacteria and archaea) in the physiology, biochemistry, and ecology of
reef-forming corals. The importance of greater understanding of prokaryote
associations has become especially evident because it is now known that many
corals harbor endosymbiotic prokaryotes with multiple, significant effects on
coral biology. This project will assess how different prokaryotic communities
affect the biogeochemistry of nitrogen within the coral, and how these microbial
communities, and the functions they carry out, are affected by global climate
change. To accomplish this, the latest high-throughput-sequencing (metagenomic
and metatranscriptomic) tools will be used to examine the taxonomic and
functional diversity of these symbioses in a model coral from the Caribbean,
Montastraea cavernosa. Proposed experiments will elucidate the effects of
thermal stress on these prokaryotic communities, as well as the coral host and
symbiotic dinoflagellates (i.e., zooxanthellae) from individual corals. The
bioinformatic analysis of the sequence data from this project will result in the
discovery of novel prokaryotes and increase our understanding of the taxonomic
and functional biodiversity of prokaryotes in corals. Broader Impacts: The
particular metatranscriptomic approach described in this project is novel in its
application to corals and their multiple symbionts and could be an important
advance in applying molecular techniques to the study of corals. This project
will also support the research activities of both undergraduate and graduate
students who will work closely with the principal investigators on their
individualized research projects. Both the investigators and students supported
on this project will also engage in public outreach events to provide
environmental education lectures about the ecology and conservation of coral
reefs.