* 1231373
* EAGER: Monitoring the Global Electric Circuit from Ocean Straits
* GEO,AGS
* 05/30/2011,06/30/2013
* Robert Tyler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* A. Gannet Hallar
* 06/30/2013
* USD 53,385.00

It has been known for over a century that the atmosphere is positively charged
with respect to the earth's surface, and that a globally-distributed downward
"fairweather" electric current through the atmosphere attempts to equilibrate
this charge disparity. The observation that this charge imbalance and the
downward field persist has lead to a theory for a Global atmospheric electric
Circuit (GC), in which processes in thunderstorms and electrified clouds provide
an upward current balancing the downward fairweather currents. This research
will concentrate on the role of the ocean component in the GC. Measurements of
electric currents in oceans have not been done before. The current study will
explore this new area. If successful, it will provide new evidence for the GC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The GC is a primary component of the
earth's global electrical system and is of great interest due to its inferred
role in global climate change. Despite this, there are even very basic elements
in the GC theory that have not been resolved because an adequate description of
the temporal variability of this planetary-scale circuit has not been available
for testing ideas. For nearly a century, continuous monitoring of the GC has
been both an observational priority and an unaccomplished goal. The global
circuit appears to be both a global thermometer and an active element in the
Earth's weather system. Future progress in GC science will hinge on the
establishment of programs for the continuous, sustained monitoring of the GC,
and on the development of numerical models of the GC processes. The work
addresses these goals with a highly original approach aimed at establishing
long-term GC monitoring from ocean straits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The GC currents literally thread through what has been strongly
separated geographic domains of study (air, earth, water) in the earth's
electrodynamics. This study may provide a better understanding of earth's
electrodynamics through the measurements of GC currents in oceans, and also
integrates GC into the earth system and climate models.