* 1231549
* EAGER: Engineering of universally immunocompatible biological tissues using genetically  modified embryonic stem cells and decellularized scaffolds
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Narine Sarvazyan, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2014
* USD 199,998.00

1231549/ Sarvazyan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT. The proposed studies
are at the intersection of different fields, including tissue bioengineering,
cardiology, immunology, and tissue transplantation. The researchers propose to
use an innovative approach to reduce rejection of embryonic stem cell
(ESC)-derivatives by non-syngeneic hosts. The studies will use the latest stem
cell differentiation techniques, molecular biology methods, and decellularized
scaffold engineering. Projects will be executed by an interdisciplinary team of
researchers with published expertise in the aforementioned fields. The creative
and novel strategy of diminishing the expression of Major Histocompatibilty
Complex Class I molecules and up-regulating Fas ligand expression is a practical
and well-conceived plan that will help advance knowledge in developing
universally immunocompatible tissues. The facilities and all required resources
are fully available to the PI and her research team at the George Washington
University to succeed in these studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT. The
researchers aim to develop new methods by which graft rejection can be
suppressed. Their studies will contribute to the general understanding of how
immunogenic molecules on the surface of undifferentiated and differentiated ESC
can influence tissue transplantation. As a result of these studies minimally
immunogenic ESC will be developed. The use of such cells in tissue engineering
can help to reduce the need for aggressive immunosuppressive treatments. In the
long term, this strategy can help to decrease the rates of morbidity and
mortality associated with many degenerative diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project assumes participation of junior faculty, undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as high school students from the DC public school system.
Throughout the years the PIs lab hosted and trained over 30 students. Their team
was and continues to be very inclusive; they trained students of many faiths,
different races and ethnical backgrounds, including many from underrepresented
groups and minorities. Students involved in the proposed studies will be trained
in the latest stem cell and molecular biology methods, as well as in scaffold-
engineering protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regeneration of tissues is one of
the hottest topics in modern science, which is of high interest to the general
public. The researchers plan to promote knowledge about the current state of
research in this rapidly developing field through professional seminars,
publications, and public lectures.