* 1231976
* BST-Inspired Flexible and Beamsteerable Reflectarray Antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Xun Gong, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merits:&lt;br/&gt;Research on BST transfer technology has revealed
that BST devices fabricated on conventional rigid substrates at elevated
temperatures can be transferred onto low-melting-point flexible polymer
substrates without compromising the dimensional tolerances or losing the high-
frequency performance. In addition, this technique offers unique advantages such
as low substrate loss, low parasitic inductance and capacitance, and high
integration capabilities. These properties make BST-inspired flexible
electronics particularly suitable for adaptive RF front ends which require
conformal shape, high-frequency performance, and reconfigurability. In order to
develop the necessary knowledge base, which would lead to the successful
development of next-generation advanced antenna systems, several important
technical objectives will be accomplished in the proposed research program: (1)
Develop reflectarray unit cell with optimized performance such as loss, phase
swing and bandwidth. (2) Develop reflectarray antennas with optimized
performance such as gain, efficiency, and scan angle. (3) Develop the biasing
network and circuitry to control the voltage. (4) Investigate the potential of
this BST technology for flexible and beamsteerable antennas operating up to W
band. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will move the flexible electronics technology beyond the current state in the
following aspects: (1) Advance flexible electronics technology for applications
which require frequency tunability and form adaptability. (2) Promote the use of
BST materials for tunable RF components with high tunability, low-loss, low
packaging costs, and high-frequency capabilities. (3) Achieve an in-depth
understanding of material properties and microfabrication technology, as well as
device development inspired by BST for flexible electronics. (4) Effectively
combine antenna technology with material development to achieve advanced
capabilities. (5) Substantially benefit the RF, microwave, antenna, and
biomedical industries and their customers by ultimately providing high-quality
BST components on flexible substrates.The broader impacts to education and
training will include: training graduate and undergraduate researchers on BST
materials, thin film processing, microwave engineering, and tunable component
design, fabrication, and characterization; preparing students for challenging
careers in the emerging technology areas in materials science and microwave
engineering; providing hands-on research training opportunities for K-12
students and underrepresented undergraduate students in each summer semester
through participating the Orlando Science Center education program and Diversity
and Minority Engineering Programs; and incorporating research discoveries in
microfabrication and tunable components into the current electrical engineering,
and mechanical engineering graduate/undergraduate courses offered at the
University of Central Florida.