* 1231668
* GOALI: Bi-Primary Electrokinetic Displays - Electronic Paper with Color Performance Approaching Printed Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jason Heikenfeld, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 09/30/2016
* USD 357,526.00

The objective of this NSF GOALI proposal is to pursue a novel color e-Paper
through a 3-year collaborative effort between the University of Cincinnati,
Hewlett Packard (Corvallis), and EMD/Merck Research Labs (Boston, Southampton).
The central hypothesis is that a new bi-primary color system can provide
transformative e-paper reflectance (~76%) and color gamut (&gt;40%), using an
electrokinetic pixel and dual-particle ink dispersions. The academic-industry
team has formulated this hypothesis on the basis of preliminary data, and
previous collaborative publishing on the state-of-the-art in e-Paper technology.
&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit is three-fold: (1) exploring the fundamental
electrophoretic behavior of dual-color, dual-particle ink dispersions, including
understanding the effects of poly-dispersity and zeta-potentials for clean
particle transport; (2) optically engineering pixels for 2X reflectance and 2X
color-fraction of conventional RGBW color-filtering; (3) implementing electrical
control by active-matrix addressing and optically characterizing the improved
performance as a function of ambient lighting conditions (diffuse, directional,
etc..).&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts center on undergraduate students who will
be trained as research co-ops at the University of Cincinnati, followed by
industry co-op experience at GOALI partner companies. In terms of societal
benefit, e-paper is &gt;10X more energy efficient than a typical LCD.
Furthermore, e-paper benefits to the individual include improved e-reader
ergonomics (less weight, larger screen size, unbreakable plastic display,
rollable/foldable form-factor), and enable further immersion of society in the
growing sectors of e-publishing and tablet-based learning.