* 1231447
* Workshop:  Paleocollections Digitization Workshop to be held April 26-28, 2012 in Gainesville, FL
* BIO,EF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 03/31/2014
* USD 32,000.00

Paleontology is often a core research emphasis of many U.S. natural history
museum collections, but to date, the paleocollections community has been less
engaged in digitization of specimens and collection information than its
neontological counterpart. iDigBio - Integrated Digitized Biocollections, the
National Resource for Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections - will
conduct a workshop to address the digitization needs, opportunities, and Grand
Challenges of the paleontological collections community throughout the U.S.

The specific goals of this workshop are to: 1. Allow a forum for dialog and
communication among the paleontological collections subdisciplines (vertebrate,
invertebrate, paleobotanical, and microfossils). 2. Present examples of on-going
digitization initiatives among the neontological collections communities and
examples of currently funded digitization projects. 3. Facilitate dialog between
the paleo- and neontological collections communities to promote integration of
collection data. 4. Facilitate a discussion of the collections digitization
needs, priorities, and Grand Challengesfor the paleo community.

Collection information for biological specimens housed in U.S. institutions
holds tremendous value for research, education, and understanding patterns of
biodiversity. Integrated biocollection data - from both paleo- and neontological
specimens ? can therefore be used for developing conservation, management, and
public policy for biodiversity. Four graduate students in paleocollections will
be included. These students will have the opportunity to meet professionals in
the paleo community and will be able to participate in developing a vision for
digitization of paleocollections.