* 1231211
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES Pacific Zonal Transect: Rates of supply, removal and internal cycling of trace elements and isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Willard Moore, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2016
* USD 87,313.00

The goal of GEOTRACES is to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control
the distribution of trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) in the ocean, and to
establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental
conditions. While the distribution of numerous TEIs will be mapped by a large
team of GEOTRACES PIs along this transect, their distribution cannot be properly
interpreted without concurrent measurement of tracers capable of providing rates
of internal TEI cycling processes and fluxes at boundaries and across
interfaces. Naturally-occurring radioisotopes of the Uranium-Thorium series are
well suited for studying the sources and sinks of TEIs on time and space scales
necessary to interpret lateral and vertical TEI distributions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team from the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and the University of South Carolina at Columbia will
carry out measurement of a suite of uranium/thorium series radionuclides on the
US GEOTRACES cruise to the Eastern Tropical South Pacific (ETSP) Ocean. This
radiotracer suite will include shorter-lived 234Th and 228Th as well as the
radium quartet (224Ra, 223Ra, 228Ra, 226Ra), which together allow the
quantification of rates of horizontal and vertical transport and mixing, as well
as removal at ocean boundaries, surface export, and subsurface remineralization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PIs have actively involved
undergraduate and high school students in their prior NSF-funded projects, with
two having won awards at ASLO meetings in recent years. The trend will continue
with this effort, along with the inclusion of an international guest student who
will work on analytical improvements for measuring particulate 228Th. In
addition, two WHOI-MIT Joint Program students will be involved using this
project as a major part of their PhD theses on Th and Ra isotopes. Contributions
to the data management side of the results from these 6 isotopes is eagerly
awaited by the modeling community, where there is a lack of multiple thorium
isotope data sets on these basin scales for parameterization of the cycling of
all particle reactive and biologically active TEIs.