* 1231154
* Formal and Informal Boundary Spanning in Multiteam Systems: An Examination of Triadic Influences on Knowledge Generation and Innovation in Scientific Teams
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Roger Calantone, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,085,570.00

Multiteam systems are becoming increasingly pervasive in modern organizations.
As organizations attempt to simultaneously become leaner and more flexible, this
creates a need to create teams that cross divisional boundaries in a context
where there are fewer people to buffer communications across functions. The
academic literature, as well as corporate experience indicates that direct face-
to-face inputs from people different than ourselves is faster, cheaper and of
higher knowledge quality than classic technology transfer. Thus, multiteam
situations are a natural response to the competitive pressures faced by many
organizations. Still, although multiteam systems have the potential to solve
many problems related to both routine operations and innovations solutions, they
also create unique issues and conditions that require special attention to
boundary spanning relationships both within and between highly specialized
teams. The large number of members within a typical multiteam system, along with
the specialized nature of their knowledge base, makes it impossible for every
member to fruitfully talk to each and every other member, thus dictating a
formal network of boundary spanners within the multiteam system. However, the
large size and specialization associated with multiteam systems also creates
more potential for Simmelian ties the emergence of informal boundary spanners
outside the formal network. These additional informal ties can either reinforce
are undermine the formal structure and the research proposed here will develop
new theory and provide new data that seeks to improve our understanding of the
interplay of formal and informal networks on processes and performance in
multiteam systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study these phenomena
at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State University, a
facility that is a state of the art complex for studying high particle physics
and is at the forefront of the competitive world of scientific discovery and
knowledge expansion. In addition, the composition of its workforce, which is a
multicultural representation of top researchers from all over the world, serves
as vivid manifestation of the challenges faced by modern multinational
organizations trying to leverage their human knowledge capital. The FRIB is
structured as a set of multiteam systems linked by boundary spanners and the
needs for inter-team knowledge sharing trigger both a planned formal ties as
well as ad hoc informal ties. Using in-depth interviews, surveys, and network
analysis protocols, this project examines the positive and negative aspects of
informal third-party ties and how these are influenced by individual
characteristics, dyadic relational characteristics and team attributes related
to structure and leadership.