* 1231873
* CAREER: Exploring the Dynamics of Individual Pedestrian and Crowd Behavior in Dense Urban Settings: A Computational Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/31/2011,05/31/2014
* Paul Torrens, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2014
* USD 87,885.00

Crowds are vital to the lifeblood of cities. Crowd behavior has largely been
veiled from traditional academic inquiry, however. For example, it is
impractical to establish live experiments with hundreds or thousands of people
along busy streetscapes, to reproduce mob behavior during riots for the purposes
of academic experimentation, or to expect to replicate the life-and-death
behavior under emergency situations in a fabricated fashion. Modeling and
simulation occupy a pivotal role in the research of crowd behavior as synthetic
laboratories for exploring ideas and hypotheses that are simply not amenable to
investigation by other means. Major advances have been made in modeling crowd
dynamics, but challenges remain. The goal of this Faculty Early-Career
Development (CAREER) award is to support research, education, and related
activities that will develop a reusable and behaviorally founded computer model
of pedestrian movement and crowd behavior amid dense urban environments. The
investigator intends for this work to serve as a test-bed for experimentation
with ideas, hypotheses, and plans that would otherwise lie beyond the reach of
academic inquiry. The research will seek to advance the state-of-the-art in
crowd modeling by representing individuals, crowds, and the ambient city with
rich detail. Models will be built with theory-informed algorithms that capture
the intricacies of human behavior. The model will be realized as a fully
immersive three-dimensional environment that engages both the public and
students, and it will convey intuitively complicated ideas about human movement
and crowd behavior. A robust calibration and validation scheme will be employed
to facilitate evaluation of policies and plans in simulation and mapping of
models to real-world scenarios in public health, downtown revitalization, public
safety, defense, large-scale event-planning, escape, evacuation, and
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be innovative in areas of
methodological and substantive interest in many ways. It will push the current
state-of-the-art in spatial modeling in the geographical sciences. The work will
broaden the behavioral base for computational modeling of human movement. The
project will contribute to the development of dynamic geographic information
science. The work also will produce a novel validation scheme that combines GIS
analytics based on time geography with spatial analysis, landscape metrics, and
spatial statistics. Substantively, the model will be used to build theory in
areas of human and urban geography that are traditionally ill-equipped for
investigation and examination at the micro-scale and in massively dynamic
contexts. Moreover, the model will serve as an experimental but wholly realistic
environment for exploring "what-if" and unforeseen scenarios of relevance to
cities and their citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;