* 1231548
* Travel Support to Attend Workshop on Gravitational Wave Bursts at Tobermory, Scotland
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Pablo Laguna, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

This award will fund the participation of scientists to the workshop
Gravitational Wave Bursts: Astrophysics, Data Analysis and Numerical Relativity.
Gravitational wave bursts are short signals with the potential of unveiling the
broadest range of sources of gravitational radiation: e.g. stellar core
collapse, gamma-ray bursts engines, cosmic strings, compact object mergers,
isolated neutron stars. The perfect storm of observations of short duration
cataclysmic events is arriving with gravitational antennas such as LIGO. Now is
the time to challenge the theoretical understanding of the transient
gravitational wave sky and its connection to the more traditional
electromagnetic firmament. The time is also ripe for a workshop that enables
critical review of the data analysis and numerical modeling tools that will make
gravitational-wave observations a reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will encourage communication and critical evaluation of efforts and
methodologies, in an environment that promotes synergistic collaborations among
researchers from the astrophysics, data analysis and numerical relativity
communities. The meeting will serve as a model for inter-disciplinary workshops
in gravitational-wave physics, providing an example of a collaborative framework
to evaluate the status of the effort in a multi-disciplinary area, assess
methodologies and challenges, and identify transformative opportunities.