* 1231325
* RCN-SEES: Urban Heat Island Network
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* J. Marshall Shepherd, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2018
* USD 749,732.00

Three and a half billion people currently live in cities, and this is projected
to rise to six billion by 2050. In much of the world, cities are warming at
twice the rate of rural areas and the frequency of urban heat waves is expected
to increase with climate change throughout the 21st century. Addressing the
economic, environmental and human costs of urban heat islands requires a better
understanding of these complex systems from many disciplinary perspectives. The
goal of this four-year Urban Heat Island Network is to advance multidisciplinary
understanding of urban heat islands, examine how they can be ameliorated through
engineering and design practices, and share these new insights with a wide array
of stakeholders responsible for managing urban warming so that the health,
economic, and environmental impacts can be reduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Urban Heat Island Network will involve atmospheric scientists, engineers,
architects, landscape designers, urban planners, public health, and education
and outreach experts, who will share information, evaluate research directions,
and communicate knowledge and research recommendations to the larger research
community as well as to stakeholders engaged in developing strategies to
mitigate the effects of urban warming. The Network will bring together
institutions that are already engaged in urban heat island research but have not
previously had opportunities to interact with one another on this subject. The
University of Minnesota is conducting a novel analysis of 100 urban heat islands
around the globe. Georgia Tech is a leader in understanding the contributions of
urbanization to climate change. The University of Georgia is advancing knowledge
of the interactions between urbanization and precipitation. The UK Met Office is
designing models to simulate the impact of urban heat islands on the regional
and global climate. Lawrence Berkeley National Lab?s Heat Island Group is at the
forefront of advanced materials and building design to reduce urban warming.
PositivEnergy is a leader in practical heat island mitigation and building
energy conservation. The Minnesota Department of Health is evaluating public
health impacts of climate change, including urban heat islands. Collaboration
with the Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) ensures that the Network reaches
audiences in New York, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and Washington,
DC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned activities of the Urban Heat Island Network
include holding annual summer institutes in the Twin Cities and Atlanta
metropolitan areas to advance the collaborative science of urban heat islands;
partnering with the Science Museum of Minnesota to engage large public
audiences; infusing the work of the Network into the Franklin Institute's Urban
Climate Education Partnership (UCEP); and integrating a team of underserved Twin
Cities youth into the Network's work. Evaluation of Urban Heat Island Network
dynamics and activities by SMM's Department of Evaluation and Research in
Learning will inform future efforts to scale up the network and to implement
other research coordination networks.