* 1231132
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Scalable Kinship Inference in Wild Populations Across Years and Generations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Wanpracha Chaovalitwongse, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 245,409.00

Scalable kinship inference in wild populations across years and generations

A cornerstone of research in molecular ecology is the reconstruction of family
groups (kinship analysis). Understanding how individuals in free-living
populations are related to each other provides the best opportunity to study
many important biological processes, ranging from sexual selection to patterns
of dispersal and recruitment. Recent advances in molecular DNA technologies and
computational methods have made these studies possible. However, many conceptual
and computational challenges remain and need to be addressed in order to advance
these studies. To date, existing research work on kinship analysis has primarily
focused on computational methods that address a single relationship, such as
parentage assignment or reconstruction of full sib groups. Inclusion of multiple
objectives, such as half-sib reconstruction with minimum parentage assignment,
or hierarchy over multiple generations, makes formulation of the underlying
computational problem extremely challenging, and simple extensions of previous
methods do not address in a practical, scalable, and robust manner the problem
of kinship reconstruction for data sets that include multiple generations of
species or involve multiple optimization functions.

The goal of the proposed research is to design robust, parsimonious, and
versatile computational approaches for inferring multi-generation kinship
relationships in wild populations from multiallelic markers. Parsimony
assumption is fundamental to these approaches as it requires no prior knowledge,
assumptions about sampling methodology, or existence of models, which is the
case for most free-living populations. The diverse tasks of this project include
formulating computational kinship inference problems based on existing
biological studies, analyzing computational complexity of and providing
solutions to the resulting combinatorial optimization problems, and designing
robust, scalable and efficient high performance implementations. The resulting
computational methods will be evaluated on datasets collected from existing
biological studies and will be deployed to the biological community through the
Kinalyzer web-based service, currently actively used for sibship inference only.

The research proposed in this project will greatly impact diverse application
areas including funda- mental research in combinatorial optimization and data
mining, and within biology, areas as diverse as behavioral ecology, evolutionary
genetics, conservation, forensics, and epidemiology. The multidisci- plinary
nature of the project and the research team will enhance curriculum design of
related areas and introduce new cross-disciplinary courses. This cohesive,
multidisciplinary project will provide training opportunities in biology,
operation research, algorithms analysis, bioinformatics and high performance
computing, within a single application framework. The project will leverage the
diverse scientific ex- pertise and extensive mentoring experience of the team to
foster a true interdisciplinary collaboration and to provide a thriving
environment for a new generation of interdisciplinary scientists.