* 1231754
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Collaborative Research: EasySense: Contact-less Physiological Sensing in the Mobile Environment Using Compressive Radio Frequency Probes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Santosh Kumar, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 207,736.00

The collaborative research project (IIS-1231754, Santosh Kumar, University of
Memphis; IIS-1231525, Mustafa al'Absi, University of Minnesota Twin Cities;
IIS-1231577, Emre Ertin, Ohio State University) is developing and evaluating a
mobile sensor called EasySense that can provide continuous physiological
monitoring without skin contact in the field environments using radio frequency
(RF) probes. This approach addresses the problem of physiological monitoring
today that requires skin contacts such as electrodes for ECG, and hence cannot
scale to widespread monitoring of patients and healthy adults for years. The key
challenge is to develop high-resolution sensing on low-power mobile platforms
that can separate out the weak motion signals of heart and lung, from the gross
motion of the body and the sensor. The project is developing theory and design
for a compressive ultrawideband (UWB) RF sensor that achieves two orders of
magnitude reduction in the required sampling rate to make it feasible to realize
in a low-power mobile form factor. EasySense employs dynamic compressive sensing
algorithms to improve the quality of sensing through temporal integration of
information and employs interference subspace cancelation methods to cancel out
motion artifacts using data obtained from accelerometers and gyroscopes. The
project is implementing all the needed hardware, firmware, embedded software on
the sensor node for sampling, processing, and wireless communication, and mobile
phone software for data collection, storage, and visualization. EasySense is
evaluated against traditional physiological sensors via lab and field studies on
human subjects involving stress and exercise protocols.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By
realizing contactless sensing of physiology in the field environment, EasySense
will enable long-term physiological monitoring at large-scale that is essential
for determining potential causes and early biomarkers of fatal diseases of slow
accumulation such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases. In addition to being
used widely in health research and practice, EasySense can be used for hands-on
demonstration in health education. Information on the project, developed
hardware and software design files and code relating to the testbed
infrastructure will be accessible in open source form via the project web site
(http://www.easysense.org).