* 1231145
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Variation in Macaque Social Structure from Phylogenetic, Socioecological and Biological Markets Principles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Carol Berman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,053.00

Social structure in nonhuman primates varies markedly both within and between
species. Although there is no consensus, several explanations have been
proposed. One is that social structure varies in accordance with species' past
ancestral relationships (phylogenetic closeness). Two others are based on the
idea that variation in current ecological factors (e.g., group size and/or food
distribution) shapes patterns of competition within and between groups of the
same species, and in turn, shapes (1) the structure of agonistic and dominance-
related behavior, and/or (2) patterns of exchange of affiliative behavior (e.g.,
grooming, aggressive support) that occur as predicted by economic models (e.g.,
supply-and-demand). Research by doctoral student Krishna Balasubramaniam
(University at Buffalo), supervised by Dr. Carol Berman, tests predictions
related to these explanations, focusing on females in the primate genus Macaca.
The investigators will reconstruct phylogenetic trees to decipher ancestral
relationships, and use these to determine whether variation in dominance-related
behavior across nine macaque species correlates with degrees of genetic
relatedness. To test within-species explanations, they will collect
observational behavioral data on free-ranging rhesus macaques at Cayo Santiago,
Puerto Rico, using focal-animal and all-occurrences sampling. Various
statistical analyses will be applied to these data to test whether group sizes
and empirical measures of competitive ability vary with patterns of aggressive
behavior, and/or the exchange of affiliative behavior

The research is unique in testing predictions related to multiple explanations
for variation of nonhuman primate social structure in a single study. It sheds
light on the relative contributions of species' ancestral relationships vs.
variation in current ecological conditions in shaping macaque social behavior,
and addresses current debates concerning the relative roles of inherent species
characteristics and/or stable environmental influences vs. adaptation to current
conditions across primates, including early humans. In addition, aspects of the
study related to patterns of exchange of affiliative behavior have important
implications for understanding human economic behavior.