* 1231570
* Theory of Spin Transport in Silicon Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Hanan Dery, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

Future technologies beyond the CMOS age are becoming exceedingly important
research frontiers. In this regard, scientists conjectured that spin-based
devices must be on the horizon. In these devices, the quantum mechanical spin is
introduced to electronic circuits. Silicon is an ideal material choice for
spintronic devices. It has a mature technology which overwhelmingly dominates
the semiconductor industry. Importantly, silicon has a relatively long spin
relaxation time due to its weak spin-orbit coupling and the suppression of
important spin relaxation mechanisms (via the crystalline inversion symmetry and
the zero nuclear spin of its naturally abundant isotope). Accordingly, spin
information can be carried over 1 mm length scales in
silicon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the proposed
activity:&lt;br/&gt;I. Studying the spin relaxation in silicon devices in the
presence of strain, electrical fields and quantization. In this part, the basic
device geometry includes a transport channel between spin injector and detector.
Transport across this basic structure will be studied using a drift-diffusion
model whose basic parameters (e.g., spin lifetime and charge mobility) will be
calculated from rigorous numerical methods that accurately quantify the
electron-phonon interaction. These include an empirical pseudopotential method
and a k&amp;#8729;p model to calculate the electron wavefunctions and an
adiabatic bond-charge model to calculate the phonon dispersion and atom
displacement vectors. Strain effects can be readily incorporated in these models
while quantization effects along the confinement direction are explicitly
considered in the k&amp;#8729;p model. The electron-phonon scattering will be
modeled by a rigid-ion approximation. Group theory will be used to identify
selection rules that simplify the analysis. &lt;br/&gt;II. Incorporating the
gained knowledge in device simulations. Spin injection, extraction and the role
of contact widths will be carried by realistic boundary conditions taken from
verified experimental results. A new concept for on-chip spin-based information
transfer that alleviates much of the acute problems of on-chip transmission
lines will be studied. Heating effects of drifting conduction electrons (by the
electric field) in silicon wires and silicon-germanium nanostructure devices
will be investigated by Monte Carlo simulations which quantify both the charge
transport and spin lifetime. Other than spin flips, momentum relaxation will be
modeled by electron-lattice and electron-impurity scattering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed activity:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research includes new theoretical aspects and device concepts in silicon
spintronics. This research is timely and may have an important impact since spin
injection in silicon has recently become a very active research field. Other
than publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations in professional
conferences, outcomes of this project (theoretical predictions and device model
results) will be shared with leading experimentalists in silicon spintronics.
The broad impact of our previous spintronics results has been highlighted in
several science magazines including the Science News, Nanomaterials News and the
New Scientist.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Educational activities are an essential
part of this project and are closely integrated with the proposed program. The
proposed research presents ideas that are fascinating to a wide range of
students. By collaboration of engineering and physics graduate students, each
side learns from the other quantum mechanics or device function concepts. The PI
has already designed a new course on spintronics which explains how quantum
mechanics and magnetism can be applied into new logic and memory architectures.
The PI is committed to training students and will integrate this research with
undergraduate courses and will recruit qualified undergraduate students to
participate in the research. The PI will actively promote this research among
K-12 students by delivering interactive lectures/demos that highlight the use of
future technology in devices. The potential of this research for high societal
impact will hopefully attract students from under-represented groups to the
project.