* 1231742
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Rehospitalization Analytics: Modeling and Reducing the Risks of Rehospitalization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Chandan Reddy, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 444,999.00

Hospitalizations account for more than 30% of the $2 trillion annual cost of
healthcare in the United States. As many as 20% or more of all hospital
admissions occur within 30 days of a previous discharge. Such rehospitalizations
are not only expensive but are also potentially harmful, and most importantly,
they are often preventable. Providing special care for a targeted group of
patients who are at a high risk of rehospitalization can significantly improve
the chances of avoiding rehospitalization. Estimating the predictive power of
the clinical data collected during the hospitalization of a patient and
effectively making predictions from such diverse patient records requires new
analytical models. This project develops a 'rehospitalization analytics'
framework that can identify, characterize and reduce the risks of
rehospitalization for patients using a wide range of electronic health records.
Specifically, the research objectives of this project are to develop: (i)
integrated models that can effectively leverage multiple heterogeneous patient
information sources and transfer the acquired knowledge about rehospitalization
between different hospitals and patient groups in the presence of only few
patient records, (ii) novel adaptable time-sensitive models that make
predictions of the risk estimates in the presence of inherent concept drifts in
the clinical data, and (iii) new regularization methods that can effectively
extract the population-specific risk factors despite the presence of multiple
correlations and grouped categorical clinical predictors. The methods are
evaluated using heart failure patient records collected at the Henry Ford Health
System in Detroit. The performance of the proposed models is compared against
the state-of-the-art statistical and clinical tools that are currently applied
for risk prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide a
comprehensive, accurate, and timely assessment of risk of rehospitalizations,
and has the potential to direct more aggressive treatments towards specific
high-risk patients. Predictive models developed in this project could be widely
adopted and have nation-wide impact because the source data is often available
at the hospitals. This has the potential to improve the lives of patients, by
reducing exacerbations, and reducing overall health care costs by reducing the
number of hospitalizations. The computational models developed in this project
could also be applied to other chronic diseases that have high rates of
utilization and could benefit from improved targeting of intervention/resources.
The educational objective of this project is to train the next generation of
interdisciplinary researchers in the fields of data analytics and healthcare
informatics. The progress of the project and the research findings are
disseminated via the project website
(http://www.cs.wayne.edu/~reddy/projects/health/).