* 1231848
* Secure Communications in Fading Cognitive Radio Networks with Finite-Alphabet Signaling
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Chengshan Xiao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to establish
transformative methodology and novel&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for secure
communications in spectrum sharing cognitive radio networks
to&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously maximize the secrecy throughput of secondary users
under security&lt;br/&gt;threats, ensure the quality of service for primary
users, and keep information secret
to&lt;br/&gt;eavesdroppers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is: 1) to propose a unified network
model to describe the fading&lt;br/&gt;cognitive radio network that has multiple
primary users, secondary users and&lt;br/&gt;eavesdroppers, all connected by
wireless fading channels; 2) to formulate the secure&lt;br/&gt;communication of
secondary users into direct maximization of mutual information
or&lt;br/&gt;throughput with finite-alphabet (rather than Gaussian) signaling
and channel statistics&lt;br/&gt;constraints; 3) to present a novel approach to
solving the neither concave nor convex&lt;br/&gt;optimization
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
include: 1) this project will bridge the gap between
network&lt;br/&gt;information theory and practical network implementation by
employing finite-alphabet&lt;br/&gt;signaling and channel statistics to optimize
linear precoders which maximize the&lt;br/&gt;practically achievable data rates
or throughput; 2) it will establish a transformative&lt;br/&gt;methodology that
effectively tackles difficult non-concave, non-convex, and
nondeterministic&lt;br/&gt;polynomial-time (NP) hard optimization problems in
cognitive radio &lt;br/&gt;networks. This methodology can be well applicable to
other wireless network settings&lt;br/&gt;such as cooperative relay networks,
cellular networks, and wireless sensor and mesh&lt;br/&gt;networks; 3) The
research will be timely integrated to collaborations with
industrial&lt;br/&gt;partners and education of undergraduate and graduate
students, particularly, underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;minority students, thus
enhancing the impact to the society via technology innovation.