* 1231233
* RCN-SEES:  Advancing our social and environmentalunderstanding of complex mountain landscapes and their vulnerability to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Jack Stanford, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 749,999.00

This project will establish a Research Coordination Network (RCN) to develop
national and international research collaborations and partnerships to address
the overarching question of how to reduce the vulnerability of natural and human
systems in complex mountain landscapes. The Northern Rockies region of the
United States contains the largest undeveloped landscapes in the contiguous
United States. However, this region is undergoing rapid growth in human
populations through both urbanization and ex-urbanization. As is typical of
mountain-valley environments throughout the world, this region is a complex
coupled natural-human system: a set of landscapes characterized by dramatic
ecological and climatic changes and socioeconomic transitions. This effort
leverages a core group from the University of Idaho, Washington State
University, University of Montana and the United States Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Research Station to coordinate research planning for informing decision
processes and sustainable management of forest and water resources in complex
mountain landscapes. The research network for this region will be a partnership
of academic institutions, state, and federal agencies, Native American tribes,
and non-governmental organizations. An important goal of this RCN is to
effectively network multiple sources of knowledge on how ecosystems function in
complex mountain landscapes for the purpose of improving social and ecological
resilience and sustainability of their natural resources and ecosystem services.
The work will first demonstrate this process in the Northern Rockies region
encompassing Idaho, eastern Washington, western Montana, Wyoming, and
southwestern mountain regions of Canada. Subsequent work will extend the model
to other complex mountain landscapes nationally and internationally. Extension
of the regional model internationally will be facilitated through collaborations
and partnerships developed with researchers and organizations in eleven
countries throughout Europe, North and South America and through the
International Long Term Ecological Research Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have substantial broader impacts on local stakeholders and land
managers through activities that build and expand partnerships with public,
Native American, and private institutions of education and through outreach to
inform decision making and governance that improves social and ecological
resilience. Education programs will range from creating national and
international graduate student associations to curriculum development, with a
primary objective being to increase involvement of individuals from
underrepresented groups. Annual meetings, national and international workshops,
and modern communication capabilities will facilitate exchanges that incorporate
findings across local to international boundaries.