* 1231231
* Developing Guidelines to Aid in Communicating Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Robin Gregory, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2017
* USD 599,989.00

One of the primary reasons risk management decisions are difficult is because of
uncertainty in estimates of the outcomes of proposed actions. This uncertainty
has multiple sources and can refer to either the expected magnitude of a
consequence or to its assessed probability. A key challenge facing decision
makers is how to communicate effectively about uncertainty among the different
participants involved in the risk decision process -- experts from government
agencies or academia, industry staff and consultants, and members of the public.
People from these different groups will typically hold different values, have
different tolerances for risk, and have different levels of comfort with respect
to numeric presentations of information. Although it is widely known that these
differences can lead to substantial variations in how the same uncertainty
presentation is understood, current practice generally reflects a largely ad hoc
approach to the presentation of uncertainty, with each risk manager responsible
for developing a presentation strategy. In response, this research project
contributes to the development of broadly applicable guidelines for presenting
uncertainty in ways that encourage understanding and minimize communication
failures. The proposed work combines experimental studies, using both experts
and laypersons as participants, with case studies that will assist decision
makers in a variety of real-world settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
stakeholders engaged in risk management decisions are able to more fully
understand the implications of outcome uncertainty and, as a result, select
options that are more consistent with their own values, then the quality of
citizen participation in important social debates should be improved. Across a
range of case-study applications -ncluding national security, environmental
management, and health contexts- trust in the role of credible technical
analyses will be promoted. Results of this 3-year project will be disseminated
broadly through presentations, trainings for risk managers and other citizens,
teaching in university classes, media submissions (e.g., newspaper editorials),
and articles published in leading professional journals.