* 1231262
* Support for the 2012 Annual Meeting of the Society for Mathematical Psychology
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Mark Pitt, Society for Mathematical Psychology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide partial support for the 45th Annual Meeting of the
Society for Mathematical Psychology to be held in Columbus, Ohio on July 21-24,
2012. The Society for Mathematical Psychology Conference encourages the
presentation of research in which mathematical, statistical, or simulation
methods play a significant role in the development of hypotheses or the
interpretation of experimental results in the behavioral, neural, and cognitive
sciences. In addition, accepted research papers focus on theoretical
developments clearly relating to substantive issues or methodologies of obvious
use in psychology, cognitive science, cognitive neuroscience, and related areas
and/or experimental results which bear directly on particular mathematical or
simulation models of aspects of human behavior. This year's conference themes
include: (1) Neural models of cognition; (2) Modeling with Big Data; and (3)
Bayesian methodology in cognitive modeling. Two events will take place on the
day prior to the start of the full Society meeting. One is a half-day meeting
focusing on the mentoring of women in mathematical psychology. The other is a
half-day workshop entitled "Building Human Cognitive Models Using Quantum
Probability and Dynamics." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical psychology brings
together social scientists, statisticians, mathematicians, and computer
scientists to work on problems critical to behavioral scientists. Much
transformational research has come from the mathematical psychology community,
including mathematical models of brain function, memory, and decision-making, as
well as the introduction of new methods for data analysis. While mathematical
models improve our understanding of human behavior and provide formal structures
for future scientific exploration, new and better methods for data analysis
allow us to derive more accurate and nuanced conclusions from behavioral data.
The annual meeting of the Society advances discovery and understanding. It
promotes training and learning of new models and methods for analyzing
behavioral data. It makes possible the broad dissemination of new findings
important in all areas of psychology, as well as economics, political science,
and sociology.