* 1231682
* EAGER: Investigation of Polymeric Nitrogen Supported on Carbon Nanotube Sheets for  Oxygen Reduction in Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Zafar Iqbal, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

Fuel cells are devices for direct conversion of the chemical energy of a fuel
into electricity through electrochemical reactions. If successful, practical
fuel cells would be a key enabling technology for movement to a green economy.
However successful application of fuel cells has been hindered by factors
relating to the kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction. Expensive platinum-
based catalysts seem to be required to catalyze these oxygen reduction
reactions. Platinum is of course rare and expensive and is susceptible to
poisoning by molecules such as carbon monoxide, leading to reduced catalyst
lifetimes. Despite many decades of research, very few non-precious metal
catalysts have been found with promising oxygen reduction catalytic activity and
none have exhibited sufficient performance stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators Xianqin Wang and Zafar Iqbal from New Jersey
Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, are proposing a radically different
approach to a new cathode material. Polymeric nitrogen has been theoretically
predicted to be a high energy-density material. Various modes have been
considered for stabilization of this material. Ab initio molecular dynamic
simulations have predicted that a polymeric nitrogen phase can be stabilized at
ambient conditions inside carbon nanotubes. Calculation of band gaps for
polymeric nitrogen in carbon nanotubes indicates all chain lengths of oligomers
are semiconducting. Thus, successful synthesis of polymeric nitrogen in carbon
nanotubes offers the opportunity to confirm the viability of such a material in
a fuel-cell application. In addition, such materials could be evaluated as
catalysts for other reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER proposal will
offer the PIs the opportunity to expand on some initial findings. The PIs have
had preliminary success in the synthesis of polymeric nitrogen using
electrochemical and plasma polymerization approaches and have demonstrated some
stabilization on a carbon nanotube substrate. These are very preliminary
successes. Experimental tasks in this EAGER proposal include: synthesis of
polymeric nitrogen stabilized on carbon nanotube sheets, determination of
properties and stability of the materials, fabrication of a polymeric nitrogen-
based cathode using modified current commercial techniques, measurement of the
performance of this cathode in the oxygen reduction reaction and comparison to a
commercially available platinum-on- carbon cathode. Successful performance
demonstration will lead to further characterization studies as well as
determination of stability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issues with platinum catalysts in fuel cells
have been limiting factors for decades. This approach is radically different
than many other incremental studies in the area. Success could be very valuable.
Even if not successful in fuel cell catalysis, the synthesis offers new catalyst
potential for other reactions. In terms of educational directions, the two PIs
will guide a graduate student in the accomplishment of these initial experiments
in one year. This will be a challenging project for the student. In addition,
the potential of new catalyst technology will add to the educational value.