* 1231623
* GSE/RES: Two Studies on Long-term Changes in the Relation Between Spatial Skills and Math Achievement in Girls
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Beth Casey, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,952.00

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this research is to conduct longitudinal
investigations of the relationship between spatial skills and mathematics
achievement in girls from families from a range of income and educational
levels. One type of spatial skill, 3-d mental rotation ability, shows the
largest gender differences favoring boys of any other cognitive measure, with
girls using less effective strategies than boys solving these problems. For
girls, in particular, this type of spatial reasoning has been found to be a
strong predictor of mathematics achievement. By focusing on variability among
girls from a longitudinal perspective, the purpose of the present study is to
provide a nuanced account of developmental mechanisms that may promote girls'
spatial and mathematics skills. The project includes two studies of the
acquisition of spatial and mathematics skills in girls over time. Study 1
addresses longitudinal changes among girls in the relation between 3-d mental
rotation skills and mathematics achievement from fifth through seventh grade
(the period in which 3-d spatial skills are being acquired in girls). This
longitudinal research will allow for more causal inferences about the links
between spatial skills and mathematics achievement over this time period. Study
2 addresses the influence of girls' early skills and early mathematics
experiences in the home, on their later mathematics achievement and spatial
skills. This study is a follow-up of a NSF-funded study of first grade girls, in
which the same sample will be assessed at fifth grade. The previous study showed
that early home mathematics experiences were important predictors of mathematics
achievement in first-grade girls, and mediated the association between socio-
economic status and mathematics performance. This study will investigate whether
these early mathematics experiences in girls have any long-term impact on their
later mathematics achievement in fifth grade, when controlling for SES levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A careful analysis of girls'
developmental changes in the relationship between spatial and mathematics skills
over time will provide much needed information about the critical role that
spatial ability plays in girls' STEM success and educational and occupational
choices and outcomes. This may provide important educational clues on how to
more effectively teach girls to develop their spatial reasoning skills and to
apply them when approaching mathematics problems with the overarching goal being
to broaden the participation of girls in STEM fields.