* 1231790
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Are gelada loud calls "sexually-selected signals"?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Marcela Benitez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,061.00

Geladas (Theropithecus gelada), like humans, live in unusually large social
groups with numbers that exceed 1000 individuals. Unlike humans, however, the
dominant males in gelada society do not recognize other males around them - even
males that they encounter on a daily basis. This creates a socially and
evolutionarily (fitness-related) significant set of limitations for males
competing for mates; mainly, how to assess rivals prior to engaging in costly
forms of competition. Species that do not use individual recognition for
assessment typically use short-hand proxies; i.e., particular physical features
or other characteristics ("signals") which are useful for ascertaining the
competitive abilities of potential rivals. Although such signals in primates are
rare, the unusually large groups found in gelada society may have favored their
evolution through a form of natural selection referred to as "sexual
selection."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by doctoral student Marcela Benitez
(University of Michigan), under the supervision of Dr. Jacinta Beehner, will
examine one such putative signal for male geladas living in the Simien Mountains
National Park, Ethiopia - a loud vocalization used in male displays (i.e., "loud
calls"). Establishing whether loud calls are evolved signals requires
establishing the following: (1) that variation exists in loud calls across males
of different quality, (2) that males can use these calls to distinguish between
high and low quality males, (3) that males then base challenges on these calls,
and (4) that males with high quality calls have higher fitness (reproductive
success). To address these predictions, this interdisciplinary research will
combine acoustic, experimental, hormonal, and observational analyses on known
individuals that have been followed continuously for the past six years. As
such, the research represents one of the most comprehensive studies of what are
theoretically termed "sexually-selected signals" (i.e., those evolved through
male-male reproductive competition) with potential fitness consequences in a
primate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is part of a long-term project that
is committed to increasing conservation awareness and scientific education, both
in the U.S. and in Ethiopia, through collaborative research and educational
presentations to local people and eco-tourists in Ethiopia. The doctoral student
Co-PI, a member of an underrepresented group in science, will incorporate the
research into her bilingual website for childhood educational outreach,
promoting engagement with the sciences by US children.