* 1231712
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Personalized Signal Processing for Early Diagnosis of Mobility Impairment
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Maite Brandt-Pearce, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2016
* USD 358,127.00

Diseases, disorders, and degenerations that lead to mobility impairment can have
a significant impact on functional independence and quality of life. For many
such conditions, early diagnosis is the key for successful intervention and
maximized wellness, and accurate mobility assessment is central to monitoring
progression and evaluating the impact of physical and pharmaceutical therapies.
In recent years, inertial body sensor networks (BSNs) have emerged as platforms
with the potential to provide continuous, non-invasive collection of high-
precision motion data in any location over an extended period of time. Up to now
these have been used primarily in-clinic, making absolute assessments from data
collected challenging. Out-of-clinic collections introduce nuisance variables,
which exacerbate the problem. However, the purpose of mobility assessments as
described above does not truly depend on absolute assessments compared to a
statistic norm but rather on relative assessments compared to an individual's
baseline, which eliminates nuisance variables and makes out-of-clinic
assessments using a BSN a more tractable problem. This project leverages the
general motivation of more personalized medicine to enable continuous,
longitudinal gait assessments to be made using a BSN for two example conditions
with mobility impairment symptoms: normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) and
multiple sclerosis (MS). Specific anticipated contributions include: 1)
identifying signal features that can be feasibly extracted from out-of-clinic
inertial BSN data and effectively utilized for detecting individualized gait
changes, 2) developing new signal processing algorithms for the individualized
identification and relative quantification of gait changes, and 3) exploring
techniques for implementing forms of personalized signal processing on resource-
constrained BSN platforms to enable more intelligent data reduction and dynamic
energy optimization strategies that can extend the battery life of such systems.