* 1231125
* Workshops:  Systems and Modeling Advances; 2011 NSF Engineering Research and Innovation Conference; Atlanta, Georgia; January 4, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/25/2012,09/30/2012
* Paul Collopy, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2012
* USD 8,683.00

The objective of this award will be to conduct three one day workshop in
conjunction with the 2011 NSF Engineering Research and Innovation Conference
sponsored by NSF's Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
(CMMI). The overarching theme of these workshops is the investigation of
fundamental questions in systems and modeling, with the goal of identifying
knowledge gaps that require further research pursuit. The Hot Topics in
Engineering Design Workshop will further advance the fundamental theory of
systems engineering through examination of model-based design, value-centric
design for adaptability, and by placing a rigorous footing under systems
engineering processes. The investigation embodied in this workshop is a
necessary step in a major research program examining fundamental issues in the
design of large complex systems. The Workshop on New Directions in Dynamical
Systems Inspired by Biological, Energy, Environmental, and Information Sciences,
will further advance uncertainty quantification (UQ) and data driven dynamical
systems (DDDS); dynamical systems in biomechanics/biomimetics, and energy
generation/distribution systems; and identify new directions for research in
dynamical systems. The Workshop on Challenges and Opportunities for Research in
Multiscale Modeling in Mechanics and Materials (M4), aims to attain a systematic
rationale, which is scientifically rigorous, to the field of multiscale modeling
in mechanics and materials, as opposed to the present approaches that are
largely heuristic in nature. These workshops will produce research agenda aimed
at significantly advancing the respective fields in systems and
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of these workshops will be strengthened by
inviting a culturally diverse group of researchers and practitioners, and will
offer travel stipends to a number of graduate students as well, thereby enabling
these researchers of the future to frame their research with the latest and most
cutting-edge insights in their field. Additionally, the topics identified by
each workshop have broad and sweeping impact across numerous fields, from
energy, to defense, to manufacturing - all identified as Grand Challenges for
the next century. The critical investigations of each workshop into existing
practice and potentials for future research in each area, suggest tremendous
possibilities for impacting industrial practice across these fields. The
workshops will encourage interaction of the communities involved, with
presentations by thought leaders in the respective fields, emphasis on
discussion and interaction, and encouragement of participation by graduate
students. Each workshop will produce a report that will provide a complete and
balanced result of discussions, along with a collection of key research
questions and research proposal directions for future consideration.
Additionally, results from the workshops will be disseminated through
presentations, conference papers, and journal articles.