* 1231604
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Collaborative Research: A Portable Power-Assist Orthosis to Aid Elderly Persons in Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Geza Kogler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This project develops a portable power-assist orthosis to address the problems
of impaired mobility due to lower-extremity weakness. This robotic orthosis
actively assists the user's joint motion according to his or her motion intent,
and thus enables the user to perform certain critical, power-consuming tasks
(such as the sit-to-stand motion) independently. The orthosis is powered with a
high-performance actuation approach, namely chemo-fluidic actuation, which
combines the high-power-density pneumatic actuators with a high-energy-density
monopropellant-based pneumatic supply. In addition to the new actuation
approach, the orthosis also features a new structure and user interface for
effective load transfer and easy donning-doffing; and an effective motion
control algorithm to enable interactive power assist according to the user's
motion intent. With the portable power-assist orthosis, the users reduce the
reliance on the assistance by caregivers, enjoy a significantly improved life
quality, and stay physically active to avoid the aforementioned issues
associated with the sedentary life style.

This project has broader impact to assistive technologies and can improve
mobility of elderly individuals and people suffering from the impaired mobility
due to lower-extremity weakness. The project can potentially reduce a
considerable amount of physical assistance taking care of these individuals, and
the cost of time and manpower in the care. The research of the project is
incorporated into education activities by utilizing the rehabilitation robotics
as an innovative education medium.