* 1231046
* Sustainable Energy Pathways Through Education and Technology (SEPTET)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Tito Busani, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,700,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy Pathways (SEP) Program will support the research
project of Prof. Olga Lavrova and her collaborators at the University of New
Mexico. The objective of the project is to combine fundamental research on
energy harvesting with creating visualization tools for raising social awareness
about energy usage. In this project, Prof. Lavrova and her collaborators will
develop new multi-functional and broadband energy harvesters, utilizing novel
material combinations and novel material growth techniques. First, the research
will lead to a quantitatively new approach to energy harvesting. which can be
used to offset the energy demands of the US population. Second, the team of
investigators will incorporate energy harvesters into existing or newly
developed urban and rural power infrastructure. The goal is to significantly
reduce the amounts of energy being routinely consumed and/or wasted. Detailed
numerical models for system-level operation will lead to long-term models of
energy harvesters operation, economical feasibility and life-cycle analysis of
energy harvesters in various environmental settings. Lastly, Prof. Lavrova and
her collaborators will create a number of highly visual tools for the general
public, which will increase public awareness of the energy and sustainability
picture. An example of general public oriented visualization will be a real-time
interactive behavioral energy application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social outcomes
will stem directly from the visualization and education work described above,
and will lead to changes in global behavior as relevant to energy consumption.
Economic benefits will stem from both technical developments (new devices
providing new economic models for $/W) as well as savings and generation avoided
by implementing new infrastructures suggested in this project. Environmental
benefits will stem from the direct reduction of generated power, thus leading to
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. At the same time, by removing and/or
simplifying certain elements from the current electrical infrastructure,
environmental footprint will be reduced even further by removing the
manufacturing environment impact associated with removed or reduced components.
A broad educational and outreach campaign will ensure sustainable approach to
workforce development, starting from young graduates to re-entry level of
professionals, or veterans returning to civilian careers, hence providing an
outcome of continuous workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformational
impact of this project, if successful, will be in bringing the fundamental
fields of energy research from micro-W to MW scales into one common model. From
such big picture, both researchers as well as electric utilities can assess
current states of energy generation and consumption, and address improvements on
a short-term and long-term scales. The project will also lead to new societal
understanding of energy generation and consumption, thus transforming behavior
of energy consumer in a way as to provide sustainable lifestyle. Such approach
will have an impact from a single-building to utility-wide to worldwide energy
balance, hence transforming current worldwide approach to relieving energy
crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.