* 1231155
* AGS-PRF:  Seasonal-resolution Examination of Asian Monsoon Dynamics as Recorded in Chinese Speleothems
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Ian Orland, Orland                  Ian            J
* Fellowship Award
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2015
* USD 172,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (PRF) teams a recent Ph.D. from the
University of Wisconsin with expereinced paleoclimate researchers to study the
Asian monsoon system using Chinese cave deposits. Orland's graduate research
documented the potential for using ion microprobe measurements of oxygen
isotopes in speleothems to develop extremely high-resolution paleoclimate
records. He plans to apply this technique to the collection of cave deposits
from China that in the last decade have proven to be among the most influential
paleoclimate records of orbital and millennial scale climate changes during the
late Quaternary.

Orland will test three competing hypotheses about the causes of the isotopic
changes in the Chinese speleothem records: 1) the degree to which the ratio of
summer and winter monsoon precipitation affects the average annual isotopic
composition, 2) whether changes in summer rainfall and winter temperatures are
controlling the isotopic composition of the rainfall, or 3) whether an overall
stronger monsoon system increases the isotopic composition but does not alter
the ratio of summer and winter rains. By resolving annual variability in oxygen
isotopic composition--which is only possible using methods developed by the PI--
he will be able to choose among these three different hypotheses and isolate the
causes of the long term changes observed in the speleothem stable isotope
records.

The broader impacts of this project include strong postdoctoral training and
mentoring. In addition the scientific results should provide better
understanding of monsoon dynamics under different climate boundary conditions.