* 1231289
* Room Temperature, High Power, Monolithic Optical THz Source Based on Photonic Crystal Distributed Feedback Quantum Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Steven Slivken, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 359,968.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;The aim is to create a revolutionary monolithic, narrow
linewidth, THz technology which is compact, mass-producible, and has mW-scale
power output at room temperature. This will be achieved by optimizing intrinsic
nonlinearities in quantum cascade lasers, reducing absorption and phase-matching
losses, improving pump power and spectral purity, and improving the device
geometry for better THz outcoupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort combines basic science with advanced
technology in order to produce a multi-component, yet highly integrated and
functional, device. The building blocks of the high power THz source represent
many active areas of investigation including: high power, dual frequency quantum
cascade lasers based on two-dimensional diffractive feedback, band structure
engineering of nonlinearity in a quantum system, and investigation of plasmon
waveguides and surface gratings. The proposed research also makes an excellent
case study for how theory, technology, and experiment all play a role in
developing a single integrated device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses critical needs in the field of THz
light generation at room temperature. There is also significant potential for
follow-on work to explore electrical tunability of the source. Besides improving
spectroscopy and imaging efforts, the biggest impact of a compact, mass-
producible THz source will be ease of access, which will enable new research and
applications to be developed in diverse fields.&lt;br/&gt;To increase the
lasting impact of this work, educational and outreach activities are stressed
which include hands-on training of undergraduates and high-school students.