* 1231358
* Symposium J: Organic and Hybrid Organic Electronics. To be Held April 9-13, 2012, in San Francisco,CA
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2012,11/30/2012
* Henning Richter, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 11/30/2012
* USD 7,500.00

The objective of this proposal is to increase student participation at Symposium
J ?Organic and Hybrid Organic Electronics? to be held at the 2012 MRS Spring
Meeting. Funds will be used to enable young American scientists in training to
attend an international conference by means of financial assistance to travel
and registrations fees. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
Symposium consists in the development of a detailed understanding of
correlations between chemical structure and associated molecular properties
(such as electronic and spectroscopic properties, solubility, miscibility or
chemical reactivity) and characteristics of devices in which the investigated
compounds are used. Examples include the selection of pairs of specific
fullerene derivatives and polymers and the characteristics of resulting solar
cells and photodetectors while developing scalable device fabrication
methodology or the use of bulk quantities of exclusively semi-conducting carbon
nanotubes (SWCNT) in thin-film transistors. The proposed symposium is expected
to lead to transformative design approaches allowing for the systematic
engineering of new materials best suitable to be used in specific devices,
improved predictive capabilities of computational techniques and better
materials as well as device metrology. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact includes
the significantly accelerated commercial development of organic and hybrid
electronics. Communication between scientists with different backgrounds,
critical for the industrial success of newly developed devices will be
facilitated. Manufacturing of electronic devices with yet unmet characteristics,
for instance on flexible substrates, will be enabled. Participation of women and
representatives from underrepresented minorities will be particularly
encouraged.