* 1231294
* RCN-SEES: Building a Research Network for Promoting Arctic Urban Sustainability in Russia
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Marlene Laruelle, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 561,377.00

This award will support a Research Coordination Network aimed at creating models
for Arctic urban sustainability. It is a multi-disciplinary, international
effort examining the interconnections among resource development, climate
change, and evolving demographic patterns in an effort to provide advice to
U.S., Russian, and other policy-makers on how to develop Arctic oil and natural
gas deposits and their related infrastructure in a way that produces minimal
impact on the environment. The five-year project will convene an annual meeting
of scientists working on these issues in Washington and Russia (alternating
yearly) in order to facilitate collaboration across disciplines and institutes
and to spur better communication between the researchers and policy-making
community. Between meetings, the network will engage its participants through
webinars hosted at George Washington University, place-based exercises to
develop recommendations for specific cities, and coordinating on-going research
projects. Russia is the central focus of this project because its territory
holds most of the Arctic's energy resources and is the site of the most
extensive urban development in the high north. How Russia develops its Arctic
energy resources and how its northern cities evolve over the next several
decades will have a major impact on the environmental health of the entire
Arctic region. The output of the project will be policy advice on how to improve
Arctic sustainability in the crucial urban areas associated with energy resource
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project bridges disciplinary and national
divides by bringing together geographers, political scientists, and sociologists
to study the interaction of human and natural systems in the Arctic. Project
personnel include researchers with a wide range of expertise, including
knowledge of energy resource development; migration and employment patterns in
Eurasia; and scientific measurement of permafrost thickness throughout Arctic
regions. The project will provide additional enrichment for a) the graduate
students and early career scholars who are involved in the networking
activities, b) residents of Arctic urban developments who will receive area-
specific advice on improving sustainability, c) and policy-makers who benefit
from input on how infrastructure sites, resource exploitation, and social urban
environments can be made more robust in light of forthcoming climate and socio-
economic changes. Additionally, the project will serve underrepresented groups
by assessing urban impacts on the indigenous peoples of the Arctic and examining
the role that foreign laborers play in Arctic infrastructure development.