* 1231001
* SEP: Creating An Energy Literate Society Of Humans, Buildings, And Agents For Sustainable Energy Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Milind Tambe, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,588,505.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Profs. Burcin Becerik-Gerber of the Department
of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Wendy Wood of the Department of
Psychology, David Gerber of the Department of Architecture, and Milind Tambe of
the Department of Computer Science at the University of Southern California
(USC). The multi-disciplinary team of investigators will develop an energy-
aware, cyber-physical multi agent framework of buildings, humans, and
intelligent software agents for sustainable energy management, taking a
collective, energy literacy approach to influencing building occupants,
operators, designers, and engineers. The investigators will first assess
behavior and preferences of building occupants, evaluate building design/system
specifications, and identify building operational policies. They will then build
a multi-agent model to integrate these different systems. Building on
fundamental research in agents' autonomy and teamwork, the multi-agent framework
will facilitate negotiations between occupants and building devices. The agents
will provide feedback to the occupants and control building devices to conserve
energy. Based on this integrated model, feedback about occupant energy use to
building designers will be provided to shape early-stage design decisions that
have the longest lasting impact on building's lifecycle footprint. The central
focus is designing a multi-component model of energy consumption in office
buildings in order to identify and test the optimal points of change in energy
systems. Specifically, the research predicts that energy use could be optimized
and occupant comfort could be maximized in an integrated way by changing
occupant behavior, design/system specifications, and building operators'
policies via an agent-based system. The research will be validated in an office
building, where occupants lack the individual financial incentives for energy
consumption. The system will be tested both in professional and student designer
studios to validate the impact of the model in energy aware design decisions.
The research differentiates itself by treating occupant preferences and behavior
not only as input data but also as controllable variables in a broader energy
system; it then harnesses a complex multiagent system to control these variables
for energy savings. It also extends energy literacy into the arena of design and
engineering by providing human behavior input in early design stages, as well as
into the arena of building operations by dynamically controlling buildings based
on human behavior and preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to the
increasing energy needs of our country and world, this research has far-reaching
impact on environmental conservation, pollution, and the economy. The primary
impact of this research is identifying the key factors that create significant
energy savings for buildings, resulting in monetary savings and environmental
protection. The results will be disseminated through and contribute to multiple
conference talks and publications. A game, in which students will compete to
save the most energy, will be developed with the aim of teaching how to conserve
energy in daily life. Energy-focused workshop lessons will be developed and
delivered to minority-majority K-12 schools in USC's neighborhood and other
children and their families. In addition, the research team will partner in
research with the computer science department of California State University,
Dominguez Hills, a minority majority institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed interdisciplinary research challenges the ways that building engineers
and designers, computer scientists, and behavioral scientists look at the
pressing challenges of energy-efficient buildings. The research will integrate
design with outside data sources and bring behavioral science to design, which
in turn will trigger a design-method evolution for sustainable buildings.
Through dynamic data collection, spatiotemporal information about energy use,
and data on human comfort, the research will improve system optimization and
adaptation through the use of intelligent software agents. The project will
educate building occupants about their energy consumption and the ways that they
can make concrete behavioral changes to achieve greater energy efficiency. The
research brings to the problem of energy literacy an interdisciplinary approach
in which cyber tools are manifested in physical space.