* 1231348
* Collaborative Research: Monolithic on-chip resonant cavity isolators for photonic integrated circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The objective of this research is to demonstrate monolithic integration of
magneto-optical isolators on semiconductor substrates and to characterize their
performance. The approach is based on developing a nonreciprocal resonant
optical cavity device using monolithically grown polycrystalline cerium-yttrium-
iron-garnet as the magneto-optical medium, and new photosensitive chalcogenide
glass materials for robust post-fabrication trimming. The research will leverage
gray-scale processing technologies and high-order Fano resonant cavity
architectures to realize record-breaking device performance. The intellectual
merit of this work is the combination of new materials and innovative device
designs. Prior on-chip isolators have largely relied on wafer bonding of
magneto-optical garnets, traditionally considered incompatible with monolithic
integration on semiconductors. The proposed work will combine new growth methods
and materials with new device designs to simultaneously achieve monolithic
integration, passive device operation, large isolation ratio, minimal insertion
loss, small footprint, as well as superior fabrication tolerance, thus resolving
the standing challenge of efficient on-chip optical isolation. The broader
impacts of this work include its potentially transformative impact on the field
of optical communications and photonic signal processing by providing the first
practical solution for monolithic on-chip isolation. When the number of
components in a photonic chip increases, parasitic reflections between
components can seriously jeopardize circuit functionalities by destabilizing
laser and circuitry operation. The need for on-chip isolation therefore becomes
imperative as the level of photonic integration continues to scale. The
scientific research will be tightly integrated with graduate course development,
undergraduate training, and development of hands-on modules for K-12 classrooms
at both institutes.