* 1231393
* RCN-SEES: Multidisciplinary Approaches to Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Darlene Schuster, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 657,562.00

1231393 (Park)

Predictions of global energy usage indicate a continued increase in carbon
emissions and rising concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere unless major
changes are made to the way energy is produced and used. Consequently, Carbon
Capture, Utilization and Storage (CCUS) is one of the most urgent technological
and societal challenges faced by humanity. Until now, these technologies have
been developed independently of one another, which has resulted in complex and
economically challenged designs without much discussion on the societal issues
for their implementation. This multidisciplinary RCN-SEES team is formulated to
provide transformative research directions in CCUS and facilitate research
collaborations that effectively cross the boundaries of the natural sciences,
engineering, and the social and economic sciences to develop new understanding,
theories, models and technologies as well as assessment tools for the developed
technologies and their implementation plans.

Steering Committee: The steering committee consists of faculty members from
Natural Science, Engineering, and Social Science disciplines from multiple
institutions as well as industrial members. (1) Members from Columbia
University: A.-H. Alissa Park (PI) and K. Lackner (Earth and Environmental
Eng.), P. Kelemen (Earth and Environmental Science), J. Matter (Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory), P. Marcotullio (Architecture), M. Gerrard (Policy/Law), G.
Wagner (Business), P. Schlosser (Associate Director, Earth Institute), M.-E.
Carr (Energy modeling & communication, Earth Institute), C. Meinrenken (Lenfest
Center for Sustainable Energy); (2) Members from Minority institutions: J. Lee
(City College of New York), M. Stute (Barnard College); (3) The representative
of the Carbon Management Technology Project, a collaboration of five U.S.
engineering professional societies: D. Schuster (Institute for Sustainability,
American Institute of Chemical Engineers).

Intellectual Merit: This RCN-SEES team is well-positioned to facilitate
communications and collaborations among academia, industry, the public and
policy makers. Its activities include annual symposiums and bi-annual workshops
which will be open to the public as well as broader international communities.
There will be webinars for K-12 teachers and young professionals to disseminate
most recent research findings into the educational environment and help to
educate and engage young professionals in the energy and environment related
industries. Bi-monthly seminars via WebEx will also be employed to facilitate
research collaboration among participating members. The research findings will
also be incorporated into the new Masters program on Carbon Management which is
currently being developed at Columbia University. Moreover, a student exchange
program will be used to allow broader research experiences for participating
undergraduate and graduate students. A website and expert database will be
created and it will be connected to the websites of all the five engineering
professional socieites that are members of the Carbon Management Technology
Project to provide valuable resources on CCUS technologies.

Broader Impacts: The Earth Institute and the School of Engineering and Applied
Science at Columbia University are experienced in international outreach and the
development of educational programs. Jointly, they are currently developing a
new Masters program on Carbon Management for workforce training on understanding
the multifaceted nature of CCUS based on core classes in science, engineering,
business, policy and law. This program will be one of the platforms for the
implementation of the efforts of this RCN-SEES team. The active participation by
the Engineering Founder Society's Carbon Management Technology Project will
allow this RCN-SEES team to impact large groups of scientists and engineers as
well as decision makers in business and policy. Faculty and students from a
female only institution (Barnard College) and a traditionally minority
institution (CCNY) will be actively engaged to enhance efforts on diversity
issues. The involvement of K-12 teachers will also play an important role in
broader impacts, while international partners from various countries (e.g.,
China, Korea, France and Italy) will facilitate rapid communications with global
communities.