* 1231816
* Energy Harvesting in Flows Using Parasitic Aeroelastic Structures and Nonlinear Switching Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ephrahim Garcia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Research Objectives and Approach: The research objective is to develop a novel
energy harvesting method for self-powered devices. If one could develop sensing
circuits that required no power, then the amount of wiring which leads directly
to maintenance and production costs could be greatly reduced. It is proposed to
develop energy harvesters to create sensor networks that could constantly report
on the health of a variety of critical structures. The proposed approach will
develop methods of power harvesting from fluid flow using aeroelastic systems
and smart power electronic circuits. Using piezoelectric structures, these
devices will be capable of converting flow-induced vibrations into storable
electrical energy. Nonlinear switching circuits will be developed to enhance the
efficiency of transducer electromechanical power extraction.

Intellectual Merit: This work also represents fundamental research into a
heretofore untapped source of energy for self-powered systems, i.e., the
movement of fluid air and water. The results of this work will give engineers
the analytical tools to determine how to harvest power from fluid flows. This
could aid in the development of condition-based systems of maintenance for
future and existing infrastructures.

Broader impact: This project will disseminate information for K-12 students by
creating teaching modules in cooperation with local middle and high school
teachers. These modules will be made available to schools on the web to
demonstrate the idea of energy harvesting from the environment. Local teachers
will be invited to a workshop at Cornell with their students to help create
lessons and experiments for use in K-12 classrooms.