* 1231096
* AGS-PRF:  Improved In Situ Thermodynamic Sampling of Severe Storms with Unmanned Aircraft Systems Through Improved Wind Estimation and Energy Harvesting
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jack Elston, Elston                  Jack           S
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 172,000.00

Advancement of research into the origins of tornadoes in supercell thunderstorms
is heavily dependent upon the ability to accurately measure the in-situ
thermodynamic properties within supercells. A pilot program during the VORTEX2
project proved the ability to conduct directed sampling using small unmanned
aircraft systems (UAS), achieving the first ever sampling of the rear flank gust
front and airmass associated with the rear flank downdraft of a supercell
thunderstorm by a UAS. Despite this success, much work remains before such a
system will be able to regularly return scientifically valuable and sufficiently
accurate measurements over the volume and time span needed.

This work will provide the next step needed for effective in-situ sampling of
severe storms. An investigation into the techniques for sampling storm features
will be performed, including improved wind estimation and the use of wind energy
harvesting to extend unmanned aircraft sampling missions. The product of this
fellowship will be combined with current efforts at the University of Colorado
Boulder and University of Nebraska-Lincoln to construct a next generation UAS
for meteorological sampling. These combined efforts will transform severe storms
research by providing a deployable instrument system for "routine" access into
these storms with small, inexpensive aircraft capable of targeted sampling of
the thermodynamic properties of complex atmospheric phenomena.

Intellectual Merit The new capabilities for targeted in-situ measurements in
complex atmospheric phenomena are potentially revolutionary. Contributions
include: 1. Characterization of current methods for wind velocity and
acceleration estimation, with respect to the accuracy of currently available
sensors for small unmanned aircraft systems. 2. Development of a hybrid wind
state estimator to fuse on-board sensor measurements from those obtained through
the synthesis of Doppler radar observations. 3. Estimation of the amount of
energy that can be extracted from severe storms employing algorithms for static
soaring, dynamic soaring, and energy extraction from gusts. 4. Construction of a
hybrid controller to take advantage of the energy available in severe storms to
either follow a specific sampling pattern, or extend mission endurance through
loitering.

Broader Impacts This research spans two distinct disciplines, and requires the
collaboration of three different institutions. It will provide a critical
component for the next-generation system designed to accurately measure the
thermodynamic properties of severe storms. These measurements will benefit both
modeling and forecasting, allowing for greater understanding of the storms, and
better prediction systems which will ultimately save lives.