* 1231671
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Context-aware Ubiquitous Human Health Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Qi Cheng, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This project develops a ubiquitous human health monitoring system that collects
not only vital signs, but also daily activities and environmental context of a
human subject in an everyday life setting. From these collected data, higher
level knowledge, such as behavioral and vital sign anomalies, is extracted to
assist health evaluation, medical diagnosis/prognosis or healthcare delivery.
The research team first develops a low-cost and power-aware wearable Smart
Health Monitoring (SmartMon) system, which is integrated into human clothing
with minimized obtrusiveness to the wearer. The research team then employs a
minimalist approach to understand human?s daily activities and environmental
context using the data collected by the SmartMon system. The research team
further develops adaptive and intelligent signal processing algorithms to detect
anomalies in human daily activities and vital signs for health assessment
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can significantly improve the
ubiquitousness, accuracy, and reliability of wearable human health monitoring.
The technologies developed in this project have many different applications,
from improving quality of life for elderly people to enhancing capability of
first responders during emergency responses. Through the involvement of female,
minority (Native American) students, this project prepares a more diversified
workforce in the area of biomedical engineering for the State of Oklahoma and
the nation.