* 1231396
* Resonant microfluidic circuits for assay automation and detection in point-of-care diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Barry Lutz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 09/30/2016
* USD 301,407.00

PI: Lutz, Barry Institution: University Of Washington

Intellectual Merit: The field of microfluidics aims to create portable
"laboratories" to carry out analytical tests. Devices are typically simple
polymer cards that require supporting equipment to control fluids (e.g., pumps,
valves, controllers) and detect test results (e.g., imaging). A key challenge
for point-of-use medical diagnostics, environmental monitoring, bio-threat
detection, etc. is reducing the expense and physical burden of the
instrumentation. Nearly everyone has a cell phone that could serve as a test
instrument- they are ubiquitous, battery-powered, easy-to-use-and they are
capable of generating, detecting, and communicating information-rich audio
signals. We envision a disposable test card connected to a phone earbud, where
audio tones (1) control fluidic steps by "talking" to the card, and (2) quantify
test results by "listening" to the output from the card. The principle is based
on a classic analogy between electrical and fluidic circuits. In electrical
circuits, useful functions are created via simple combinations of resistors,
inductors, capacitors, and diodes (e.g., a radio tuner). By using oscillating
flows in microscale channels ("AC microfluidics"), we can resurrect functions
that we know from electrical circuits. This proposal aims to develop AC
microfluidic circuits that perform analytical functions for point-of-use
testing. Fluidic versions of classic electrical circuits will be created (e.g.,
band-pass filters), and measurements of the fluidic circuit frequency response
will be compared to electrical circuit models. A "microphone" will be
incorporated into cards to measure circuit output, and audio-based sensing
circuits will be developed via model-based design and experimental validation.
Signal transduction chemistries will be developed that produce physical changes
in a circuit component, and the system will be used to detect a malarial
biomarker.

Broader Impacts: The grant will support student projects in the cross-
disciplinary field of global health diagnostics, which offers rich educational
experiences that require integration of engineering with broader issues of
health, culture, ethics, regulatory procedures, and commercialization in low-
resource settings. The global health focus also introduces unique constraints on
engineering (simplicity, cost, ease-of-use) that often require creative and
simple solutions. Technology for global health needs will be highlighted in
public outreach including hands-on exhibition at our annual Engineering Open
House. Undergraduate students will participate in design projects to develop
card-to-phone interfaces and cell phone "apps" for on-phone data analysis, and
the PI will host a group of students in the laboratory as part of the UW STEM
Bridge program that aims to encourage underrepresented students to pursue
careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines.