* 1231547
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Large-Scale Telemedicine for Cardiology Patients
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Telemedicine technologies offer the opportunity to frequently monitor patients'
health and optimize management of chronic illnesses. Given the diversity of home
telemedicine technologies, it is essential to compose heterogeneous telemedicine
components and systems for a much larger patient population through systems of
systems. The objective of this research is to thoroughly investigate the
heterogeneity in large-scale telemedicine systems for cardiology patients. To
accomplish this task, this research seeks to develop (i) a novel open source
platform medical device interface adapter that can seamlessly interconnect
medical devices that conform to interoperability standards, such as IEEE 11703,
to smart phones for real-time data processing and delivery; (ii) a set of novel
supporting technologies for wireless networking, data storage, and data
integrity checking, and (iii) a learning-based early warning system that
adaptively changes patient and disease models based on medical device readings
and context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiovascular disease is a major health
problem and the leading cause of death in the United States. Telemedicine
technologies developed in this project have the potential to dramatically
improve the quality of home health care with low cost for medical community.
This research acquires a clear understanding of how to address heterogeneity
issues in telemedicine systems, which allows effectively compose and
interconnect individual telemedicine components together with low cost. For
developers, this research significantly reduces the design and development costs
for building interoperable large-scale telemedicine systems. The research
content is being integrated into undergraduate, graduate system courses,
clinician training course as well as high school research projects.