* 1231216
* A Center for Brains, Minds and Machines: the Science and the Technology of Intelligence
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2024
* Tomaso Poggio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 48,079,625.00

Today's AI technologies, such as Watson, Siri and MobilEye, are impressive yet
still confined to a single domain or task. Imagine how truly intelligent systems
--- systems that actually understand their world --- could change our world. The
work of scientists and engineers could be amplified to help solve the world's
most pressing technical problems. Education, healthcare and manufacturing could
be transformed. Mental health could be understood on a deeper level, leading in
turn to more effective treatments of brain disorders. These accomplishments will
take decades. The proposed Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM) will
enable the kind of research needed to ultimately achieve such ambitious goals.
The vision of the Center is of a world where intelligence, and how it emerges
from brain activity, is truly understood. A successful research plan for
realizing this vision requires four main areas of inquiry and integrated work
across all four guided by a unifying theoretical foundation. First,
understanding intelligence requires discovering how it develops from the
interplay of learning and innate structure. Second, understanding the physical
machinery of intelligence requires analyzing brains across multiple levels of
analysis, from neural circuits to large-scale brain architecture. Third,
intelligence goes beyond the narrow expertise of chess or Jeopardy-playing
computers, bridging several domains including vision, planning, action, social
interactions, and language. Finally, intelligence emerges from the interactions
among individuals ? it is the product of social interactions. Therefore, the
research of the Center engages four major research thrusts (Reverse Engineering
the Infant Mind, Neuronal Circuits Underlying Intelligence, Integrating
Intelligence, and Social Intelligence) with interlocking teams and working
groups, and a common theoretical, mathematical, and computational platform
(Enabling Theory).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the Center is
its focus on elucidating the mechanisms and architecture of intelligence in the
most intelligent system known: the human brain. Success in this project will
ultimately enable us to understand ourselves better, to produce smarter
machines, and perhaps even to make ourselves smarter. The Center's potential
legacy of a deep understanding of intelligence, and the ability to engineer it,
is tantalizing and timeless. It includes the creation of a community of
researchers by programs such as an intensive summer school, technical workshops
and online courses that will train the next generation of scientists and
engineers in an emerging new field -- the Science and Engineering of
Intelligence. This new field will catalyze continuing progress in and cross-
fertilization between computer science, math and statistics, robotics,
neuroscience, and cognitive science. Sitting between science and engineering, it
will attract growing interest from the best students at all levels. The broader
impact of the Center program could be to revolutionize K-12, and also 0-K, and
12-life with a deeper understanding of the process of learning. The ability to
build more human-like intelligence in machines will transform our productivity,
enabling robots to care for the aged, drive our cars, and help with small-
business manufacturing. The Center team is composed of over 23 investigators,
many having already made significant accomplishments in multiple research areas
relevant to the science and the technology of intelligence. The Center team has
a mix of junior and senior researchers, bringing expertise in Computer Science,
Neuroscience, Cognitive Science and Mathematics. The institutional partners
include nine institutions (MIT, Harvard, Cornell, Rockefeller, UCLA, Stanford,
The Allen Institute, Wellesley, Howard, Hunter and the University of Puerto
Rico), three of which have significant underrepresented student populations. The
academic institutions are complemented by the Center's industrial partners
(Microsoft, IBM, Google, DeepMind, Orcam, MobilEye, Willow Garage,
RethinkRobotics, Boston Dynamics) and by world-renowned researchers at
international institutions (Max Planck Institute, The Weizmann Institute,
Italian Institute of Technology, The Hebrew University).