* 1231248
* Collaborative Research: Electro-optical Studies of Nanoscale, Geometrically-Asymmetric Tunnel Junctions for Collection and Rectification of Light from Infrared through Visible
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Brian Willis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to develop a "rectenna" device that simultaneously collects and rectifies solar
radiation from infrared to visible. The approach is to use selective atomic
layer deposition, a process developed by the investigators, which is capable of
fabricating arrays of thousands of nanoscopic, geometrically-asymmetric tunnel
junctions in a reproducible manner. An integrated program of device fabrication,
characterization, and numerical modeling will provide insight into device design
aimed at creating larger arrays (to harness more power), and smaller junction
gaps (to reach the visible spectrum).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Until the advent of selective atomic layer deposition, developed
by the present team of researchers, it has not been possible to fabricate
practical and reproducible rectenna arrays that can harness solar energy from
the infrared through the visible. The fabrication, characterization, and
modeling of the proposed rectenna arrays will lead to increased understanding of
the physical processes underlying these devices, which will add greatly to the
fields of solid-state device physics and solar power conversion technology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The solar power
conversion device under development by this collaboration of two universities
and an industry subcontractor has the potential to revolutionize green solar
power technology by increasing efficiencies, reducing costs, and providing new
economic opportunities. A large, diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students will acquire extensive research experience and training.
The four faculty members and two industry subcontractors have proven experience
working with underrepresented groups including, women, minorities, and
international colleagues and students.