* 1231085
* SEP: Consortium for Nature-Inspired Lignocellulosic Biomass Processing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Joy Peterson, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Shulin Chen and co-workers at Washington
State University, University of Georgia and University of Minnesota. The vision
for this SEP project is to develop sustainable energy systems through a
biomimicry pathway inspired by natural biological systems. The central
hypothesis of this project is that wood feeding termites harbor biocatalysts
that modify lignin structure in order to improve the accessibility to and
functionality of saccharifying enzymes. New knowledge about the reaction
mechanisms and enzyme systems in termites will provide the required critical
insights for designing new methods to break lignocellulosic biomass. A nature-
inspired lignocellulose processing system can be developed by building upon a
stepwise lignin degrading catalytic process, and by mimicking the termite
system. The objective of the project will be accomplished by achieving four
specific aims: (1) elucidating the mechanism of selective lignin modifications
in wood feeding termite and evaluating the alleviated inhibition effect of
lignin on cellulase, (2) identifying, locating, expressing, and characterizing
new lignin modifying enzymes of the termite, (3) integrating biomimetic
approaches with interdisciplinary sciences to develop a nature-inspired
lignocellulose processing system, and (4) conducting sustainability and social
acceptance analysis of the biologically inspired energy system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the SEP program goal in terms of
societal, economic, environmental, and education /workforce development
imperatives. The project will benefit the society by producing new knowledge and
highly competent professionals for building an innovative sustainable pathway to
secure energy future, to strengthen sustainable economic development, and to
combat climate changes. It is anticipated that the project will advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning.
The complexity and scientific challenges will enhance interdisciplinary learning
and training. Minority students will participate in this project thus broadening
the participation of under-represented groups. The research opportunity for K-12
students will promote science and engineering interests to the next generation.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that the project will produce multiple
impacts: The research activities will yield new transformative knowledge and
enabling tools that may lead breakthroughs in the fundamental science needed for
the development of a biofuel industry to achieve the mandated national biofuel
goals. It will demonstrate the possibilities and scientific challenges in
employing nature-inspired systems for the development of robust, effective, and
environmentally-friendly biorefineries. The project will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education through fostering collaborations among
the members of the consortium. The results will enhance scientific and
technological understanding through broad dissemination to the public, the
scientific community and industry.