* 1231467
* International Medical Geography Symposium; East Lansing, Michigan, summer 2013
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Sue Grady, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2014
* USD 59,965.00

This award focuses on providing support to enable health and medical geography
scholars and students from developing nations to attend the 15th International
Medical Geography Symposium (IMGS) at Michigan State University in July 2013.
The theme of the 2013 IMGS will be Sustainability of Health and Health Care
Systems, a theme that covers a broad range of contemporary and emerging
population health needs around the world. The IMGS is a biannual meeting of
health and medical geographers from countries around the world that enables
researchers to discuss their recent research and teaching techniques. The first
IMGS was held in 1985 in Nottingham, England, and thereafter, it has been held
in the United States, Canada and European countries. There is a recognized need
from within the discipline to more actively recruit health and medical
geographers from developing nations, especially Africa south of the Sahara,
Latin America, and central and southeast Asia in order to extend the exchange of
knowledge and techniques and to provide additional learning opportunities for
geography faculty and students from within those regions. NSF funding will
provide support for faculty researchers and students from these underrepresented
regions of the world to enable them attend the 2013 IMGS and participate in the
global discourse of the discipline.

The 2013 International Medical Geography Symposium will provide the opportunity
for health and medical geographers from throughout the world to exchange
information about the health status of their regions and their respective
research in order to address these health problems. Health and medical
geographers are recognized within the broader disciplines of human and
veterinary medicine and public health for their use of theoretical approaches
and skills that help evaluate disease diffusion and disease clusters, conduct
health risk assessments and locate-allocate healthcare services. The 2013 IMGS
will help improve knowledge of health around the world and the advancement of
practices within the field of health and medical geography. The exchange of
ideas about new education and training approaches will increase the potential to
positively impact the mentoring of future health and medical geographers. The
discourse among 2013 IMGS participants from developed and developing nations
will increase the potential for future collaborations among health and medical
geographers from around the world and will increase opportunities for future
participation of scholars and students from all nations in future symposiums.