* 1231306
* Biology with X-ray Lasers
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2023
* John Spence, SUNY at Buffalo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 47,887,807.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vision: The Stanford Linac Coherent
Light Source (LCLS) provides hard laser x-ray pulses as short as 10 fs, capable
of probing nano-samples on biological reaction time scales. The Center for
Biology with X-ray Lasers (BioXFEL) will use the LCLS's laser x-ray source to
attack recalcitrant structural biology problems and apply the gained knowledge
and expertise to the development of tools and techniques that will be widely
applicable in structural biology. The x-ray free electron laser (XFEL) at the
LCLS brings at least four new modalities to the fore. (1) Many macromolecules
that appear not to crystallize actually form nanocrystals (as small as 10 nm on
edge), and the ability to study nanocrystals is possible with XFELs. (2) The
short XFEL pulse length allows observation of macromolecular dynamics. (3) XFELs
dramatically increase the information yield from x-ray solution scattering. (4)
As beam technology develops, studies of single particles - the ultimate
nanocrystal - will become possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research plan: XFEL-
based imaging brings an unprecedented combination of spatial and temporal
resolution to bear on biological samples. BioXFEL will develop every aspect of
this imaging work: growth of nanocrystals; specimen delivery into a tiny XFEL
beam; data processing and phasing algorithms; molecular movies and more. In each
case, the difficulty varies. Conventional crystallography of larger crystals
provides a firm platform for nanocrystal work. At the other extreme, non-
crystalline, single-particle studies will require creative developments to
achieve successful imaging. The integrative approach of the Science and
Technology Center (STC) will be critical to meeting these and other challenges.
Within BioXFEL each experiment will also be a test of hardware and software that
will provide a platform for improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific legacy:
BioXFEL expects to leave the scientific community with: (a) Hardware and
software innovations and developments that will enable facile implementation of
an array of XFEL structural biology experiments spanning a broad range of
specimen types and dynamic regimes. (b) A portfolio of successful structural
projects that provide key insights and illustrate the capacities of the XFEL.
(c) A diverse community of talented scholars in the US and internationally, with
deep interest in and commitment to XFEL science, who will nucleate and promote
new projects. (d) Broadened public awareness of XFEL science in particular and
of biological imaging in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important constituencies: BioXFEL will implement a
far-ranging, integrated plan to create constituencies that benefit from the
efforts of the STC and contribute to it. The principal constituencies are:
students and trainees; a community of scholars that will nucleate around XFEL
science and technology development; a larger scientific community that is aware
of the capabilities and importance of XFELs; and the public at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education: BioXFEL spans seven academic campuses.
Distributive education and professional development training will be
accomplished in the CLIMB program (designed to promote advanced skills for
interdisciplinary research) through multiple means, including inter-campus on-
line course modules for aspects of XFEL science. An integrated web of training
and personal interactions will build the current and future BioXFEL community.
Linked to this is the "Scientific Villages", project-driven educational outreach
courses associated with XFEL science, which is being created at Arizona State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diversity will be integrated into the fabric
of BioXFEL's human resources and education programs. The CLIMB program which
enrolls approximately 60% underrepresented minority students, recruits students
to its broad range of enrichment programs from a variety of sources including
McNair Scholars and visits to a variety of undergraduate-oriented events such as
SACNAS. This program will be expanded to cover all campuses participating in
BioXFEL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge transfer is a key component of a
distributed center. BioXFEL will communicate with users and potential users
through: (1) distribution of software, representative data sets and related
information, through a computing resource at The University at Buffalo; (2)
indexing in Science Citation Index databases of protocols and other important
information that are now often hidden in silos; (3) short-term visits to BioXFEL
campuses and other facilities to train colleagues in the use of specimen
delivery systems, or for purposes of collaboration; (4) a comprehensive web
presence.