* 1231207
* AGS-PRF:  Development of a Data Assimilation Model for the Plasmasphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Romina Nikoukar, Nikoukar, Romina
* Fellowship Award
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 172,000.00

This is an inter-disciplinary project to expand existing ionospheric data
assimilation techniques to develop a new state-of-the-art imaging and data
assimilation technique for the plasmasphere. It will use a variety of
observations of plasmaspheric densitites to produce time-evolving maps of the
electron density i nthe plasmasphere. These maps will then be fed into first-
principles models of the plasmaspehre to produce corrected and improved
characterisations and predictions of plasmasphere dynamics. The method will be
tested and validated via simulations. Finally, the technique will be used on
real GPS and in-situ measurements to address questions of ionosphere-
plasmasphere coupling through refilling and erosion, and for characterizations
of plasmasphere plumes. The work will be carried out at Augsburg College under
the mentorship of Dr. Murr and in collaboration with Dr. Bust of Atmospheric &
Space Technology Research Associates and Dr. Huba of the Space Physics Section
at the Naval Research laboratory.

The project will involve undergraduate students at Augsburg College. The project
will produce a practical methodology to predict the state of the plasmasphere
more accurately and more efficiently. Plasmasphere dynamics is an important
ingredient in understanding space weather effects in the ionosphere. Therefore,
the new model will help improve our space weather forecasting capabilities.