* 1231264
* Epigenetic alterations and stress among new mothers and neonates in the Democratic Republic of Congo:   A biocultural investigation of the intergenerational effects of war
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Clarence Gravlee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 353,328.00

It has been known for decades that a mother's health impacts the health of her
children. Moreover, it is known that a mother's experiences while she is
pregnant (i.e., peri-natal experiences) affect her children's health, both when
they are born and throughout their lives. What is unknown is how information
about the mother's health is transmitted to the developing fetus and,
furthermore, how this information impacts children's health throughout their
lives. This project is one of the first to test the possibility that extreme
environmental or psychosocial stressors may result in altered health outcomes,
possibly in a heritable, multigenerational manner. Specifically, the
investigators will determine if epigenetic changes, which are inherited changes
in gene expression that do not affect the underlying DNA sequence, translate the
impact of stress and trauma to mothers into altered health outcomes in newborns.
The investigators are working in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where ongoing
civil war and the use of rape as a weapon has created one of the most stressful
and traumatic environments for women on the planet. Culturally relevant measures
of stress will be developed through extensive interviews with mothers and these
data will be tested against patterns of epigenetic variation detected in DNA
samples collected from mothers and their newborns. Cutting-edge DNA sequencing
techniques will be used to generate the largest epigenetic dataset ever on a
unique set of mother-newborn samples. Investigators will look for a connection
between maternal stress and newborn health outcome that is mediated by
epigenetic alterations in gene expression. Ongoing research in other
laboratories indicate that it may be possible to devise treatment to reverse
epigenetic alterations made in response to stress exposures, which has profound
implications for our ability to address some of society's most taxing problems.

The proposed study is the first to investigate epigenetic alterations (changes
in gene expression that do not change the underlying DNA sequence) in humans as
a possible response to peri-natal stress and trauma to mothers that results in
altered health outcomes in offspring. The idea that violence and stress exposure
can create changes in newborn health outcome, presumably through changes in gene
expression, has immediate relevance to global public health issues. Seen from
the broadest perspective, this proposal and similar research has profound
implications for our understanding and attempts to ameliorate society's most
vexing problems, including multigenerational cycles of violence, abuse and
poverty.

The proposed research will improve our understanding of the link between stress
and health in humans and has broad implications for the increasing prevalence of
stress-related disorders in the United States. The project takes a broad,
interdisciplinary perspective that integrates human genetics, cultural
anthropology and sociology, biology and psychology, as well as political
realities and public health policy. Furthermore, a graduate training program has
been developed in collaboration with the University of Florida's Scientific
Thinking and Education Partnership in which anthropology students will act as
production assistants to develop communication materials to disseminate research
results to the general public. Students will receive training in news writing,
print layout, and video production to prepare them to better communicate their
research to a non-science audience.