* 1231855
* Scalable Digital Spin Logic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Ichiro Takeuchi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

This project will combine expertise of PI in spin transport and of Co-PI in
multiferroic materials &amp; devices to develop a new logic paradigm capable of
circumventing the fundamental limitations of charged-based circuits. The team
will exploit the interactions between electron spin and solid-state magnetism in
a scalable architecture which avoids the shortcomings relevant to electronic
logic circuit operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium spin (injected
into a nonmagnetic, spin-conserving channel material from single-domain
ferromagnetic bits) can couple to other magnetic bits through spin torque and
exchange force. The actuation of magnetization switching and therefore logic
processing, is enabled by effective fields induced by interfacial
magnetostrictive strain from multiferroic and piezoelectric material
heterostructures in a virtually dissipation-free way. These concepts of
materials, coupling, and actuation are natural themes which guide the research
tasks and will lead toward realization of a technology capable of satisfying the
five fundamental requirements for viable computing systems: non-linearity, gain,
concatenability, feedback elimination, and a complete set of Boolean operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the proposed research is that it
directly addresses the fundamental scientific challenges that must be overcome
to realize an all-spin logic device technology. Silicon and germanium will be
studied as model semiconductor spin-conserving channel materials. The spin
torque and exchange coupling strengths at the interface between ferromagnet and
channel material will be measured. Piezoelectric voltage-mediated control over
magnetic switching barriers will be achieved, and switching of a magnetic bit
using non-equilibrium spins in a neighboring non-magnetic channel material will
be demonstrated for the first time. The result will be a detailed understanding
of the necessary conditions for using the effective magnetic field generated by
voltage-controlled magnetostriction to effect rapid magnetization switching with
minimal forcing by non-equilibrium spins and minimal energy
dissipation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of the proposed activity
is in the potential of this new logic processing paradigm to continue
performance trends (established through decades of scaling) in charge-based
electronic systems with significant economic, environmental, and societal
ramifications. The advantages afforded by spintronics devices of enabling lower-
power, instant-on electronics allow increased device portability and are
especially important in light of today?s increasing energy costs and its
environmental damage. Additional Broader Impact is achieved through training
graduate students in diverse aspects of science and engineering including
semiconductor device design, processing, measurement, and spintronics; and
activities designed to broaden understanding by elementary and high-school
students, parents, and the general public of the historical importance of
scaling in the semiconductor electronics industry and the challenges faced as
scaling reaches its end in the next decade.