* 1231638
* Collaborative Research: ELOKA Phase III:  Toward Sustainable Data Management Support for Community-Based Observations Contributing to the Arctic Observing Network
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Shari Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 02/28/2017
* USD 2,531,668.00

The project builds on the successes of prior phases that resulted in operational
research data infrastructure that crosses disciplinary boundaries and provides
users with the ability to access community data and supports a circumpolar
network of researchers, practitioners, and knowledge holders. Three objectives
support sustaining and enhancing ELOKA: 1) Provide core data management services
to researchers and organizations involved in community-based research; 2)
collaboratively enhance the existing ELOKA technology platform to better support
collection and sharing of community data; 3) ensure a sustained and
interoperable long-term preservation system for community data. Objectives are
achieved first by providing data management planning support, developing
community data Websites, and hosting an inventory of community-based research
projects. Second, by adding advanced administrative, mapping, and multimedia
functions to existing technology to enhance ELOKA services and increase the
number of projects served. Third, by securing community data over the long-term
by building on interoperable, data-curation infrastructure developed through the
Data Conservancy, an NSF DataNet project. Making ELOKA a sustained presence in
the Arctic research landscape will continue to broaden the participation of
Arctic residents in research, and will provide researchers outside of the
community and the general public with greater exposure to community-based
research through improved access to data. Establishment of the ELOKA Advisory
Committee ensures that community perspectives are an integral part of sustaining
and evolving ELOKA.