* 1231324
* Student Travel Support for the 2012 North American Membrane Society Meeting, June 2012, New Orleans, LA
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Isabel Escobar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Escobar CBET - 1231324

Membranes are widely used in the chemical, petrochemical, food processing, food
packaging, medical and pharmaceutical industries. Therefore, it is crucial for
U.S. scientists and engineers to participate in activities that foster
professional growth and new ideas in an area that impacts the U.S. economy. This
proposal seeks funding to partially support the travel of 20 U.S. graduate
students to attend the North American Membrane Society (NAMS) 2012 National
Meeting in June 2012. The objective of this funding request is to encourage
student participation in the largest American meeting focused on membrane
science and engineering, to provide opportunities for them to present their
work, meet other scientists and engineers from around the world with similar
interests, and see state-of-the-art presentations from other research groups
working in this area. This opportunity will help develop the next generation of
scientists and engineers and the retain U.S. standing in membrane education and
research. Attendence is expected from the most respected and accomplished
membrane scientists and engineers from government, industry, and academia. The
meeting will cover emerging areas of membrane science and engineering and
feature three world-class lectures on water treatment and sustainability, gas
separations, and materials.

Broader Impacts:

The requested support will allow U.S. graduate students to attend a very
important meeting in the U.S. on membrane science and technology. The students
will also develop professionally through an extensive student program comprising
of the Young Membrane Scientist Forum, "Dining with the Legends" event, student
workshop on career planning and a student poster competition. There will also be
four workshops planned for students to receive intensive, tutorial training in
key fundamental and developing areas of science and technology. The selection
committee will ensure representation of students from underrepresented groups.
Applications from students with disabilities will be encouraged. Student
participation will enhance research infrastructure by giving students access to
leading scientists and engineers from around the world in the technical sessions
and in workshops. Students will also have the opportunity to network with
potential employers and with students and faculty members with similar
interests. This activity will produce better trained, more knowledgeable
graduate students to push the frontiers of membrane science and technology in a
wide range of practical applications.