* 1231963
* Collaborative Research: On-chip Multi-Channel Millimeter-wave Wireless Links for Multi-core Platforms
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2015
* Emmanouil Tentzeris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hao Ling
* 09/30/2015
* USD 220,001.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: With the well-known trend of continued CMOS scaling, as per
Moore?s Law, traditional on-chip interconnect systems are projected to soon
reach the point of having a very limited ability to meet the performance needs
and specifications of emerging many-core processors. According to the
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS), for the longer term,
material innovation with traditional scaling will no longer satisfy performance
requirements and new interconnect paradigms will be needed. The computing
capabilities of many-core systems can be harnessed only if the underlying on-
chip communication links can perform at an acceptable level of power performance
efficiency. To address this problem, design of high-bandwidth, long-range and
multi-channel millimeter (mm)-wave on-chip wireless links as communication
backbones targeted for many-core chips is proposed. The research goals of this
proposal will be achieved by: (1) Designing on-chip, highly efficient, single
and multiband miniaturized antennas for high throughput on-chip data transfer;
fabrication, testing and evaluation of prototype antennas including on-chip
inkjet-printed antennas and (2) Designing mm-wave transceivers that enable
multiple non-overlapping, low power, broadband wireless links and performance
evaluation of small-world wireless Network-on-Chip (WiNoC) architectures.
BROADER IMPACTS: This proposal addresses the design of on-chip mm-wave wireless
communication links to support power efficient design of massive multi-core
chips. Multi-core processing platforms have emerged to meet the performance
needs of many important applications such as graphics, financial and scientific
modeling, biomonitoring, networking, multimedia and wireless infrastructure.
These diverse applications will benefit from the low latency, low power on-chip
communication infrastructure proposed in this work. The proposed research will
enhance the education of undergraduate and graduate students by allowing them to
apply classroom knowledge to research problems. As part of its Tera-scale
Computing Research Program, Intel is actively pursuing several projects on
scalable multi-core architectures. Consequently, the proposed work aligns with
an important thrust area within Intel. Students from various underrepresented
groups, including women, African Americans and Hispanics will be engaged in this
project. The project?s positive educational impacts will be complemented by the
positive effect that the research outcomes are expected to have on society as a
whole. Outcomes of the research will be broadly disseminated. In addition to
publication in peer-reviewed journals, results will be presented at
internationally recognized conferences.