* 1231372
* International Workshop on Tracer Applications of Noble Gas Radionuclides in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Neil Sturchio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shemin Ge
* 04/30/2013
* USD 25,000.00

International Workshop on Tracer Applications of Noble Gas Radionuclides in
Geoscience Research&lt;br/&gt;Neil Sturchio, University of Illinois-
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for support of an International
Workshop on Tracer Applications of Noble Gas Radionuclides in Geoscience
Research, which will be held at Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago on June
21-22, 2012. This workshop is in response to the recent technical advances in
atom-trap trace analysis (ATTA), a novel analytical method for measuring
isotopic abundances of the ultratrace noble gas radionuclides 81Kr, 85Kr and
39Ar in natural samples of air, water, and ice, using a laser-based magneto-
optical atom trap apparatus
(http://www.phy.anl.gov/mep/atta/research/atta.html). The leading facility in
terms of ATTA development thus far has been Argonne National Laboratory, but
several other laboratories in Asia, Europe, and the US have been pursuing ATTA
instrumentation and/or methods for sample collection and sample preparation for
ATTA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential tracer applications of noble
gas radionuclides provide a unique and powerful set of isotopic tools that can
be used for a broad spectrum of geosciences research, including hydrology,
oceanography, glaciology, paleoclimatology, and volcanology. For example, key
applications of ATTA include determining residence times of very old
groundwater, brines, and glacial ice using 81Kr; determining circulation and
mixing time scales in the deep tracing circulation patterns of the ocean using
39Ar; and tracing young groundwater using 85Kr and 39Ar. The new technology of
ATTA opens the door to these applications, as well as many other scientific
opportunities that are less obvious but equally
transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives of this workshop are
(1) to identify the salient scientific opportunities provided by ATTA, (2) to
increase awareness and to catalyze more widespread application of ATTA in a
broad range of transformative geosciences research, and (3) to map out the
optimal path for rapid deployment of ATTA in the relevant international
scientific communities. ATTA is likely to have broad impact in a wide range of
geoscience applications.