* 1231598
* Spintronics with Yttrium Iron Garnets - From Fundamental Physics to Device Concepts
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Mingzhong Wu, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 337,950.00

Abstract: Recent work demonstrates that one can transmit spin currents into and
out of yttrium iron garnet thin films, as well as use such films to generate
spin currents. This demonstration opens a new research field of yttrium iron
garnet-based spintronics. This new program will address four issues in this
emerging field: (1) spin pumping at yttrium iron garnet/normal metal interfaces;
(2) relaxation control in yttrium iron garnet films through interfacial spin
scattering and its device applications; (3) spin-wave amplification through
interfacial spin scattering and potential device applications; and (4) spin
Seebeck effects and potential device applications. Topic (1) addresses the
efficiency of spin angular momentum transfer across yttrium iron garnet/normal
metal interfaces. Topics (2) and (3) consider the scattering of spin-polarized
electrons off the surface of a yttrium iron garnet film and study the effects of
such interfacial spin scattering on both uniform and non-uniform modes in the
film, and make use of the interfacial spin scattering and yttrium iron garnet
thin films to demonstrate a new type of spin torque oscillator as well as low-
loss delay lines and phase shifters. Topic (4) studies the spin Seebeck effect
in yttrium iron garnet films in a perpendicular configuration in which the
temperature gradient is perpendicular to both the film plane and the
magnetization. Under Topic (4), work is also planned to demonstrate a new spin
torque oscillator that relies on thermally induced interfacial angular momentum
transfer. Although several device concepts will be demonstrated, the new program
does not include plans for the implementation and integration of spintronic
devices such that the workload is reasonable. The new program is supported by
preliminary work and collaborations with three leading groups in spintronics.
Education activities include teaching spintronics in Advanced Solid State
Physics course.

Intellectual Merits: (1) This program will yield the first results on
fundamental physics underlying (i) spin angular momentum transfer across yttrium
iron garnet/normal metal interfaces, (ii) interactions between spin currents in
normal metal layers and excitations in yttrium iron garnet films, and (iii)
relaxation control through thermally induced angular momentum transfer. (2) The
program will demonstrate new methods for relaxation control in magnetic
insulators. Such control is highly desirable because magnetization relaxation
not only plays a critical role in the dynamics of spin-based devices but also
sets a natural limit to the response time of a device. (3) Two new types of spin
torque oscillators will be demonstrated. (4) The program will yield novel
approaches for spin-wave amplifications and thereby opens the door to a new
class of spin-wave devices.

Broader Impacts: The program will touch on several fundamental issues and will
therefore have a significant impact on the advancement of the new research field
of yttrium iron garnet spintronics. The technological significance of yttrium
iron garnet spintronic devices originates from two features of yttrium iron
garnets: (1) extremely small damping and (2) electrically insulating property.
The small damping, for example, will allow for the development of new spin
torque oscillators that exhibit much narrower spectral linewidth and much larger
signal-to-noise ratios than ferromagnetic metal-based oscillators. The
advancement of spin wave-based microwave devices and logic devices is
bottlenecked by spin-wave damping. The new approaches for spin-wave
amplification will promote the development of these devices. The program will
provide research opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students. Outreach to high schools in Colorado will be accomplished through the
Colorado State University Little Shop of Physics program. The results from this
program will be disseminated broadly through conference presentations,
publications, and visits to national laboratories and industry.