* 1231590
* Verification of closed loop feedback/feed-forward control actions for safe medical devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Sandeep Gupta, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 79,892.00

This project is a collaboration under the NSF-FDA Scholar-In-Residence (SIR)
program. With increases in life expectancy leading to larger aging populations,
there is growing need to make healthcare services available anywhere and
anytime. In addition, healthcare costs rise significantly when diseases are
identified at a later stage. Thus, early detection of diseases can potentially
lead to better healthcare at lower costs. Achieving widely available healthcare
and ensuring early detection of diseases require complex medical control systems
to monitor the condition of the human body. However, unsafe operation of these
medical device control systems and failures of medical device control can cause
harmful physiological conditions and even life and safety hazards. Verifying
patient safety under the operational control deployed in medical devices is
critical. For example, infusion-pump control systems must prevent drug overdose.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop spatio-temporal
hybrid automata (STHA) formal modeling and analysis techniques for medical
device control operations to verify patient safety. Specifically, this project
focuses on three principal scientific challenges: formal modeling of control
operations that can respond to time-varying physiological processes and to
spatio-temporal variation of physiological parameters; characterizing aggregate
effects of multiple medical devices operating simultaneously; and formal safety
analysis of medical devices. This project involves collaboration between
researchers at U.S. Food and Drug Administration and Arizona State University.
The research results will contribute theoretical foundations for assurance of
patient safety when using medical devices. The project will contribute
technology for developing highly reliable medical devices and increase public
confidence in their use, while enabling safer and cheaper healthcare. Project
findings are available at IMPACT lab's website (http://impact.asu.edu).