* 1231206
* Structural, Climate, and Communication Dynamics of Innovative Inter-Organizational Project Teams
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Vernon Miller, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 320,855.00

This project assesses how communication behaviors and programs in inter-
organizational project teams contribute to effective implementation of
innovative practices and overall project quality. The project-based nature of
the construction industry introduces many challenges, one of which is the
collaboration process among key participants and their contracting
organizations. This challenge is magnified in sustainable building projects
where interdisciplinary collaboration is most needed. Accordingly, the project
examines the introduction and use of integrated project delivery (IPD) in
project teams as an innovation in the architecture, engineering, and
construction industry. As an initial step, case studies are used to follow
conventional theoretical models that consider the innovation's match to the
organizations' structure, climate, and values. Then key communication behaviors
of inter-organizational project team members, who not only serve as conduits in
information flow and champions of working together, but also are creators of
meaning and influencers of others' attitudes, will be examined. Consequently,
the study will explore communication behaviors related to team dynamics,
negotiation, and role change and their relationship to commitment to IPD and
project outcomes across 20 inter-organizational project teams engaged in
sustainable buildings projects.

The long-term goal is to develop an integrated organizational communication
model for industry that fosters collaborative long-term relationships, product
quality, and innovativeness. This research represents an important, continuing
step toward enhancing sustainable building practices via effective coordination
mechanisms and at the broader level, the identification of communication
behaviors central to inter-organizational project teams. Results will contribute
to interdisciplinary teaching modules and be widely disseminated. The research
outcomes will be used to inspire graduate students; especially women in
interdisciplinary research via CrossTalks to be given at Michigan State
University.