* 1231515
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Long-term Mobile Monitoring and Analysis of Sleep-Cognition Relationship
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mark Gluck, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,267.00

The importance of sleep to human health and well-being has long been recognized.
Contemporary research emphasizes two central processes by which sleep affects
our daily lives: Memory-consolidation and emotional regulation. However, the
ability of lab-based sleep research to fully characterize the role of sleep in
brain function has been hampered by experimental requirements that heretofore
have necessitated subjects spending a night or two in a sleep lab wired to an
EEG recorder, a setting of limited ecological validity that is usually practical
for only one or two nights. These requirements limit our ability to answer
important questions regarding the long-term effects of sleep on cognition and
mood. This project aims to answer these questions using: (i) Long-term Mobile
Sleep and Activity Monitoring to enable the economical, practical, and parallel
assessment of sleep patterns of multiple participants in their own homes for
several weeks; and (ii) Mobile Individualized Cognitive Assessment to deliver
twice-daily short cognitive tests and other self-assessments in participants'
homes. The project aims to develop a smart health approach that integrates these
two technologies to assess the effect of sleep-wake patterns on the cognitive
performance of participants for a period of several weeks, thus obtaining the
necessary data needed to answer the research questions regarding the long-term
effects of sleep on cognition and mood including: (i) What is the cumulative
effect, over many days, of fluctuations in sleep patterns on cognitive and
emotional wellbeing? (ii) What are the effects of sleep on the gradual
consolidation of memory in activities which require ongoing practice for days or
weeks to master?

Intellectual Merit: Anticipated results of the project include answers to
important unanswered questions about the complex interactions between natural
fluctuations in sleep and their influence on cognitive and emotional well-being
through innovations in (i) Utilization of mobile sleep, activity, and cognitive
assessments to allow long-term studies to take place in participants' homes,
(ii) Use of cognitive tasks that have previously been validated in a wide range
of clinical populations, and which measure subtle variations in two key brain
regions involved in sleep-related changes in cognition: the basal ganglia and
medial temporal lobe. (3) Application of mathematical model-based methods for
deriving learning strategies used by participants to provide a novel and
parsimonious approach to analyzing and interpreting large sets of learning data
from the cognitive assessments to extract the key neuro-cognitive parameters
which can be related to variations in sleep patterns.

Broader Impacts: Integrating mobile sleep monitoring with cognitive and
emotional assessments will further the SHB goal of empowering patient-centric
wellness using unobtrusive monitoring of individual baselines. Mobile sleep
monitoring may be especially useful for impaired individuals for whom a sleep-
lab is not viable. The project offers enhanced research-based training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, including members of
under-represented groups, at Rutgers University. All of the research results,
data, publications, mathematical models, will be made freely available to the
larger research community.