* 1231842
* Theoretical Analysis of Atmospheric Reactions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John Barker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 751,224.00

This project involves testing, extending, and applying high-accuracy theoretical
methods to atmospheric chemical reactions. It consists of three tasks. Task 1 is
to use theory to predict reaction rate constants and branching ratios for
nitrogen-containing atmospheric species. Amines, imines, and amides are emitted
from feedlots and other biogenic sources. Amines may contribute to future
industrial emissions because they are key components of an industrial method for
carbon dioxide capture (to reduce greenhouse gas emissions). Rate constants will
be predicted for some reactions that have never been measured experimentally
because the nitrogen-containing reactants are unstable. Task 2 is to further
test the accuracy of Semi-Classical Transition Sate Theory (SCTST) by comparing
predicted rate constants with experimental data for key atmospheric reactions.
SCTST has already been shown to predict ab initio rate constants in excellent
agreement with experiments for the reaction of hydroxyl radical with molecular
hydrogen, without any empirical adjustments. It also predicts ab initio rate
constants for chlorine atoms with methane in very good agreement with
experiments. The predicted hydrogen/deuterium kinetic isotope effects (KIEs) for
both reactions are as accurate as the existing experimental data. SCTST will be
characterized further and then used to predict rate constant and KIEs for
several additional atmospheric reactions. Task 3 is to extend the Master
Equation treatment of unimolecular and recombination reactions by explicitly
incorporating conservation of angular momentum. This will significantly improve
on existing Master Equations, which use various untested approximations to avoid
the explicit treatment. The new Master Equation will be used to generate
benchmarks and can be used to predict rate constants and to analyze experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All areas of gas phase chemical kinetics will benefit
from the characterization of SCTST. The benchmark Master Equation calculations
will enable other researchers to test models for non-equilibrium chemical
systems where collisions and chemical reactions are competitive. These include
combustion, chemical manufacturing, planetary atmospheres, and astrochemistry.
The results, parameterizations, source codes, and all models will be presented
at scientific meetings, published in the peer-reviewed literature, and made
freely available on the internet. These materials will add to the
cyberinfrastructure of atmospheric chemistry. Students and postdoctoral research
associates will be trained in the development and use of computational chemical
kinetics methods.