* 1231843
* Assessing long-term technological progress for alternative transport energy sources
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2011,07/31/2014
* Eric Williams, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 180,227.00

0933837&lt;br/&gt;Williams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to advance modeling of technological progress of alternative energies by
developing and applying new methods to (1) estimate long-term bounds on economic
and environmental performance, (2) assess life cycle economic and environmental
costs, and (3) assess uncertainty in technological forecasting. The methodology
will synergistically integrate experience curve, thermodynamic, and life cycle
approaches. The concept to combine these approaches is to (1) pick life cycle
technological paths implementing a given supply type (e.g., cellulosic-based
switchgrass ethanol), (2) apply thermodynamic and physical laws to find upper
limits of efficiency, (3) develop lower bound estimates of long-term costs and
environmental impacts of technologies, and (4) scope technological components of
dynamic evolution of cost and key environmental impacts. Characterizing future
technological development involves significant uncertainties and assessment of
this uncertainty is a major component of the project. At the high school level,
curricula material will be developed and implemented for energy literacy that
incorporates both engineering/technical aspects and an understanding of the
interconnections between energy systems, human society, and the environment. To
advance the understanding and use of technological progress models in decision-
making, a workshop will be held near Washington D.C. to engage energy R&amp;D
and policy communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
CBET/ENG Environmental Sustainability and Energy for Sustainability programs.