* 1231916
* Detection and Manipulation of Magnetic Skyrmion Domains in Silicide and Germanide Nanowires for Spintronic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Song Jin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 288,840.00

This project seeks to utilize chiral magnetic Skyrmion domains in nanowires of
silicides and germanides for magnetic data storage applications. Skyrmions are a
novel type of exotic magnetic ordering in which electron spins orient to form a
topologically non-trivial whirlpool-like structure. They were recently
discovered in non-centrosymmetric B20 monosilicides (MnSi, Fe1-xCoxSi) or
monogermanide (FeGe). Skyrmions can be thought of as magnetic knots, quasi-
particle-like domains that are stable to small perturbations in magnetic field
and temperature and do not pin strongly to the crystal lattice or impurities.
Skyrmions strongly couple to electrical currents due to the spin torque
interaction therefore much lower critical current density is needed to drive the
motion of Skyrmion domains. Skyrmions present novel opportunities for
implementing spintronic and magnetic storage device designs. Furthermore,
nanowires present an ideal system to realize, detect, and manipulate isolated
chiral magnetic Skyrmions in the absence of an applied magnetic field due to the
stabilization of the Skyrmion phase in confined one-dimensional geometry.
Building on their progress in the growth of metal silicide and germanide
nanowires and the expertise in spintronic device investigations using nanowire
building blocks,PI plan to observe, measure, and manipulate chiral Skyrmions in
nanowires of non-centrosymmetric B20 silicides, such as Fe1-xCoxSi and MnSi.
Specifically, through an international collaboration with the University of
Tokyo, Lorentz transmission electron microscopy will be used to visualize
Skyrmions in these nanowires. Furthermore, topological Hall effect due to
Skyrmions will be electrically measured in nanowires. Finally, the emergent
dynamics of Skyrmions and their motions will be investigated in nanowire
electrical devices. The intellectual merit: This research project presents the
first opportunity for observing and electrically detecting Skyrmion motion by
integrating existing nanowire materials with careful device and physical
studies. Nanowire geometry has several advantages over thin film and bulk
samples and is better suited for demonstrating such novel phenomenon therefore
nanowires can serve as a model material platform that takes the study of
Skyrmions from the fundamental physics and to more applied device work and
eventual applications. Due to their unique and superior properties, Skyrmions
have advantages over the conventional domain walls in metallic ferromagnets. The
realization and electrical detection of ground state isolated Skyrmions in
nanowires would demonstrate the proof-of-concept for utilizing Skyrmions for
magnetic storage. The broader impact of the project includes that the success of
the project will open up new design concepts for magnetic memory and spintronic
devices with low-power, enhanced performance, and mass data storage, therefore
bringing broad technological impacts. Education and outreach is closely
integrated with active research in this project by recruiting underrepresented
undergraduate students to participate in nanotechnology research in spintronic
materials and devices, and by further developing a nanotechnology workshop for
high school students and teachers. Used computer hard drives and integrated
circuit chips will be examined during the workshop to allow students to learn
basic concepts in spintronics and nanoelectrics and how they connect to digital
gadgets, encouraging their interest in science and engineering.