* 1231171
* Feedback Control of Highly Dynamic Spatial Locomotion in 3D Bipedal Robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jessy Grizzle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This project contributes to the foundations of feedback control through the
study of highly dynamic motions for 3D bipedal robots. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: It is estimated that 70% of the earth's landmass is inaccessible to
wheeled or tracked vehicles. This has stimulated interest in the design of
robots that use legs as a means of locomotion. With legs, robots can step over
obstacles or use sparse footholds (as in ladders). The research conducted under
this NSF grant is enhancing the ability to design robots that can function in a
wide range of natural environments. In particular, this work focuses on
developing feedback control algorithms that will allow bipedal robots to walk,
run, and turn rapidly, without stumbling and falling, thereby bringing closer
the day when such robots can assist humans, and eventually stand in for them, in
situations of extreme danger, such as when responding to a major industrial
accident or a fire in a home.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research being
conducted in this grant is enhancing the interest in STEM subjects, by giving
tours of the 3D robotics laboratory to hundreds of students, from grade school
through high school. More broadly, the work is being highlighted in the media,
informing the public about the excitement of cutting-edge engineering research
and how it benefits society.&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination: The research conducted in
this grant is being published in leading peer-reviewed journals and conferences.
The work is also available on public web sites and a YouTube channel, Dynamic
Leg Locomotion. Videos from this channel have been featured worldwide on
numerous television programs.