* 1231927
* A Framework of Algorithms &amp; Simulator for Quantum Mechanical Modeling of Nanodevices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ulrich Hetmaniuk, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 340,001.00

Objective: The proposed research seeks to develop novel algorithms and a
simulator to quantum&lt;br/&gt;mechanically model nanoscale devices in both two
and three-dimensions. Algorithms will be developed to model both the dc and ac
current response. The focus of the proposed work is on a broad range of
nanodevice structures within the effective mass and tight binding approaches.
Examples of these structures include devices based on carbon nanotubes,
graphene, silicon nanowires and quantum well
superlattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed work
combines the expertise of co-PIs from electrical engineering and applied
mathematics departments to probe the physics of nanodevices accurately and
efficiently using the Green?s function approach. The developed algorithms will
be applicable to devices in the areas of low power / voltage and energy
applications. Further, the approach has the potential for a significant
improvement in the simulation speed over current widely used approaches for
steady state simulations with decoherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The proposed research will involve training of both graduate and undergraduate
students in methods to model nanodevices and the study of their underlying
device physics. We will make an effort to involve female students and students
from underrepresented groups. Both electrical engineering courses on devices and
an applied mathematics course on high performance computing will leverage this
research to explore nanodevices and algorithms respectively. Outreach to high
school students will occur by interactions to illustrate the role of modeling
and simulation in discovery and technology development.