* 1231153
* CAREER: Enhancing Atomic Mobility and Desorption Kinetics in Metal Hydrides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2015
* Tabbetha Dobbins, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 09/30/2015
* USD 269,168.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to aid in the
development of the hydrogen economy and to stimulate public discourse on the
topic of on-board vehicular hydrogen storage for fuel cells and electric motors
by implementing research and educational outreach activities. The research
projects will study important unanswered questions which limit the
implementation of hydrogen as a practical and viable fuel source. Specifically,
the role of catalysts in metal hydrides will be studied using state-of-the-art
instrumentation located at synchrotron x-ray and neutron facilities within the
U.S. and abroad. Investigations will surround the questions: ?How do catalysts
facilitate the removal and uptake of H2 gas in metal hydride powders (e.g.
NaAlH4 or LiBH4)?? and ?Do the same catalysts act to enhance or decrease long
range atomic movement in the hydride powders?? Other projects instituted by this
funding will include a high school design challenge project to be instituted
annually with a team of students. The high school program will be called Project
ENERGY (Exploring New Energy-alternatives Relevant to Generation Y) (see
projectEnerG.com for updates).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to understand the influence of
catalytic additives in enhancing atomic mobility and desorption rates in metal
hydrides (specifically, NaAlH4 and LiBH4). The adaptation of sintering models to
a new class of materials will be investigated, while incorporating x-ray and
neutron scattering studies to understand local lattice changes in these hydrides
during desorption. Prior experimental investigations to understand the role of
catalysts have been limited to single-experiments such as x-ray absorption
spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance, or direct imaging to understand the
local structure around the catalysts. Alternatively, the proposed project
approaches this problem by applying an entire paradigm. In order to build
concepts in understanding the role of the transition metals in hydrides, ideas
are taken from a well-developed field of study (i.e., ceramic sintering and
densification) wherein it is understood how dopants effect diffusion and mass
transport. Studies will investigate the effect of transition metal catalytic
additives on atomic mobility at various stages of the H2 desorption process.
Synchrotron x-ray scattering data aid in understanding the relative roles of
mass transport and H2 desorption on microstructure remediation. Concentration
and type of point defects formed as a result of catalytic additions will be
determined using positron annihilation studies. As well, in situ synchrotron
x-ray diffraction, neutron diffuse scattering studies with atomic pair
distribution function analysis, and x-ray absorption spectroscopy will enable
examination of local lattice strains, lattice amorphization and catalyst local
structure upon hydrogen desorption and uptake. The PI has a history of mentoring
student researchers at synchrotron x-ray studies ? many from underrepresented
groups, through her joint faculty position between Grambling State University, a
historically Black university, and Louisiana Tech University. This program will
support both undergraduate and graduate students. Educational activities include
new courses on synchrotron x-ray studies and alternative energy, and a high
school outreach program.