* 1231761
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Personalized Asthma Monitor Detecting Nitric Oxide in Breath
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sanford Simon, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 599,763.00

This project explores the use of a gas selective resistive type sensing
technology to detect and quantitate nitric oxide (NO) in exhaled breath for
diagnostic purposes. The goal of the project is to develop a technique for
personalized monitoring of the fraction of nitric oxide (FeNO) in exhaled
breath, with the long term objective of prevention or control of airway
diseases, such as asthma. FeNO is a known biomarker for measuring airway
inflammation and the technology studied in this project provides an effective
and practical means to quantitate NO levels in breath in a relatively simple and
noninvasive way. This work involves the use of single crystal metal oxide
nanowires that are expected to improve the detection threshold of NO-selective
sensing nanoprobes by at least two orders of magnitude down to the few ppb level
and below. A sensor microsystem is being developed that quantifies the gas
sensor response to generate and display an accurate measure of the NO
concentration in a single exhaled breath. The design of independent component
analysis (ICA) algorithms, to enhance the gas discrimination and improve the
robustness of the sensor response, is one of the objectives of this project. The
implementation of the ICA algorithms and readout circuitry incorporating
baseline tracking in mixed-signal VLSI will lead to a low-power autonomous
system-on-chip solution for the measurement of gas concentrations from a
handheld gas-measuring unit. The head space from cell cultures that have been
stimulated to generate NO and CO are being used, along with breath-simulating
samples, to assess the performance and reliability of the NO-breathalyzer. The
same studies help to understand the biochemistry of NO production in response to
inflammation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome of this work is a smart
health breath analysis tool that will empower the individual who may be
susceptible to airway diseases to stay healthy and that provides a means for
self-monitoring of early signs of illness in the home, instead of the hospital
setting in which monitoring would require the assistance of health care
professionals. The new tools being developed for personalized diagnostics should
be easily employed by the lay public to promote their health and well-being.
Furthermore, the device will be especially suitable for use by a wide range of
compromised individuals, such as the very elderly, young children and otherwise
incapacitated patients. This project will engage students, including
underrepresented groups in research activities in an interdisciplinary field
spanning nanomaterials, sensor nanotechnology, microelectronic device
fabrication and diagnostic instrumentation, biophysics and biochemistry, and
ultimately nanomedicine. Interactions with National Laboratories and the medical
diagnostics industry are anticipated. These interactions are expected to lead to
the translation of the technology embodied in the NO-breathalyzer resulting from
this work in the laboratory to the marketplace. The results of this work will be
disseminated through publications, presentations, outreach events and multimedia
products to be posted on the project web site
&lt;br/&gt;(https://web.stonybrook.edu/cnsd/formservertemplates/pro7.html).