* 1231431
* Preparation, Certification and Distribution of Reference Materials for Dissolved Organic Carbon Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dennis Hansell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 482,703.00

This award will fund a research group at the University of Miami to continue a
consensus reference material (CRM) program that was first developed in 1999 in
support of consistent, high-quality measurements of dissolved organic carbon
(DOC) in seawater by the international ocean chemistry community. With continued
strong international efforts to investigate the marine carbon cycle, the
existing CRM program provides the necessary benchmark for globally comparable
marine DOC measurements. Marine dissolved organic carbon measurements are made
regularly at more than 50 laboratories in the United States, and at a greater
number of laboratories in the rest of the world. Until this CRM program began
distribution of reference materials, analyses made in these many laboratories
were not linked by a common reference material and were, therefore, not
comparable. Because there had not been an independent and common standard
available, against which calibrations of individual analyses could be checked,
there was little agreement amongst the majority of the laboratories making the
measurements. Since the beginning of the program, ca. 110,000 ampoules of deep
seawater and ca. 70,000 ampoules of low carbon water ampoules have been produced
and distributed to 230 US and international laboratories in 36 nations. With
renewal of the reference material program for a fifth 3-year period of support,
deep ocean water containing ca. 40 umol C/kg of biologically refractory
dissolved organic carbon and low carbon reference water will continue to be
distributed to the marine biogeochemistry community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: With continuation of this work the US and
international communities will confidently produce consistent measurements of a
major marine carbon reservoir, thereby advancing society's ability to assess
changes in the marine carbon cycle and the role of the ocean in climate change.
The principal investigator maintains a website that provides direct and
convenient links to a growing number of DOM data collected from the global ocean
(http://www.rsmas.miami.edu/groups/biogeochem/Data.html). As the CRM program has
matured, a growing number of international laboratories are now able to provide
high quality data to this repository. The principal investigator intends to
pursue those data over the next 3 years, making them publicly available to the
carbon community.