* 1231128
* AGS-PRF: Improved Model Representations of Biomass Burning Organic Aerosol Formation for Prediction of its Impacts on Air Quality and Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Lindsay Hatch, Hatch                   Lindsay
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2014
* USD 172,000.00

The aim of this research is to (1) leverage collaborative measurements of
biomass burning (BB) emissions and chemistry to better understand the essential
compounds and processes contributing to secondary organic aerosol (SOA) in smoke
plumes, and (2) develop an SOA model framework to improve predictions of organic
aerosol formation and transport in fire-influenced regions. In this study,
detailed chemical analyses of SOA precursors in fire emissions and their
reaction products will be conducted at the US Forest Service Fire Science
Laboratory using two-dimensional gas chromatography/time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (GCxGC/TOFMS) during the fourth Fire Lab at Missoula Experiment
(FLAME-IV). GCxGC analyses, augmented by complementary gas- and particle-phase
measurements from the FLAME-IV campaign, will be used to develop a process-level
model describing SOA formation, including the contribution of components
evaporating from primary particles during plume dilution. The SOA module will be
subsequently integrated into a comprehensive smoke plume model that includes
calculations of aerosol water uptake and optical properties, thereby allowing
improved assessments of fire-induced radiative forcing, as well as predictions
of BB pollutant formation and transport for assessment of air quality downwind
of fires. The work will be conducted under the mentorship of Prof. Kelley
Barsanti at Portland State University (PSU).

Potential broader impacts of several kinds are associated with this research.
The FLAME-IV campaign will bring together researchers and their associated
instrumentation from ten other institutions, creating new partnerships and
datasets that are complementary to the PSU analyses. The smoke plume SOA model
framework can be adapted and integrated into publically-available models (e.g.,
EPA's Community Multiscale Air Quality model, CMAQ) for access by the broader
scientific community and policymakers nationwide. For example, such enhancements
of CMAQ for predictions of BB-SOA formation and transport may be used by
municipalities throughout the U.S. to inform scheduling of prescribed burns to
maintain compliance with national particulate matter standards or to provide air
quality alerts during wildfire activity. The project will provide the principal
investigator with career development training in addition to enhanced
opportunities for networking and outreach (e.g., mentoring underrepresented
high-school students as part of the Apprenticeships in Science and Engineering
program at PSU). Under the Center for Climate and Aerosol Research (CCAR) at
PSU, additional opportunities exist for direct involvement in community
engagement by assisting in the coordination of climate-related seminars
accessible to the public and participating in K-12 classroom visits. These
various outreach activities will provide important avenues for enhancing
atmospheric science education and facilitating integration of research and
education.