* 1231326
* RCN-SEES: Engineering Research Collaboratory for Sustainable Infrastructure in a Changing Climate
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Jack Kartez, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 764,779.00

1231326 &lt;br/&gt;Jacobs &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Coordination
Network under NSF's Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES)
initiative will create a multi-institution collaboratory to support the
integration of climate science and engineering research for sustainable
transportation infrastructure (Infrastructure and Climate Network ? ICNet). The
nation?s physical infrastructure is at increasing and critical risk from
climate-driven stressors due to both ambient and periodic extremes in
precipitation, temperature, and wind. Climate nonstationarity poses challenges
that have been broadly recognized by the road and bridge engineering community.
However, relatively few infrastructure researchers incorporate climate change
into their work due to significant knowledge and data barriers. A network of
collaborators in the transportation infrastructure research and practitioner
community is essential to develop and maintain the capacity needed to keep pace
with rapid advancements in climate modeling, error propagation and adaptation
arenas. A distinctive part of the strategy is to build a knowledge resource
using processes designed by our social science ICNet members to support
knowledge-sharing and prioritization among ICNet researchers and to link that
knowledge to the community of user institutions. This will be accomplished by
(1) fostering collaboration among the infrastructure research and practitioner
community who have the expertise to conduct this research, (2) identifying key
questions and hypotheses, common data needs and standards required to generate
and expand new research, (3) building and populating a knowledge commons that
will serve as a web-based resource for the community, (4) strengthening the
linkages between researchers and practitioner communities to successfully
address adaptation challenges for a sustainable infrastructure in the future,
and (5) developing and exploring the efficacy of processes of knowledge access
and network development to improve technology transfer. The ICNet RCN will
develop the institutional networks needed to accelerate research methods in
climate change transportation infrastructure impacts and adaptation. It will
also advance the science of sustainable engineering under emergent environmental
conditions. The ICNet will topically address a concrete societal need to
discover new ways to deal with uncertainties of planning for human systems in
the environment of nonstationary natural and earth systems. A goal of the
project is to develop science to build bridges and roads that will last longer
in the future and require less money and energy to maintain. The knowledge-
linking strategies that will be explored are designed to build conduits with
societal institutions in New England that are responsible for long-range
infrastructure adaptation standards and policies and demonstrate an approach
transferable to other regions and adaptation problems. This will help maximize
the benefits of the knowledge network and will also play a role in its own
sustainability. The RCN will also provide opportunities for, and already
reflects in its steering committee and participants, strong leadership of women
in engineering, cultural diversity, and over 80% of the graduate degree granting
Civil Engineering Departments in the region and will advance education in
sustainable engineering at institutions with significant underrepresented groups
in the region.