* 1231415
* Experimental measurements for targeted assessments of turbulent shear flow mixing simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Lester Su, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2014
* USD 102,041.00

Su&lt;br/&gt;0854402&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will apply planar laser
imaging techniques to perform highly quantitative measurements of velocity and
scalar fields in turbulent, axisymmetric jet and swirling jet flows. The data
will support the development of subgrid-scale (SGS) modeling approaches for
large-eddy simulations (LES) of turbulent mixing. Accurate representation of
mixing in LES is crucial to efforts to simulate non-premixed combustion systems,
where molecular mixing is a necessary precursor to chemical reaction. Very
limited tests of SGS mixing models using planar scalar mixing measurements have
been reported. Here, particle image velocimetry (PIV) and planar laser-induced
fluorescence (PLIF) will yield simultaneous measurements of velocity and scalar
fields in gas-phase turbulent jets, while simultaneous Rayleigh scattering and
PLIF will measure single- and multi-species scalar mixing. Refinements to
standard cross-correlation PIV algorithms improve the accuracy and resolution of
the velocity and velocity gradient measurements, while strict data reduction
ensures high accuracy of the PLIF and Rayleigh scattering results. Working in
the gas phase allows the investigation of a range of velocity and scalar field
length scales relevant to LES of combustion, from the dissipation scales well
into the inertial range. The planar nature of the measurements permits spatial
filtering that reflects the filtering implicit in LES. Evaluations of SGS mixing
model performance will include a priori tests, as well as appropriate, grid-
dependent, a posteriori assessments of LES results. These a posteriori tests
will involve, besides standard comparisons of scaling properties and mean
profiles, assessment of the ability of LES to capture large-scale flow
organization, and true LES grid-scale fluctuations, spatial gradients, and
probability distributions. The results will provide a rigorous framework for
understanding the performance of SGS scalar models. This work will directly
inform efforts to apply LES to realistic combustion systems, including gas
turbine and internal combustion (IC) engines. Innovative IC engine technologies,
such as direct injection, offer significant gains in fuel economy, and attendant
reductions in carbon dioxide production. The ability to perform LES of practical
engines will greatly facilitate the optimization of their efficiency and
emission control. The work will also find applications in LES efforts in
geophysical problems, such as those involving transport and mixing in the
atmosphere and oceans.