* 1231869
* GOALI Collaborative Proposal: 3D RF Microsystems using  Direct Digital Manufacturing Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Ioannis Papapolymerou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 09/30/2016
* USD 207,831.00

Objectives Research is proposed that will advance design and fabrication
techniques relating to direct digital manufacturing (DDM), or additive
manufacturing of three-dimensional, reconfigurable microwave microsystems. DDM
is a layer-by-layer fabrication approach which can combine structural,
functional and sacrificial materials in a single build of arbitrary-shaped
structures. The work will investigate devices that include new transmission line
geometries, deployable 3-D antennas and tunable cavity filters. Mechanical
reconfiguration based on DDM-produced shape-shifting surfaces will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit DDM has enabled significant
technical innovation in a wide range of fields, from bio-medical devices to fuel
cells, but utilization in RF/microwave applications is in its infancy. To date,
high frequency applications have consisted primarily of the deposition of
conductors on conformal surfaces to create antennas and simple interconnects.
This project will explore the integration of innovative electronic and
mechanical design techniques that are compatible with a low cost, common
manufacturing platform to produce 3D microwave
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Reversing the loss of high-tech
manufacturing jobs is of vital importance to the Nation?s economic security, and
thus the outcomes of this project could have significant societal impact. DDM is
also a green technology that eliminates material waste associated with
subtractive manufacturing and so has a positive impact on environmental
sustainability. The outcomes of the research will be integrated into
undergraduate education through joint REU activities between the partnering
institutions, and also into the graduate curricula at each school. Graduate
student exchanges are planned along with summer internships at Sciperio to
enhance professional development.