* 1231620
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Algorithms for Unsupervised and Online Learning of Hierarchy of Features for Tuning Cochlear Implants for the Hearing Impaired
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Lisa Mendel, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2016
* USD 298,203.00

Since noteworthy events happen only occasionally in any data, it is imperative
for smart sensors to learn the norms in data so that authorities can be alerted
and appropriate action can be taken at the occurrence of an abnormal or
noteworthy event. The aim of this project is to develop algorithms that can
learn the norm in terms of a hierarchy of meaningful features from data in an
unsupervised and online manner. The application testbed is the problem of
automatically tuning cochlear implants (CIs) of patients with severe-to-profound
hearing loss by continuously monitoring their speech output. The working
hypothesis is that deficiencies in hearing for people with significant hearing
loss are reflected in their speech production. This project will develop and use
unsupervised, online, and biologically plausible machine learning algorithms to
learn feature hierarchies from the speech output data of severely-to-profoundly
hearing-impaired patients. The learned feature hierarchy from the speech of a
patient will be compared to those learned from the speech of a comparable normal
hearing population. Deficiencies in the patient's hearing will be ascertained by
identifying the missing or distorted features. Algorithms will be developed to
map this information into the signal processing strategies used in CIs to
enhance the audibility of speech.

The proposed project promises transformative changes to three major
interdisciplinary fields: machine learning and artificial intelligence,
healthcare, and sensors. It will transform the traditional ways in which the
clinical needs of patients are met. For example, the results of this project
will provide doctors with evidence-based practices that will better address the
specific needs of individual patients by monitoring each patient around the
clock at minimal effort and cost.

Hearing loss is the most common birth defect in the U.S. with slightly over
15,000 new pediatric cases each year and societal losses amounting to $4.6
billion over a lifetime. A proven technology for CI tuning would make a
significant difference to the lives of over 1.2 million CI candidates in the
U.S. and many more around the world, thereby leading to substantial health and
economic benefits to society. Other than CI tuning, the proposed algorithms will
be applicable to a variety of monitoring applications within healthcare, such as
blood pressure, cerebrospinal fluid pressure, intracavitary pressure of the
bladder, etc., and beyond healthcare, such as web, machine health, traffic, etc.
Continuous monitoring with wearable and implantable body sensors will increase
early detection of emergency conditions and diseases in at-risk patients and
also provide a wide range of healthcare services for people with various degrees
of cognitive and physical disabilities. Not only the elderly and chronically
ill, but also the families in which both parents have to work will benefit from
these systems to provide high-quality care services for their babies and
children. Finally, the proposed project will integrate diversity by promoting
teaching, learning, and interdisciplinary research among underrepresented
groups.