* 1231994
* Trapped Microbubbles in Polymer MEMS Microcapsules as a Novel Pressure Sensing Principle Based on Electrochemical Impedance Transduction
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2016
* USD 323,451.00

PI: Meng, Ellis&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectrual Merit: The objective of this
proposal is the investigation and development of novel microbubble-based
pressure transducers enabled by polymer microelectromechanical systems and
electrochemical impedance-based detection. The new microsensing modality is
based on the principle that microbubbles can respond instantaneously to pressure
variations. This approach addresses two major challenges in pressure sensing:
(1) miniaturization and automation of microbubble-based pressure sensing, and
(2) lack of safe and reliable implantable pressure sensors. Bubble-based sensing
offers a unique set of advantages including operation in wet environments
without specialized packaging, simple implementation, biocompatible
construction, extremely small footprint, and low power operation. Fundamental
factors that affect microbubble-based pressure sensor performance as well as
microbubble response will be investigated and thereby demonstrate the potential
of this transduction method for in vivo applications. New sensor structures,
fabrication processes, and sensor arrays on flexible substrates will be
achieved. Electrochemical and environmental conditions that affect sensor
performance will be investigated. Instantaneous and real-time pressure
measurement in wet environments simulating in vivo conditions will be
demonstrated. These compact, low power sensors have the potential to provide
advanced wireless health monitoring capability for telemedicine and remote
patient monitoring and thus, thus chronic pressure sensing can inform evidenced-
based care resulting in improved quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Successful demonstration of microbubble technology will provide a new
pressure sensing modality and enable future innovative wireless applications
such as monitoring of physiological pressures implicated as disease risk
factors, providing immediate access to actionable pressure data to drive timely
therapeutic interventions. This research effort will provide new research
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students pertaining to polymer
microfabrication, novel sensor technologies, and biomedical sensing
applications. Emphasis is placed on the recruitment and involvement of
underrepresented groups. Students at all levels will be trained to share
research results through local and international conference presentations and
write up their results in refereed journal publications. Students will also
assist in the integration of research and education by generating laboratory
demonstration modules and laboratory exercises suitable for a broad range of
educational backgrounds based on the new sensing modality. Both live and digital
formats will be used such that these educational products can be disseminated
both locally and nationwide. These research products will be incorporated into
an undergraduate course and a textbook on biomedical microdevices. This
multifaceted research and educational program will provide multidisciplinary
training to STEM students.