* 1231156
* AGS-PRF:  Aerosol Impacts on Cumulus Detrainment in the Troposphere--An Investigation Using Large-eddy Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Robert Seigel, Seigel                  Robert         B
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2015
* USD 172,000.00

Water vapor, clouds and precipitation are critically important to the global
energy budget and climate system through radiation and the hydrologic cycle.
Cumulus clouds can occupy up to a quarter of the global cloud fraction and act
to moisten the free troposphere through detrainment, which is influenced by both
microphysics and environmental thermodynamics. Through both direct and indirect
forcings, aerosols act to alter both environmental thermodynamics and cloud
microphysics, respectively, in turn affecting detrainment. As the world
increases its aerosol producing activities, the effects of these aerosols on the
global climate must be understood, especially on water processes.

The primary goal of this research is to better understand the impacts of
aerosols on cumulus detrainment and the resulting vertical distribution of
moisture through investigations of both environmental thermodynamics and cloud
processes. This will be achieved through the use of large eddy simulations (LES)
employing aerosol dependent microphysics and radiation. A series of experiments
in which the number concentration of sulfate aerosols (CCN) are varied from
"pristine" to "polluted" for each of the three cumulus cloud regimes (shallow,
congestus, and deep) will be performed. Observed soundings from the Dynamics of
the Madden-Julian Oscillation (DYNAMO) experiment will be used to represent each
of the three cumulus regimes in the LES model. This approach will allow explicit
calculations and budgets of both water processes and radiation to assess the
impacts of aerosols on the vertical distribution of water vapor due to cumulus
detrainment. As water vapor is the strongest greenhouse gas, its vertical
distribution is highly important for the global radiation budget.

Intellectual Merit This research will provide new insights into the role
aerosols play in modifying tropospheric moistening due to cumulus detrainment
through the following measures: (1) assessing the changes in the vertical
distribution of water vapor, direct aerosol forcing impacting detrainment, and
indirect aerosol forcing due to microphysical processing of aerosol - all of
which will assist future radiation parameterizations in regional and climate
models; (2) quantifying changes in cloud characteristics that impact detrainment
such as: cloud top height, drop size distributions, and precipitation efficiency
- these will be beneficial to the development of future cumulus
parameterizations; and (3) showing the importance of using data from a field
campaign (DYNAMO) designed to understand large-scale phenomena for the
investigation of small-scale processes. The described intellectual merits will
also assist in bridging the gap in our community between scientists operating on
small and large scales.

Broader Impacts The broader impacts of the research ultimately aid in our
understanding of two highly influential aspects of the atmosphere: water and
aerosols. More specifically, the research will help provide: (1) a better
understanding of aerosol forcing on the global climate; (2) increased knowledge
of cumulus convection, which occupies up to a quarter of the global cloud cover,
and its role in the vertical transport of water vapor (the strongest greenhouse
gas); (3) awareness of the value in field campaigns, such as DYNAMO, in not only
collecting in-situ data but coupling those data with models to better assess
physical processes occurring in the atmosphere; and (4) co-mentoring of graduate
students and education in numerical modeling through the development of a cloud
systems modeling course.