* 1231042
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Emerging Milk Markets: Human Milk Banking, Sharing, and Technoscience
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Adele Clarke, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Understanding how and why some biological products come to be marketed is an
important question for science and technology studiesand related fields, and for
policymakers. Much of the research on biological product commodification is
carried out after commodification occurs and the products are financially
marketed. Moreover, the gendered content of biological products is often
understudied. This study fills those gaps by analyzing a gendered biological
market in formation whose future is largely unknown. Specifically, scientists'
emerging use of breast milk in the development of biomedical products and
procedures, including stem cell recovery, and cancer and antibacterial
treatments, is compared to informal breast milk banking and breast milk sharing
to examine how financial and other markets for biological products are
transformed. The study also investigates how gender shapes the commodification
of biological products that are bought and sold in the biomedical sciences.
Evidence is drawn from in-depth interviews and ethnographic observations with
scientists, health care providers, donors, recipients, milk bank personnel and
milk sharing website personnel, and from policy and other documents and
websites.

More broadly, this study addresses socially important ethical issues involved in
breast milk markets, including whether donors should be paid for breast milk,
whether a profit should be made in milk banking, to what degree markets in
breast milk should be regulated, and the best uses of so-called excess breast
milk. Other broader impacts include policy guidance, and training a graduate
student.