* 1231382
* RCN-SEES: Integrated Network for Social Sustainability: Concepts, Language, and Assessment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Munroe, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 718,055.00

Sustainable development is often explained in terms of three intersecting
domains that must be co-optimized when designing a product or process: society,
environment, and economy. The concepts of environmental and economic
sustainability have been addressed in much greater depth than has social
sustainability, and as a result, they are better defined and more consistently
applied. Despite a shared interest in social sustainability, academics,
professionals and policymakers often hold varying perspectives about what social
sustainability is, and how it can be implemented and assessed. Broadly speaking,
the social aspect of sustainability examines the social relationships,
interactions, and institutions that affect, and are affected by, sustainable
development. The purpose of this project is to promote and facilitate discussion
about the meanings of social sustainability in its relation to general ideas
about sustainability and in its application and measurement in a variety of
contexts. The project will use a variety of in-person and virtual conferences
and virtual communication technologies to engage broad participation from the
policy, practice, and academic sectors to characterize social sustainability,
determine research needs, and increase collaboration. Students from partner
institutions will participate in and synthesize conference discussions, present
at conferences, and develop networks through student exchanges and internship
experiences. Project outcomes include developing research agendas, manuscripts,
thematic journal issues, recommendations, and conference workshops for defining,
understanding, and measuring social sustainability. Assessment of the
achievements of the RCN will include the study of our network interactions (in
order to understand the degree to which linguistic factors affect network
dialogue and progress), and determination of how in-person and online
interactions affect member satisfaction and communication frequency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the most fundamental level, conceptual clarity
regarding social sustainability is crucial because it helps us understand how
human activity affects, and is affected by, environmental and economic
sustainability. For example, issues of gender equity, social justice, and
religious freedom are intimately bound to economic development and stability.
This project provides a means to connect topics such as these to provide focus
on a few, key, early-stage concepts and cases, and bring much-needed clarity to
the concepts and concerns related to social sustainability. Bringing together
diverse perspectives from a variety of academic disciplines, agencies, and other
groups who are actively working on issues related to social sustainability will
allow us to understand the different elements of what might be called social
sustainability, and to start a conversation about how social sustainability can
be studied, integrated into planning and policies, and assessed.