* 1231675
* Collaborative Research:   Renewed Field Investigations of Australopithecus anamensis sites at Kanapoi, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Peter Ungar, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2016
* USD 30,644.00

The earliest definitive members of the human lineage are Australopithecus
anamensis, which first appeared at the Kanapoi, Kenya, 4.2 million years ago. It
is well established that later Australopithecus species were bipedal, with
strong teeth and jaws, a slightly larger brain than apes, and inhabited more
open country. Australopithecus anamensis is similar to later species in its
teeth and jaws, and a single leg bone suggests it was also bipedal, but it is
poorly known in the fossil record. Determining which traits were present in A.
anamensis is key for understanding why and how Australopithecus
evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international collaborative effort (USA,
Kenya, Sweden) renews fieldwork at Kanapoi to recover more A. anamensis fossils,
and to test the hypothesis that they appeared in the context of open habitats.
Paleontologists will map distribution of microfauna (rodents, frogs, etc.) and
larger animals to explore variation in local habitats, a unique opportunity
because sites preserving microfauna are rare. Geologists will refine the dating
of the deposits, and analyze carbon isotopes trapped within the soils to
reconstruct vegetation in the area. Anatomists will analyze microscopic tooth
wear and isotopes trapped in the teeth of all fauna to explore their diets,
which provides additional evidence about environments. These collaborative
research foci will contribute to determining which traits characterized the
origin of Australopithecus, and how these relate to environmental context - key
for understanding why and how humans evolved.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
creates a new international collaborative team, and is a field project led by a
female anthropologist (Ward) and Kenyan paleontologist (Manthi). Kenyan and
American students will receive training through their joint participation in the
field research; Kenyan students will train under a Kenyan mentor, and female
students with a woman scientist. The project's substantial outreach and
educational activities will take place in the local Kanapoi area, at the
National Museums of Kenya-Lodwar, and at schools in Nairobi, Kenya. This
outreach will be broadened further through dissemination of results via the
project's website.