* 1231783
* 3D Terahertz Synthetic Imaging and Reflection Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* James McNames, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,001.00

Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz (THz) sensing is emerging as a promising
new technology with application to a wide number of compelling problems in
material probing, medical imaging, and device design. This tremendous potential
has prompted rapid advancements in THz sensor technology, but advanced
processing approaches that exploit the unique capability of THz sensors are
still not fully developed. Perhaps the most promising application, three-
dimensional (3D) THz imaging with simultaneous chemical characterization, has
remained elusive due to challenges posed by the unique geometries of THz imaging
configurations and the subsequent scattering of THz waves. A core contribution
of this research will be the development of advanced physics-based signal
processing techniques for 3D imaging with concurrent spectroscopic material
characterization. These techniques are based on predictions of electromagnetic
scattering theory (for example, reflection from planar cracks and curved layers)
to preferentially combine reflection measurements from multiple sensors,
frequencies and polarizations. This work will produce methods for advanced 3D
focusing of Synthetic Aperture Imaging systems with the simultaneous detection
of spectroscopic material features from THz reflection spectra. While this work
will provide advances in specific THz sensing applications, the need to
understand and exploit wave interactions with physics-based processing has wide
applicability, and the integrated theoretical, modeling and measurement effort
proposed will significantly advance knowledge in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research will support an
integrated activity of research and education at Portland State University in
collaboration with international academic and industry partners. The potential
societal benefits are truly impressive, potentially enabling the ability for
rapid and robust 3D chemical mapping for future industry applications in non-
destructive evaluation, medical imaging, and security screening. This research
will specifically target two imaging applications: 1) rapid assessment of the
shape and material composition of coated pharmaceutical tablets; and 2)
detection of cracks in solar panels for enhanced production of ?green? energy.
In addition to these broader impacts of the work, undergraduate and graduate
students will have the opportunity to engage in cutting-edge THz research and
participate in the international collaboration. The PI will continue her
activities of K-12 outreach and mentoring of women in science and engineering.