* 1231288
* Eocene-Oligocene primate evolution and climate change in the Fayum Depression, northern Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* John Fleagle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2016
* USD 239,446.00

The research to be conducted in the Fayum area of northern Egypt is part of an
ongoing, international collaborative paleontological project that involves
American and Egyptian scientists. The Fayum area is world-famous for its
vertebrate fossils, which range in age from about 37 to 29 million years of age,
and for its unique capacity to document the evolution and adaptation of our
early anthropoid primate ancestors during a critical phase in mammalian
evolutionary history, the early Oligocene period of climatic cooling. Included
among the remarkable ~8 million-year-long interval preserved in the Fayum record
are the most complete remains of Paleogene anthropoids, the oldest undoubted
anthropoids from Africa, and the oldest known relatives of strepsirrhine
primates such as lemurs and lorises. The information that has been revealed by
such complete fossils has given scientists unparalleled insights into early
anthropoid biology, ecology, and phylogeny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course
of three years of fieldwork, the team of American and Egyptian vertebrate
paleontologists, paleobotanists, and geochemists will collect additional
vertebrate and plant fossils, and sample for paleoclimatic data (stable
isotopes) throughout the Fayum succession. These data will be employed to test
various hypotheses relating to the evolution and biogeography of primates and
non-primate mammals during the later Paleogene, as well as the evolutionary
response of African plant and animal communities to local environmental changes
deriving from a significant period of global climate change. The questions to be
addressed are of broad paleoanthropological and paleontological significance,
and include the core specific aims of 1) the illumination of early anthropoid
evolutionary history in Africa and documentation of the mammalian communities
and environments in which our early anthropoid ancestors lived; and 2) analysis
of the responses of vertebrates and plants to the climatic alterations known to
have occurred near the Eocene-Oligocene boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conduct of the research will support the continued development of an American-
Egyptian scientific collaboration that will train several graduate students and
early career scientists from the US and Egypt. Student training will be integral
to all phases of the research, and will maintain a strong tradition of
incorporating students from underrepresented groups in science. The specimens
and databases to be obtained will be readily shared and accessed, enhancing
research and educational infrastructure well into the future.