* 1231910
* Monitoring and Driving Chemical Response with Single Molecule Nanocircuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Philip Collins, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 303,683.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The idea of molecular electronics is usually stated in terms
of miniaturization, scaling, and the difficulties of extending silicon
technologies. Aside from digital logic, however, molecule-based architectures
could also be novel transducers of chemical activity. For example, single
molecule electronic devices might be used to merge solid state electronics with
the dynamic behavior of constituent biomolecules. This novel repurposing might
be the most transformative and impactful outcome of fabricating devices at
molecular scales, since no electronic product today incorporates proteins, DNA,
or any other biomolecule in a functional way. Even if molecular devices never
compete with traditional digital electronics as memory or transistor devices,
these alternate purposes represent untapped new fields with tremendous potential
import.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For example, imagine a silicon chip device that
could report the function of a particular enzyme, or medicine, or catalyst
particle. Directly reporting chemical activity with a solid state device could
give users new insights into chemistry happening in real time. This new
information would enable the efficient development of new drugs, or the in situ
testing of catalysts to check their effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to experimentally demonstrate and test this premise, and
furthermore to monitor chemical activity with molecule-by-molecule precision.
The work is made possible by a recently developed architecture in which single
molecules are integrated into functioning carbon nanotube transistor devices.
The nanotube conductance records chemical events in real time with microsecond
resolution, as the attached molecule interacts with its immediate environment.
Past work has successfully recorded complex, time varying signals associated
single molecule chemistry. However, the generality of the devices remains
unproven, and there is no understanding of how chemical, electronic, and
mechanical degrees of freedom combine to generate the signals of interest. A
primary goal of this project will be to develop an understanding these possible
contributions, in order to develop design rules for how to refine and control
the mechanisms at work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposal
makes effective use of recent discoveries to push forward the field of molecular
electronics, and it does so in a direction of immediate practicality. The goals
are designed to improve our fundamental understanding of signal transduction in
single molecule devices, a critical step before such devices can be
commercialized for practical applications. The project is timely and well-
positioned because it leverages other ongoing research efforts, it is
immediately technically feasible, and suggestive preliminary data
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful, this project may
help develop an electronic device having wide-ranging commercial significance.
As a high sensitivity and high bandwidth sensor it could benefit a wide spectrum
of the medical and pharmaceutical industries through new diagnostic and research
capabilities, independent of fluorophores or other optical equipment. There are
also potential benefits to chemical processing generally, through improved
process monitoring and control. The project will also directly support the
research training of junior scientists, and the training of science majors
interested in becoming K-12 science teachers.