* 1231347
* GSE/RES: Understanding women's career choices and occupational trajectories in physical science, engineering and IT fields
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2016
* USD 517,265.00

This proposal involves the analysis of data from the Michigan Study of
Adolescent Life Transitions (MSALT) and the Childhood and Beyond Study (CAB),
two longitudinal datasets originally created by the principal investigator. The
researchers will also collect additional waves of data collection for each of
the two datasets. The project draws theoretical support from Expectancy Value
Theory, also developed by the principal investigator. The researchers will
collect new data to expand the existing datasets as a way to explore issues of
generational effects on STEM engagement, analyses of non-STEM and STEM majors
from across multiple disciplines, and additional psychosocial variables that may
contribute to STEM engagement. Additional issues of interest include predictors
of individual differences in STEM career trajectories and labor market
experiences as predictors of STEM career choices. Data analytic techniques
include structural equation modeling, hierarchical linear modeling, and person-
centered techniques such as cluster analysis and latent class analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this project is investigate gender
differences and within-gender individual differences in the development of STEM-
related interests. The under-representation of females in many STEM fields
continues to be a striking labor force statistic. This study is designed to
improve our understanding of the factors influencing females' choices to pursue
specific STEM fields. Such information is vital to devising programs and
policies aimed at changing gender-role stereotypes and gender differences in the
value of STEM related majors and occupations.