* 1231334
* EAGER:  Understanding the Potential Role of Mayan Traditional Ecological Knowledge for Ecological Engineering of Forest Restoration in Mexico
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Stewart Diemont, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

1231334 (Diemont). Despite increasing evidence that traditional ecological
knowledge (TEK) can be successfully integrated into ecological engineering for
ecosystem restoration, few investigations have explored the mechanisms and
relative benefits of TEK-informed ecological engineering over conventional
ecological engineering. Due to Westernization, traditional knowledge systems in
Mesoamerica and in most parts of the world are in decline, and our opportunity
to understand this integration is at a critical point. In some cases millennia
of knowledge acquisition is at the brink of being lost. The goal of this project
is to investigate the integration of traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) and
ecological engineering through comparison of TEK and conventional ecological
engineering for tropical forest ecosystem restoration in Chiapas, Mexico. To
meet this goal, the project objectives are to: 1) Create experimental forest
restoration plots to establish a framework for long-term comparison of TEK and
ecological engineering for forest restoration in a Maya village, working closely
with Lacandon Maya farmers; and 2) Determine the soil and plant community
mechanisms beneficial for restoration (e.g. nutrient accumulation, organic
matter establishment, and plant species richness) associated with both TEK-
established tree species and government-established tree species (conventional
forest restoration ecological engineering). TEK could be an important part of
ecosystem restoration, particularly in settings where traditional knowledge
systems remain in place, making this a potentially high impact project.
Furthermore, it is vitally important to understand these systems while they are
still intact. This research is expected to contribute in-depth understanding of
the mechanisms at work in these systems, and to contribute to the evaluation of
how lessons learned from TEK could help to restore ecosystem function and
conserve landscapes. This research will reveal links between indigenous plant
community management and restoration, which could generate tools that are useful
for farmers, ecological engineers, and restoration ecologists throughout
Mesoamerica, and elsewhere, who are actively working to restore and conserve
rapidly degrading biodiversity hotpots. SUNY-ESF graduate and undergraduate
students will have an international field experience that will be partly
sponsored by this project. They will learn soil and plant community sampling
methodology while participating in this research, working with indigenous Maya
farmers in a rural, Latin American setting. One doctoral student will be trained
in restoration ecology, ecological engineering, and spatial analysis for this
project. Spanish speaking Hispanic students would be well suited and will be
highly recruited for this international research position. The soil ecology
research will improve the soils laboratory at El Colegio de La Frontera Sur in
Mexico. The results from this research will be disseminated broadly in the US,
Mesoamerica, and internationally through peer-reviewed articles in Spanish and
English; it will be presented at US, Mesoamerican, and international
conferences. Results from this research could improve restoration and
conservation of forest ecosystems throughout the tropics.