* 1231726
* Function of Arabidopsis Small RNA-ARGONAUTE Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2011,02/28/2014
* James Carrington, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2014
* USD 684,727.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The genomes of plants and animals have evolved to
control the function of genes required for development, response to
environmental change, and invasive pathogens. Many of the genes within these
organisms are controlled by tiny RNA molecules, called microRNA (miRNA) and
short-interfering RNA (siRNA), through a process called gene silencing. The
small RNA delivers proteins in the ARGONAUTE (AGO) family to target RNA
molecules by functioning as sequence-specific guides. The AGO protein can then
cause degradation, mislocalization, or repression of the target RNA, thereby
achieving gene regulation. The model plant Arabidopsis contains up to 10
functional AGO proteins, roughly one-half of which have been assigned at least
some function or shown to interact with a set of specific small RNA. Extensive
analyses have revealed highly abundant, complex landscape of multiple small RNAs
(generally 21-24 nucleotides) corresponding to sequences across the plant
genome. However, small RNA activity, rather than simply accumulation, is key to
understanding small RNA-based silencing on a genome-wide scale. Once small RNA
are formed, how and to what extent are AGO-small RNA complexes formed? Once
these complexes form, which are active to target other RNA molecules? For the
major AGO proteins (AGO1 and AGO10), how are target RNA pools affected at the
stabilization and translational repression levels? This project addresses each
of these three questions by focusing on how silencing information is processed
and managed. Understanding how gene silencing works at the molecular and genome-
wide levels will shed light on how plants use and control a large amount of
genetic information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
project will have significant broader impact beyond the actual scientific
results. The project involves front-line participation of undergraduate students
in research. Two student researchers will be supported for the duration of the
project. The project also provides a clear mentoring plan for two postdoctoral
scientists, and involves participation in an outreach collaboration with the
Scientists and Teachers Education Partnerships (STEPS, www.steps.org), an Oregon
State University-based program that provides training to K-12 teachers and
exposure of students to experimental science. The P.I.s work with the STEPS
Program Coordinator for Grades 6-12, Dr. Kari Van Zee, to develop summer
workshops in the Advances in Biotechnology series. This provides teachers with
professional development workshops, lectures, and hands-on training for school-
appropriate laboratory experiments. The Arabidopsis Small RNA Project Database,
the primary portal for information and data generated by the previous NSF-funded
project, will continue to operate in the public domain for anyone seeking
genome-wide small RNA data. Programs developed to process and analyze high-
throughput sequencing data, such as CASHX and TargetFinder, will continue to be
made available through the ASRP website. Finally, this project is leading to
better ways to use the inherent genetic potential of plants for our food, fiber,
and energy needs.