* 1231582
* SHB: Type I (EXP): Instrumented Socks for Prediction and Prevention of Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Rajesh Rajamani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 282,614.00

Over 1 million hospitalizations for acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF)
occur every year. Fluid accumulation plays an important role in the genesis of
ADHF. Monitoring of fluid status can provide a reliable warning of impending
decompensation and an opportunity for preventing hospitalization. There is a
need for low cost, non invasive devices that can provide continuous home
monitoring of fluid status and other related variables in order to reliably
predict impending decompensation in ADHF patients. This project will lead to the
development and evaluation of instrumented socks for tracking disease status in
patients with chronic forms of heart failure. Thin film flexible sensors on the
socks will measure patient weight, ankle circumference, leg tissue elasticity,
and blood pressure in the lower legs. These sensor measurements will be used to
determine if a patient is at increased risk of acute decompensation.
Measurements from the socks will be transmitted wirelessly to a computer in the
home and then to a medical provider. The transmitted data will allow health
professionals to monitor the patient and make decisions on whether intervention
is needed. By enabling continuous patient monitoring at home, better treatment
outcomes, fewer hospitalizations and lower costs are
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address several technical
challenges related to development of sensors in the socks for making reliable
fluid status measurements. Innovative sensing principles will be used to enable
measurement of weight, ankle circumference, tissue elasticity and lower leg
blood pressure in the wearable socks. These measurements will be made without
requiring controlled application of forces or displacements and without
requiring strict sensor alignment. The ability to measure these variables
automatically will remove the need to depend on patients making these
measurements regularly which has been shown to be unreliable. The basic
functionality of the sensors will first be evaluated using in-vitro tests in the
laboratory. Subsequently, tests with a planned selection of volunteers will be
used for evaluation of all the measurements from the instrumented socks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader educational activities in the project include
recruitment of undergraduate students for summer projects, outreach to high
school students and website development for dissemination of research results
from the project.