* 1231826
* Molecular Sieving in Two-Dimensional Periodic Free-Energy Landscapes Created by Patterned Nanofluidic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jianping Fu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,393.00

PI: Fu, Jianping&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan - Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Development of efficient
nanofluidic sieving structures represents a major step toward optimizing
bioseparation methods and integrating them onto a fully integrated bioanalysis
microsystem. In light of the current research thrust of nanofluidic proteomics,
it becomes critically important to understand molecular transport properties in
constraining nanofluidic sieving environments. Thus, the major goal of this
research is to study, both experimentally and theoretically, molecular dynamics
in confining nanofluidic environments and how such knowledge can be utilized to
design novel nanofluidic sieving structures for advanced bioseparation.
Different micro- and nano-fabrication methods will be applied to generate
sub-100 nm nanofluidic sieving structures. These nanofluidic structures will be
carefully examined to investigate how their separation performances (such as
size selectivity and separation resolution) are affected by different structural
parameters of the nanofluidic structures and the external electric fields.
Experimental results will be used to guide developments of kinetic models and
further validate them. Reciprocally, predictions from theoretical modeling will
be used to motivate new separation assays and guide improved designs and
generations of the nanofluidic sieving structures. The two-way validation
process between experiments and theoretical modeling will lead to a rigorous
understanding of molecular dynamics in the confining nanofluidic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Owing to its cross-disciplinary
nature, the proposed research will seamlessly integrate knowledge from distinct
fields including micro/nanofabrication, micro/nanofluidics, hindered transport,
polymer physics, and fluorescence imaging of single molecules. The proposed
research, if successful, will foster transformative progress for separation of
physiologically-relevant molecules using synthetic nanofluidic structures, a
critical step toward fulfilling the promise of the nanofluidic proteomic
research and future highly integrated bioanalysis micro/nanosystems. The
proposed research will also lead to a thorough understanding of molecular
dynamics in the confining nanofluidic geometry, which could provide a novel
basis for ultra-sensitive and high-resolution sensors and medical diagnostic
systems. The proposed educational activities will have broad impacts on students
from different educational levels and genders and ethnicities. Some of the
technologies described in the proposal will be used as vehicles for outreach
activities to K-12 students and other underrepresented female and minority
students in the Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti school districts. The proposed outreach
activities will reveal to K-12 students the exciting challenges in science and
engineering and their close relevance to our society, thus motivating them to
pursue science and engineering curricula. For undergraduate and graduate
education, an interdisciplinary course in Micro/Nanofluidics and BioMEMS will be
developed. This course will prepare engineering students to pursue research in a
variety of multidisciplinary areas such as BioMEMS and Lab-on- Chip, analytical
chemistry, and micro/nanoscale materials sciences.