* 1231808
* Novel graphene-based electronic devices integratible with silicon: synergistic research across materials, concepts, and implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Zhijian Xie, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2017
* USD 359,996.00

The objective of this program is to demonstrate novel silicon-integratible
graphene-based&lt;br/&gt;devices, including the metal-oxide-graphene-silicon
field-effect transistor to achieve drain&lt;br/&gt;current saturation with a
zero bandgap, and the graphene-insulator-graphene junction to
achieve&lt;br/&gt;resonance tunneling. These devices are expected to harness the
enormous momentum behind&lt;br/&gt;silicon manufacturing, exploit the unique
advantages graphene while circumventing serious&lt;br/&gt;challenges, thus find
niche applications for technology entry, and eventually enter
the&lt;br/&gt;mainstream digital arena with full potential enabled by future
progress.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project represents coherent
research efforts spanning materials, concepts,&lt;br/&gt;and implementation. The
materials growth research will seek answers to fundamental
questions&lt;br/&gt;about heteroepitaxy of two-dimensional layers. Novel device
concepts, with deep roots in&lt;br/&gt;proven ideas (modulation doping and
resonant tunneling), uniquely take advantage of the&lt;br/&gt;material
properties. Implementation of the concepts incorporates realistic
engineering&lt;br/&gt;considerations from materials and processing to structures
and modeling, and represents sound&lt;br/&gt;engineering
practice.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: New discoveries will be introduced to
undergraduate and graduate students, not&lt;br/&gt;only to convey knowledge, but
also to stimulate curiosity and enthusiasm. Outreach activities&lt;br/&gt;such
as the PI's partnership with a local high school will impact K-12 science and
math&lt;br/&gt;education. The nature of the proposed research provides an
excellent multidisciplinary research&lt;br/&gt;platform for graduate students.
This project will enhance diversity by involving and training&lt;br/&gt;female
graduate students and by recruiting young minds from underrepresented groups.
The&lt;br/&gt;success of this research will potentially create US jobs by
complementing the dominant, largely&lt;br/&gt;overseas silicon-based fabrication
with graphene-based niche technologies.