* 1231287
* Fast and Scalable Fabrication of Nanofibers of Polymers, Carbons, Ceramics, and Composites by Centrifugal Spinning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Xiangwu Zhang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 423,016.00

This grant provides funding for the fundamental research on a novel centrifugal
spinning process that is capable of producing polymer, carbon, ceramic, and
composite nanofibers at high speed and low cost. Centrifugal spinning eliminates
the limitations encountered by current nanofiber production methods. In this
research, the foundation of the novel centrifugal spinning process will be
established through the fundamental understanding of the nanofiber formation
process and the processing-structure relationships. Guidelines for producing
nanofibers of polymers, carbons, ceramics, and composites will be established,
and the processing-structure relationships obtained in this work can be used to
guide the design of advanced nanofiber materials for a wide variety of potential
applications including batteries, fuel cells, solar cells, biocatalysts,
purification, sensors, composites, and protonic and electronic microdevices. In
this work, the potential use of centrifugally-spun nanofibers in batteries and
fuel cells will be explored. If successful, this research will lead to a new
centrifugal spinning process that can produce nanofibers of many different
materials, which have significant impacts on a broad range of applications.
Nanofibers of polymers, carbons, ceramics, and composites will be obtained. The
exploration of potential applications, especially in energy storage and
conversion, will help alleviate foreign oil dependence, improve air quality,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and promote sustainable development. In
addition, emerging research concepts, theories, and technologies relevant to the
proposed work will be implemented in classroom teaching to accurately reflect
the changing trends in the profession, and produce students with the skills
needed to participate in and advance novel processing and manufacturing
technologies. These research and education activities will also help the United
State stay in the leading position in these strategic fields.