* 1231545
* SHB: Type I (EXP): High Accuracy Motion Analysis using Commodity Depth Camera for Clinical Lower-Extremity Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Ruigang Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2016
* USD 577,303.00

Abstract

Physical therapy has been widely adopted to treat a wide range of medical
conditions, from disabilities, injuries, to crippling diseases such as
arthritis, lower back pain, or cerebral palsy. A central issue in physical
therapy is the assessment of a patient's kinematic performance. With technology
advancement, physical therapists can now utilize commercial motion capture
(mocap) system to quantify the 3D mechanics common to many conditions they
treat. The 3D kinematic feedback leads to more accurate diagnosis and faster
progression. Unfortunately the current state of the art for technology to
measure 3D motion is expensive, cumbersome, and not widely available to physical
therapists. Thus a strong need remains for the development of a portable, low
cost, mocap system to give physical therapists precise 3D measurements of
movement dysfunction.

This research aims to use the depth information from a single depth camera (SDC)
to capture high-accuracy motion data comparable to that from a commercial mocap
system. While depth-camera-based pose tracking solutions exist, such as the
Kinect system from Microsoft, medical assessment demands almost an order-high
accuracy than that for digital entertainment. Based on prior medical studies,
this project's goal is to achieve a positional error of less than 10mm and
angular error less than 1 degree. That is four to 10 times better than the
current state of the art in SDC mocap. For the scope of this project, a new
motion capture framework will be developed and thoroughly evaluated for medical
applications, in particular to help physician, physical therapists, and other
medical professionals to diagnosis, treat, and monitor patients with movement
disorders in the lower-extremity.