* 1231872
* GSE/RES Collaborative proposal: How parents and their elementary school-age children solve science problems together: The role of gender and ethnicity
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Susannah Sandrin, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2017
* USD 250,687.00

Intellectual Merit: This project is investigating the role of gender and
ethnicity in how parents (mothers and fathers) solve science problems with their
young daughters and sons. Few studies examine the influence of parents, and the
combined effects of gender and ethnicity on science problem solving and
interest. The researchers are examining how parent gender, child gender, and
ethnicity affect science attitudes, problem-solving approaches (as well as
parental help and encouragement) and the discipline of science problem that they
prefer. The theoretical framework includes Vygotsky's and Rogoff's sociocultural
theories, Bronfenbrenner's ecological systems theory and Bem's gender schema
theory. One hundred and fifty fourth-grade boys and girls and their parents
(with a balance of Hispanic and non-Hispanic families) are observed while
solving six life and physical science problems together. Qualitative data (from
parent-child problem-solving tasks and a child attitude interview) and
quantitative data (from parent-child problem-solving tasks, a child science
assessment, and a parental questionnaire) are collected and analyzed using
content analysis and inferential statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The research findings may assist researchers, parents and teachers to
improve the participation and achievement of girls and Hispanic students in
science disciplines. The dissemination plan includes presentations to
professional audiences through conference presentations and publications, as
well as brochures and websites for parents and teachers with advice about
encouraging and assisting their students with science. Materials for parents
will be made available to parent organizations, parenting magazines, libraries,
and child care facilities. Brochures for teachers will be available to school
districts, at local and national teacher conferences, and to pre-service
teachers. This study is providing research training for both undergraduate and
graduate students, and is being carried out by researchers in predominantly-
undergraduate universities.