* 1231208
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Challenging Assumptions of Dental Senescence Using a Primate Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michelle Sauther, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,733.00

Extensive tooth wear may ablate functional features of the teeth, resulting in
the end of the dentition's capacity to effectively break down food items (i.e.,
dental senescence). Such a loss of function is presumed to impede access to
foods, resulting in reduced health status, reproductive success, and ability to
survive. Nevertheless, how and at what point of wear teeth reach a senescent
state is not yet well understood, nor is the extent to which dental senescence
may affect individual health, nutrition and behavior. Natural selection should
produce teeth which maintain the ability to fracture foods despite wear, and
which only cease to function with severe wear. Individuals may compensate for
dental impairment through behavioral mechanisms, or may be buffered against the
impacts of wear by individual traits such as sex and/or social
rank.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study, by doctoral student James Millette
(University of Colorado), under supervision of Dr. Michelle Sauther, combines
Geographic Information Systems-based dental topographic analysis of tooth form
with individual behavioral-ecology, health and nutritional data to examine
relationships between worn tooth morphology, food processing ability and
behavior for ring-tailed lemurs (Lemur catta) of the Beza Mahafaly Special
Reserve, Madagascar. This population demonstrates well-documented, varying
levels of tooth wear and frequent tooth loss due to tamarind fruit
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will: 1) determine what level of
dental wear is associated with reduced health and nutrition, 2) assess if
behavioral mechanisms can buffer individuals against the effects of dental wear,
and 3) examine whether individual traits such as rank and sex may impact such
patterns. It also will provide valuable contextual information towards improved
use of dental topographic analysis for assessing worn tooth functionality and
its relation to behavior and nutrition within the primate fossil record. The
conduct of the research will be complemented by enhancing international research
collaborations, training of Malagasy students and educational outreach to local
communities, and enhanced conservation of endangered habitats.