* 1231192
* Adoption of smart grid technologies by electrical utilities:  Factors influencing organizational innovation in a regulated environment
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* M Venkatesh, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 341,190.00

A critical issue facing the U.S. and the world is the reduction of greenhouse
gases and other pollutants created by the generation of electricity. Today,
electrical utilities in the U.S. face a challenging future, marked by the need
to modernize an inefficient, deteriorating infrastructure based on obsolete
technology, and public resistance to location of new generation and transmission
facilities. Smart grid technologies have the potential to reduce the
environmental impacts of electricity generation and distribution while improving
the quality, reliability and efficiency of electricity supply. The smart grid
would allow utilities to better manage supply and demand, while giving customers
real-time information and the ability to adjust consumption in response to
pricing. A smarter grid also is necessary to incorporate clean, but
intermittent, energy sources such as solar and wind power on a large scale. Yet
this innovation presents major organizational and technical challenges to
utilities, which operate in a highly-regulated environment. New knowledge is
needed on organizational innovation in response to important but potentially
disruptive technologies in the context of a regulated monopoly. A new model of
organizational adoption of innovation will be developed and tested, contributing
to the fields of organizational science, innovation studies, information
systems, public policy, and management. The research will provide useful
knowledge and insights for managers, regulators and policymakers involved in
smart grid adoption and implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
addresses the following questions: (1) What internal and external factors
determine the motivation and willingness of utility companies to develop and
deploy smart grid innovations? (2) How do organizations in a regulated
environment respond to innovation opportunities and challenges? (3) What policy
changes would be required to overcome obstacles to the adoption of socially
desirable innovations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be addressed
through a combination of qualitative case study and quantitative survey work.
Comparative case studies will be carried out on utilities that differ in
important organizational characteristics and operate in different state
regulatory regimes in order to analyze the impacts of organizational and
environmental factors on smart grid adoption. Based on findings from the case
studies, and on a set of individual interviews paired with web surveys, a large
survey of U.S. utility companies will be developed to test hypotheses about the
factors influencing smart grid adoption and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of a smart electricity grid
has the potential to reduce the environmental impacts of electricity production
and use, improve the reliability and security of the nation's electricity
supply, and create a platform for new business and technology development. The
proposed study will provide insights into the changes that need to occur before
a cleaner, more reliable and intelligent electrical infrastructure can be put in
place. These insights will provide guidance for utility companies, their
suppliers and customers, and also policy makers and regulators. They also will
be useful in understanding the adoption of other valuable innovations in highly
regulated environments.