* 1231286
* The CIRTL Network: 25 Research Universities Preparing a National Faculty to Advance STEM Undergraduate Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Robert Mathieu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2018
* USD 5,333,648.00

The Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL) began
in 2002 with a grant from the National Science Foundation. Its mission is to
broaden and enrich graduate education and post-doctoral preparation in order to
develop a national STEM faculty with the capability and commitment to implement
and improve effective teaching practices for the learning of all students. The
first decade of operation of CIRTL has demonstrated that research universities
can effectively prepare future faculty to be both productive researchers and
excellent, knowledgeable teachers. CIRTL has developed, implemented, and
evaluated successful strategies based on three core ideas: Teaching as Research,
learning communities, and learning-through-diversity. In 2011, 1500 future
faculty across STEM participated in the learning communities of the six research
universities that comprise the prototype CIRTL Network. CIRTL evaluations and
associated research on efforts to prepare future faculty indicate that future
STEM faculty in such learning communities can effectively use and advance high
impact teaching and learning practices and continue to do so once they are hired
as new members of the faculty. In Fall 2011 the CIRTL Network expanded to
include 25 diverse research universities; together these universities produce
26% of the STEM Ph.D.s in the United States. These partners are collaborating to
establish interdisciplinary learning communities at all 25 universities that can
demonstrably prepare future faculty who use and improve best practices in
undergraduate education. Common features of the proposed learning communities
include teaching-as-research experiences, mentor training, post-doctoral
preparation in teaching and learning, use of CIRTL core ideas as a unifying
framework for new and existing programs, conceptual strengthening of teaching
assistant programs, and facilitation of participation from underrepresented
groups. As part of this scale-up a cross-Network learning community is being
developed to engage the diversity and expertise of all 25 universities for
teaching, mentoring, shared learning, scholarly exploration, and cross-
disciplinary collaboration of future faculty. CIRTL is also engaged in efforts
to become a sustainable community. It is engaged in piloting and studying
organizational, administrative, and financial structures, examining promising
developments in information technology and evaluation methods that support an
institutionalized CIRTL Network that is scalable to larger numbers of
universities in the future. The CIRTL learning communities in the 25 member
universities are expected to educate 7,000 graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows each year, of whom 2,200 are estimated to complete their doctoral work
annually. This yield is comparable to 25% of the current national production
rate of STEM faculty 6 years out of graduate school. Through national CIRTL
Forums, web sites, publications, presentations across STEM disciplines, and
collaborations with STEM disciplinary societies and national higher education
organizations, the CIRTL Network will impact graduate education in universities
beyond the Network. The CIRTL Network Is likely to grow in number. A significant
number of additional research universities have expressed interest in joining
the network.