* 1231048
* Sustainable Energy Pathways:  A Lab-to-Market Paradigm for the Optimal Design of Sustainable Energy Storage Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,900,000.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Se-Hee Lee and co-workers at the
University of Colorado at Boulder to develop a new generation of energy storage
materials and devices. The team of investigators includes researchers with
expertise in materials science, battery engineering and environmental and
economic assessment at an early stage in battery research and development.
Energy storage materials play a crucial role for finding a sustainable solution
to transportation via electric vehicles. Today's approaches for developing such
materials do not account of the complex tradeoffs between various performance
criteria, currently used to design batteries, and sustainability goals,
including life cycle costs and economic factors. In this project, the team of
investigators will adopt concepts from multi-disciplinary optimization for
coordinating the sustainability and material design problems. A novel multi-
scale modeling framework will be established to predict the performance of 3-D
structured electrode architectures and cell layouts. The model development will
be supported by fundamental research on the thermodynamic and kinetics
characteristics of solid state lithium pyrite (SS-LP) batteries, using advanced
experimental techniques. Life-cycle analysis and environmental impact studies
will be carried out to assess the sustainability of the proposed battery
technology with respect to manufacturing and use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
coupling research discoveries with ongoing and new educational activities,
students at all levels (K-12 through graduate, including students from typically
underrepresented groups) will be exposed to the excitement of renewable energy
in general and the world of energy storage material systems for electric
vehicles in particular. Interdisciplinary, tightly integrated research will
provide an environment for educating a new cadre of engineers and economists,
who will not only be experts in their disciplinary fields but also understand
the broader context of sustainable energy and thus are equipped to lead the
design of a new sustainable energy future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will create a new paradigm to design energy storage materials bridging
the gap between materials research and the environmental and economic impact of
technologies in which these materials play a crucial role. The proposed research
specifically focuses on SS-LP batteries, a new battery material system with
extraordinary properties. The SS-LP battery development holds the promise of a
major breakthrough in reaching a market beyond the small-capacity vehicles of
urban drivers.