* 1231586
* DMREF: High-Pressure Synthesis of Novel Oxynitride Photocatalysts Directed by Theory and In Situ Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Artem Oganov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;High-pressure (HP) synthesis is considered specialized and
labor-intensive with low throughput and success rates. By integrating the
installed infrastructure for theory, HP synthesis, and property measurements at
SBU with national synchrotron x-ray and neutron facilities, we aim to unlock the
potential of HP as a routine tool for solid-state materials discovery and
development. An ab initio evolutionary algorithm for crystal structure
prediction provides structure-property relations that can be tested
experimentally using in situ scattering techniques. In addition to the precise
determination of electronic and catalytic properties, the experimental results
provide a feedback loop that validates and improves the predictive capability of
the computational search. This strategy is broadly applicable to HP exploratory
synthesis, and particularly suitable in the search for oxynitride
photocatalysts, since HP favors production of solids, rather than competing
reactions that result in breakdown to gaseous products. Pressure also
facilitates band gap engineering through careful control over the stoichiometry
and the ordering of O/N in closed systems, something difficult to achieve with
current ammonolysis routes used at ambient pressure. The development of active
nano-gold co-catalysts allows us to rapidly test the activity of even small
amounts of recovered material. The funding will train a new generation of young
scientists; comfortable with a more integrated approach to materials development
that utilizes computational and experimental high-pressure techniques as
mainstream tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;Although
materials synthesis at high pressure has the potential to produce unprecedented
and transformative materials, traditional approaches are specialized and labor-
intensive, with comparatively low rates of throughput and discovery. By
integrating theory, synthesis, and property measurements at Stony Brook with the
nation's synchrotron X-ray and neutron facilities, we aim to unlock the
potential of high pressure as a routine tool for solid-state materials
discovery. Computational search will provide lists of target compositions along
with their predicted properties. These targets can be synthesized using high
throughput techniques prior to precise determinations of electronic and
catalytic properties. These results constitute a feedback loop that provides
insight into better predictive capability. This strategy is particularly
suitable in the search for oxynitride photocatalysts for use in hydrogen
production from sunlight and water. The application of pressure favors the
formation of solids rather than competing reactions that result in breakdown to
gaseous products, oxygen and nitrogen. The recent development of active nano-
gold co-catalysts allows us to rapidly test the activity of even small amounts
of recovered material. The funding will train a new generation of young
scientists; comfortable with a more integrated approach to materials development
that utilizes computational and experimental high-pressure techniques as
mainstream tools.