* 1232118
* Toward Efficient and Distributed Cyber-Physical Systems Design for the Smart Electric Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2016
* USD 396,222.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop efficient and
distributed cyber-physical systems so as to maximize the potential of improving
the reliability and stability of the power grid. Research will be focused on
three inter-dependent thrusts: 1) developing efficient fast-converging first-
order and second-order distributed algorithms for reactive power control and
flow optimization; 2) developing deadline-constrained distributed data
aggregation schemes with efficient routing and scheduling decisions; and 3)
enabling the optimal deployment of the grid monitoring network as an integrated
sensing, communication and computing infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies
in the theme of enabling new reactive power control schemes with the additional
intelligence afforded by the cyber-physical infrastructure, which can be
potentially transformative to the development of stable and reliable smart power
grid. Efficient distributed control algorithms will be developed with either
guaranteed fast convergence speed or desired delay characteristics. The research
will provide a novel algorithmic foundation and networking
architectures/protocols that enable low-latency and fully distributed reactive
power control in smart grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The research will infuse traditional power control problems with a
brand-new cyber-physical perspective. It will advance the distributed control
theory in power systems and provide timely solutions to significantly improve
the reliability and stability of the power grids. The PIs will introduce related
research results to classrooms and actively share their findings by giving
seminars to both the cyber and power engineering communities. The project will
further facilitate training of minority students and help prepare the future
cyber and power workforce.