* 1232178
* GOALI:  Trace Vapor Detection of Explosives using Molecularly Imprinted Organic Field Effect Transistors and Metal Nanoparticles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sheila Grant, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 423,786.00

The goal of this project is to develop methods of integrating metal
nanoparticles and molecular imprinting techniques with organic electronics which
will lead to the development of novel organic field effect transistor
architectures for targeted detection of trace vapors of explosive molecules.
Room temperature deposited, ultra-fine metal nanoparticles with tunable sizes
(0.5 nm-2.5 nm) will be integrated with organic semiconductor materials such as
vacuum-deposited poly-crystalline pentacene and solution-processed amorphous
polymer (poly(2-methoxy-5-(3',7'-dimethyloctyloxy)-p-phenylene vinylene) (MDMO-
PPV)) to fabricate floating gate electronic non-volatile memory-based sensing
devices. A synergistic approach that combines these nano-scale elements into
optimized organic field effect transistor structures is expected to yield new
insights into these chemical interactions and provide better fundamental
understanding of the sensing phenomena towards trace vapor sensing of
explosives. Integration of such nanoparticles will also yield additional
analyte-specific signatures in the transistor characteristics such that these
signatures can improve the sensors?f discrimination capabilities. Selectivity of
the organic field effect transistors will be addressed by developing and
optimizing molecular imprinting techniques to give the transistors target-
specific molecular recognition. Furthermore, organic field effect transistor
sensor structures with varying channel lengths ranging from tens of microns to 5
nm will be explored to understand the diffusion kinetics of analytes and
molecular level interaction through their single electron charge transfer
characteristics with imprinted organic layers and metal nanoparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: A fundamental approach to
understanding the molecular level interaction of the vapor phase explosive
molecules with nano-engineered polymers and metal nanoparticles will advance
research in the area of explosive sensing technologies. Studying the interaction
of single molecules and the physico-chemical and electrical changes accompanying
specific binding events will offer a plethora of information that can lead to
improved sensing and monitoring capabilities which further leads to improved
diagnostics, drug discovery and therapeutics. The library of interactions and
specific recognition provided by these nano-engineered organic field effect
transistors can be used for generation of information useful to quantify the
presence, concentration and location of the explosive material in the
environment that may be significantly hazardous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: This project will directly impact the technologies used for various
explosive surveillance systems, and the technology can be translated to
diagnostics for national security, public safety and the environment. A
prominent educational component involves 'hands-on' educational activities in
transformative sensor research and will specifically target students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering. These activities will
involve secondary, graduate and undergraduate students, and the general public
with the goal of broadening general knowledge about translational research in
sensor systems.