* 1232654
* Prioritizing saccades according to their relative costs and benefits
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Mark Harwood, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* catherine arrington
* 08/31/2016
* USD 452,302.00

Should I stay or should I go now? The clash between changing and staying the
course is a very familiar choice in our everyday lives be it a trivial choice
such as leaving a social event, or a 'big life choice' such as leaving one's
job. This project hypothesizes that this type of decision underpins our most
frequent choice: where to look next. On average, we move our eyes in discrete
jumps (saccades) twice as often as we beat our hearts. Although this feels very
automatic, each movement involves a mostly unconscious decision of when to move.
Should I continue to exploit my maximum resolution vision on my current focal
point, or is now the time to explore new regions of space? There are also costs
as well as benefits to moving, since the visual disturbance during the movement
(think major camera shake) is perceptually suppressed, meaning we are mostly
blinded during the 10% of our waking lives spent making these movements. This
project tests the novel hypothesis that saccade choices are governed by an
evaluation of their relative costs and benefits, allowing us to prioritize
better choices over worse ones. The same framework will be applied to test if
the problems in initiating saccades seen in Parkinson's disease are due to a
breakdown in a cost/benefit evaluation. By understanding how such a simple, but
pervasive, decision process is driven, the investigators expect to reveal more
fundamental and general principles of decision making in the brain.
Understanding how the brain achieves optimal behavior in dynamic environments,
more broadly, is a critical issue in neuroscience and for intervening when this
process goes awry. Clarifying these processes in Parkinson's disease could lead
to better diagnostic tests of disease onset and progression.