* 1232530
* The neural bases of task proficiency and dual-tasking: Escaping the frontal bottleneck
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Maximilian Riesenhuber, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 705,929.00

One of the most impressive aspects of human cognition is its ability to, through
practice, convert effortful tasks to those that can be performed with little
effort, and even in parallel with other, attention-demanding tasks. The recent
proliferation of technologies permitting constant engagement in our culture has
made multitasking increasingly prevalent, giving rise to new policy challenges
as people's attempts at multitasking exceed their cognitive capabilities, such
as when texting while driving. A better understanding of the brain's
capabilities and limitations to automate tasks is therefore highly desirable.
Yet, the neural bases of automaticity and multitasking are still poorly
understood, leading to substantial disagreement about the brain's multitasking
capabilities. In particular, while there is broad consensus that learning new
tasks is associated with the development of task-selective circuits in the front
of the brain which are selectively activated or suppressed depending on the
individual's attentional focus, several experiments have shown that this
architecture can create a cognitive "bottleneck" in situations when more than
one task needs to be executed at the same time. Dr. Maximilian Riesenhuber and
his team at Georgetown University are testing the key hypothesis that under
certain conditions, familiar tasks can be "offloaded" to circuits in the back of
the brain, thus freeing up the frontal system to simultaneously perform
additional, attention-demanding tasks. To test this hypothesis, the project will
use sophisticated behavioral training paradigms to enable participants to
perform more than one task in parallel, and then use a combination of advanced
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalographic (EEG)
techniques to track how the brain learns to enable multitasking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will advance our understanding of the mechanisms
underlying the brain's ability to automatize and parallelize task execution,
essential in the face of the increasing pressures to multitask in today's
culture. The results will also be relevant for a range of societal and medical
challenges. For instance, deficits in multitasking and task switching have been
associated with schizophrenia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. In
addition, it is being increasingly appreciated that automaticity itself can be
associated with negative consequences, as automatic processes can reduce
flexibility in responding due to a lack of conscious awareness and decreased
control. For instance, a challenge in treating drug addiction is that many
maladaptive behaviors associated with drug abuse become automatized. Even when
associated with high performance, automatic task execution can be problematic in
domains in which accountability is critical, such as in legal or medical
decision-making. Understanding how the brain automatizes tasks is a key stepping
stone in making progress in these areas.