* 1232629
* Understanding the Barriers to Engineering as a Career Choice for Appalachian Youth
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Marie Paretti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 267,209.00

This engineering education research project seeks to understand the relatively
low participation of Appalachian youth in the engineering workforce and
engineering careers. By interviewing practicing engineers and college students
majoring in engineering, the investigators will develop an understanding of how
motivational and self-efficacy factors as well as the regional culture influence
career choices. An array of appropriate theoretical frameworks will be used to
understand the needs and culture of this underserved and understudied
demographic group that stretches over many states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader significance and importance of this project will be to contribute to an
understanding of why Appalachian youth are under-represented in the STEM
workforce. The project will work with an array of partners in K-12 and
university education as well as industry to ultimately create interventions that
can impact workforce development and thus regional economies. This project
overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through
preparation of an engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise.
Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for society is enabled by building the
capacity of the nation's citizenry for addressing societal challenges through
engineering.