* 1232928
* Collaborative Research:  Frontogenesis and Fine-Sediment Trapping in a Highly Stratified Estuary
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Wayne Geyer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,717,973.00

Intellectual merit: A field and modeling study of estuarine frontogenesis and
sediment trapping in a highly-stratified estuary will be conducted in the
Connecticut River estuary. Frontogenesis in estuaries is poorly understood, yet
it is a fundamental mechanism influencing many aspects of estuarine
hydrodynamics and sediment transport. The fronts in estuaries are among the
strongest observed in any marine environment, producing intense, localized
density gradients, abrupt transitions in stratification, bottom stress, and
turbulence, strong vertical velocities and intense sediment trapping. The
processes that lead to sediment trapping depend on the same physical variables
and occur at the same scales as those producing estuarine fronts, providing a
strong motivation for an interdisciplinary study of the dynamics of estuarine
fronts and associated sediment trapping. The Connecticut River estuary is the
field site - an energetic regime with intense and highly time-dependent fronts
and ephemeral trapping of fine-grained sediment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
observational program will include measurements of the frontal structure as it
varies at tidal and seasonal timescales, as well as intensive, high-resolution
measurements with fixed and ship-mounted instruments to obtain unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution of the physical regime. Simultaneously,
suspended-sediment concentrations and properties with optical and acoustic
methods will be quantified and subjected to an extensive laboratory and field
calibration effort. The water-column observations will be coupled with bed-
sediment characterization to address interactions among sediment flux
convergence, ephemeral deposition, and spatially and temporally varying
availability of resuspendable sediment. Observational measurements will be
paired with a high-resolution numerical model of the hydrodynamics and sediment
transport to help interpret the observations and to investigate the details of
the dominant physical processes leading to frontogenesis and associated sediment
trapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will provide a comprehensive
examination of estuarine frontogenesis, linking current theoretical
understanding of quasi-steady hydraulics with the dynamics of partially-mixed
estuaries in order to understand, quantify and parameterize frontogenesis and
its influence on the overall estuarine regime. Through the combination of high-
resolution measurements and modeling, the research team will perform a rigorous
examination of the mechanisms of sediment trapping, particularly in context with
the strong but highly time-dependent convergence resulting from estuarine fronts
and the associated, ephemeral deposits of fine-grained sediment. The study will
address the sensitivity of these hydrodynamic and sediment-transport processes
to variations in estuarine forcing conditions, based both on the observed
variation of forcing and model sensitivity studies. Model sensitivity studies
will also be used to determine whether frontal convergence processes may explain
the long-term evolution of estuarine morphology and the potential implications
of shifts in forcing variables on the overall estuarine
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This study will lead to the
understanding and improved prediction of the generation of fronts in estuaries
and the influence of fronts on the fate and transport of fine sediment and
associated contaminants. These findings will have application to the modeling
and management of the heavily populated, industrialized and otherwise human-
impacted estuaries around the world. This project includes implementation of new
educational components: a short-course in advanced field methods for graduate
students from across the international estuarine research community, and an
undergraduate field research class that will be coupled to the graduate-level
field class. The project will also support the thesis work of two graduate
students.