* 1232624
* RUI: Nonintrusive Temperature Measurements in Compressible, Axisymmetric Shear Layers Using Two-Photon Stimulated Raman Excitation of Laser-Induced Gratings
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Joel Kuehner, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 301,835.00

1232624&lt;br/&gt;Kuehner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to predict and
control mixing between two fluids is important in many engineering applications,
such as between the fuel and oxidizer in combustion. Mixing two fluids can also
generate undesirable noise, for example the noise associated with the exhaust of
a jet engine combining with the surrounding air. One area of particular concern
is the turbulent mixing that occurs in the shear layer that forms between flows
of two different speeds. The mixing governs the transport of fluid properties
across that layer and contributes to the noise generated within the shear layer.
The mixing characteristics and sound generation change as the difference in
speeds between the two flows increases. By understanding the dynamics of the
shear layer, the turbulent mixing and sound generation can be better predicted
and potentially modified in practical applications. Instantaneous measurements
of a quantity such as temperature can provide insight into the turbulent mixing
that occurs in the shear layer, as mixing governs the fluctuations in such a
quantity. Laser-induced gratings (LIG) is a nonintrusive method for acquiring
instantaneous temperature at specific locations within the flow field. This
project aims to improve the signal strength of LIG to expand its application to
a wider range of flows and to apply this new LIG technique to subsonic and
supersonic jet flows so that temperature can be acquired in shear layers for
variable difference in speed between the two flows. The specific objectives for
this project are to 1) determine the effects of the speed difference on
temperature fluctuations in the shear layers, 2) highlight the dependence of
mean and fluctuating temperature on flow structure, and 3) provide insight into
the thermodynamics that contribute to sound generation and
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research project
encompasses an improved knowledge of the turbulent mixing that occurs in high-
speed shear layers and an expanded capability of the LIG technique. The effect
of compressibility, a measure of the speed difference between the flows, is a
problem of practical importance that has been studied for several decades;
however, measurements of the fluctuation properties crucial to understanding the
problem have remained elusive. As the application of the LIG technique will be
broadened to other high-speed flows, temperature can be acquired in other
important flows in the future, such as planar shear layers, base flows, and jet
injection flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study include
a better understanding of the compressible, turbulent dynamics that govern
mixing and sound production. The effects of compressibility on turbulence have
been documented, but the underlying physical causes have yet to be fully
defined. Improved understanding will be critical to applications such as
supersonic fuel injection in scramjet engines, rocket propulsion, and control of
noise production in commercial aircraft. Moreover, as an RUI project, the
investigation will occur at a small, liberal-arts, undergraduate university.
Undergraduate research assistants will be employed during the academic year and
over the summers to perform the experiments and present the results, providing
invaluable experience for students of many backgrounds. The experimental
apparatus will be used in the fluid-mechanics laboratory in the Physics and
Engineering Department, providing research and learning experience for the
undergraduate engineering majors.