* 1232776
* 2012 West Coast Van Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2020
* Frederick Jones, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 06/30/2020
* USD 921,765.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;30 April 2012&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1232776&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oregon State University&lt;br/&gt;PI: D.
Bailey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests CY 2012 operational funding
support for the West Coast Van Pool which is managed by Oregon State University.
The West Coast Van Pool is located at the OSU's marine facility in Newport,
Oregon. The West Coast Van Pool supports federally-funded oceanographic research
by providing properly outfitted and maintained portable laboratory vans of all
types to the Academic Research Vessel Fleet. Pooling of portable capital
equipment such as this (1) provides "Centers of Expertise" with logistical
support for science and ship operators; (2) provides equipment that is "Free at
the Point of Use" to NSF-funded users which relieves burden on science and ship
operations grants; (3) provides a mechanism for non-NSF funded users to share
maintenance costs by paying established daily rates; (4) reduces the need for
duplication of equipment at multiple institutions which results in a long-term
cost savings to the federal agencies; (5) generates improved budget transparency
on actual costs to operate and properly maintain capital, shared-use equipment;
(6) allows NSF to make proper equipment purchase decisions based on science
needs and provide the appropriate, dedicated, long-term support budgets; and (7)
improves the quality and reliability of equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research projects supported by the equipment pools have been
individually peer-reviewed for scientific merit with all equipment deployments
coordinated with University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS)
ship time requests. During operations, vessels in the Academic Research Vessel
Fleet routinely expose graduate and undergraduate students to seagoing
oceanography. Oregon State University participates in a large number of public
outreach programs and open house events. OSU also operates the NSF-owned R/V
OCEANUS as part of the Academic Fleet now that the R/V WECOMA has been retired
from service.