* 1232619
* Engineered Osmosis for Sustainable Production of Water and Energy: Development of High Performance Micromolded Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 369,909.00

1236619&lt;br/&gt;Elimelech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered osmosis systems have
the potential to sustainably produce fresh water from seawater or wastewater by
forward osmosis or to generate power from salinity gradients by pressure
retarded osmosis. These membrane-based processes utilize the osmotic gradient
that develops between solutions of differing concentrations, which are separated
by a semi-permeable membrane, to effect a more efficient separation or to
sustainably generate power. However, despite the potential of these technologies
to address the global water and energy challenges, osmotically-driven membrane
processes have yet to progress significantly beyond conceptualization. The major
impediment to advancing these technologies is the lack of an adequate membrane,
because the performance of current membranes is significantly hampered by the
phenomenon of internal concentration polarization. Similar diffusion-controlled
phenomena in other processes have been improved by introducing a convective
component of mass transfer. Therefore, this work will take inspiration from the
field of microfluidics, where mixing fluids on the micrometer length is of
utmost importance, and fabricate membranes for osmotically-driven membrane
processes with static mixer-like features to minimize the deleterious effects of
internal concentration polarization. To achieve this goal, a phase separation
micromolding technique will be used to fabricate high-performance membranes for
osmotically-driven membrane processes. The research will also develop a
fundamental understanding of how the mixer geometry impacts the overall mass
transfer and membrane performance in order to optimize the membrane structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses two of the major global challenges
of our time: water scarcity and clean energy. Accomplishing this research will
provide the scientific base and methodology to fabricate robust membranes that
can find application in a variety of processes, including seawater and brackish
water desalination, wastewater reclamation and reuse, and renewable power
generation by pressure retarded osmosis. This work is also the first to directly
incorporate static mixer-like features into the structure of asymmetric salt-
rejecting membranes, with potential applications in a broad range of separation
processes.