* 1232688
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Gender and Globalization in Fishing Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Richard Schroeder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 08/31/2014
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation project is about economic globalization in fishing
communities and how gender relationships in households shape the processes that
provision the global fish supply chain. Fishing production networks are
increasingly integrated into the global economy as consumer demand for fish
grows in North America, Europe and Asia. Investigating how such globalization
impacts the ways in which men and women relate to one another has important
implications for understanding how people affect their environments and access
natural resources. This research will address the gender dimension of fishing
communities, an element currently missing in the understandings of intensified
fishing efforts. It will contribute to knowledge on conservation and development
studies, livelihoods research, and political ecology. By considering fisher
communities in Senegal, West Africa, where fishing economies have historically
displayed highly gendered divisions of labor, this research will investigate the
conjugal contracts in fishing households to better understand how these are
being reformulated in an era of greater global integration. The research will be
accomplished through twelve months of intensive ethnographically-based fieldwork
that includes participant observation and semi-structured interviews in coastal
Senegal, a major fishing nation and recipient of US-sponsored foreign aid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will include the training and employment of
two local research assistants in the course of the research and plans are in
places for broad dissemination. In addition to standard academic dissemination,
the PIs are planning to develop policy briefing papers targeted at policy-makers
and industry professionals, and they are also planning on making media
presentations in order to publicize the research beyond the immediate study
area. This way industry professionals will be provided with information that
will contribute to more effective planning and implementation strategies for
managing a dynamic fishing industry. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will also provide support to enable a graduate
student to establish an independent research career.