* 1232523
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Prehistoric Plant Use Among Complex Maritime Hunter-Gatherer-Fishers, Santa Cruz Island, California
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Kristina Gill, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2014
* USD 23,965.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael Glassow, Kristina M. Gill will analyze
carbonized plant remains from prehistoric habitation sites on Santa Cruz Island,
one of the Northern Channel Islands off the coast of southern California. Her
goal is to examine the role of plant resources among prehistoric maritime
hunter-gatherer-fishers, and how the importance of plants changed through time
in response to environmental stress and increased trade with mainland
populations. Despite the maritime focus of island populations, the extent to
which locally available plant resources were used throughout the Holocene is
important for understanding changes in subsistence, settlement, regional
exchange, and socio-political complexity. Ms. Gill will address these research
objectives by examining three habitation sites on Santa Cruz Island, each of
which is associated with mortar holes in adjacent bedrock outcrops. Throughout
California, stone mortars and pestles typically were used to process plant
foods. Of particular interest, excavations at the Diablo Valdez site
(SCRI-619/620), occupied from at least 3000 BC until after European contact (AD
1782), yielded a large number of carbonized corms (similar to bulbs), a highly
ranked local plant food. The Diablo Valdez site, with its long period of
occupation and the presence of carbonized corms in numerous strata, will make a
significant contribution to refining current understanding of island resource
exploitation, settlement, and exchange. This research project will contribute to
understanding human adaptation at a simple level of technology. It will proceed
through integration of multiple lines of evidence to examine both floral and
faunal food resource use in terms of foraging theory and diet breadth models, in
an island context where marine resources are particularly abundant but where
plant resources likely were critical to a balanced diet. Cross-cultural
comparison, specifically with regard to the relative importance of plants, among
various maritime hunter-gatherer-fisher societies will provide new insights into
how foraging decisions were made.

Broader impacts include participation by students, which is essential during all
aspects of this research project. Previous excavations at the Diablo Valdez site
involved a combination of undergraduate and graduate students and professional
archaeologists, fostering a unique cooperative research environment. The planned
excavations will provide a similar interaction between students and
professionals from academic, government, and public archaeology backgrounds.
Moreover, laboratory analyses will provide important educational opportunities
for undergraduate students through training in archaeological faunal and
paleoethnobotanical analysis.

This research will significantly improve understanding of the role of plants in
both current and past Chumash Indian culture. The youth education program of the
Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians is dedicated to preserving traditional
knowledge and supporting archaeological research that provides valuable
information about their past. During excavations in summer 2011, Ms. Gill led an
interpretive hike for the youth program on Santa Cruz Island, focusing on the
identification of native plants and their traditional uses. Based on the success
of this hike, she will continue to lead annual hikes for the youth program and
other interested tribal members. Fostering a positive, open relationship between
the scientific and Native American community is a goal of this research project.