* 1232423
* Collaborative Research: Frequency Selective Structures for High Sensitivity/High Resolution Damage Identification via Impediographic Tomography
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Fabio Semperlotti, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 184,603.00

The main objective of this research is to advance the state of the art of
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) systems by creating novel Frequency Selective
Structures (FSS) and an FSS-based Impediographic monitoring technique. The
proposed approach is based on the concept of concurrent design where the SHM
system is no longer retrofitted to an existing structure but, instead, it is
designed concurrently with the structure itself. The system is achieved by
implementing the idea of Frequency Selective Structure. FSS exploit the concept
of mistuned periodic structures as a general framework to synthesize dynamically
tailored components with self-focusing vibration energy capabilities. The new
structural design approach will allow delivering targeted excitation to the
damaged areas even in complex, non homogeneous components. The integration of
FSS with the impediographic approach will then enable advanced damage
identification capabilities characterized by high sensitivity, high resolution
and a minimized transducer and sensory network.

If successful, this research will create a transformative intellectual pathway
in synthesizing novel and realistic structural damage identification methods of
the next generation for complex mechanical systems. The technology will have
general applicability and could be implemented across the aerospace, mechanical
and civil engineering fields leading to the next generation of transportation
and infrastructure systems having advanced health monitoring capabilities. The
proposed technology will also eliminate the barriers that have prevented, to
date, the experimental implementation and validation of the impediographic
approach. Experimental findings will allow an unprecedented insight into
impediography and provide critical inputs to foster its application to diverse
fields, such as medical imaging, where remote non-invasive monitoring techniques
are of primary importance. The results will be disseminated through classroom
teaching, undergraduate and graduate student mentoring, community outreach, and
collaboration with potential users.