* 1232666
* Using confocal rheometry to investigate shear thickening suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Itai Cohen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 06/30/2015
* USD 336,284.00

1232666 PI: Cohen

The viscosity of colloidal suspensions can vary by orders of magnitude with
shear rate. Such non-Newtonian behavior arises from the arrangement of suspended
particles and their mutual interactions. Although numerical simulations and
scattering experiments revealed much about the local and average suspension
structures, particle dynamics at mesoscopic length scales, where non-Newtonian
behaviors are believed to originate, are still poorly understood. This research
program will continue to develop techniques that combine fast confocal
microscopy with simultaneous rheological measurements to determine how changes
in suspension mesoscopic structure alter the suspension viscosity. The current
work will focus on three themes associated with shear thickening suspensions.
First, we will determine how hydrocluster size distribution alters shear
thickening in different size gaps. This task will be achieved by directly
visualizing hydroclusters at various shear rates and investigating their
behavior under confinement. Second we will determine how particle shape enhances
shear thickening. Dimer and cubic particles will be used to investigate how
shape anisotropy affects thickening. Finally we will investigate whether
mechanisms for thickening at high volume fractions are hydrodynamic in origin or
if, as many groups claim, at high volume fractions frictional contact forces
come into play.

These confocal rheometry techniques illustrate a new approach for determining
the microscopic dynamics of non-Newtonian suspensions. Ultimately, research
carried out in this project will enable design of shear thickening fluids. Such
studies will have substantial ramifications due to the important role that shear
thickening materials play in industrial applications. These fluids can be found
in materials ranging from paints, to pastes, and even shear thickening drilling
mud proposed for ?top kill? procedures (such as those used to control the
?blowout? of the Macondo well). Their handling is substantially complicated by
their non-Newtonian behavior during processing and packaging. Thus, the goal of
designing flow environments and fluids that when appropriate prevent or
precipitate rapid changes in suspension rheology will have substantial impact on
common industrial practices.

A number of Education and outreach activities will be carried out. The PI is
involved in creating performance based presentations on emergent phenomena in
science. In addition to this activity, the PI will continue to organize the
semiannual New York Complex Matter Workshops. These meetings are aimed at
stimulating interaction among soft matter and statistical physics researchers
from Syracuse, Cornell, RIT, General Electric, Kodak, Corning and other
institutions and industrial labs in the area. The workshops will serve as an
excellent opportunity for introducing graduate students and postdocs to the
local academic and industrial research community.