* 1232218
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Magnetostrictive Galfenol Physics for Micro- and Nano-Scale Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,10/31/2016
* Alison Flatau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2016
* USD 367,251.00

The proposed research focuses on structured analytical and experimental analysis
of magnetostriction in iron-gallium (Galfenol) thin films and nanowires to
advance understanding of the magnetostrictive physics at this scale and to
enable transformative new micro- and nano-scale device functionality. This alloy
system has the distinct advantage of having high strains in response to magnetic
fields (400ppm) while also exhibiting the mechanical ductility and strength of
iron. The ability to electrodeposit this active material is possible due to
preliminary work which overcame the difficulty of Ga oxidation in aqueous
electrolytes, and which therefore enabled FeGa metallic alloys to be fabricated
as thin films and nanowires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this research includes that insights from study of the proposed micro- and nano-
scale test devices will lead to a deep understanding of the exciting device
physics needed to facilitate utilizing magnetostriction at the nanoscale such as
in artificial cilia sensors and actuators that mimic biological transducers in
nature. As the only highly responsive material possible as ductile nanowires and
conformal (nonplanar) thick films, this research is also expected to lead to the
creative, new concepts for transformative sensors and actuators at the micro-
and nano-scale. This work proceeds with an original plan to make the leap from
materials science to devices with four important goals. The first goal is a
simple, yet critical, step of measuring magnetostriction of electrodeposited
Galfenol thin films as a function of composition, crystallographic orientation
and magnetic domain orientation. A capacitance bridge will be used to measure
the magnetostriction of these films and the optimal deposition parameters will
be used in the subsequent goals. The second goal is to make a non-contact torque
sensor as a test device to study the device physics of Galfenol films. The
torque sensors will be evaluated in an existing rotating shaft torque test
stand. The third goal involves high-risk, high-payoff measurements of
magnetostriction in nanoscale devices (10-100nm diameter Galfenol nanowires).
Wires with the right composition, crystal structure, and even necessary
segmentation have been previously made, but measuring magnetostriction at this
scale is difficult due to unknown strains, very small magnetic fields (from
single wires), and general size constraints. Here, measurements of giant
magnetoresistance (GMR) in individual nanowires will be used to determine the
effect of applied tensile and compressive strains. In addition, magnetic force
microscopy will be used to observe magnetization rotation in bent nanowires to
verify GMR results. The fourth and last goal will involve making high-resolution
tactile sensors using Galfenol nanowires to learn more about their behavior and
integration into devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have impact
in a broad variety of fields including spintronics (FeGa on GaAs), vibration
sensors, energy harvesters as cantilevers and/or nanowires, and a wide range of
sensors and actuators using non-contact mechano-magneto coupling (e.g. conformal
non-contact torque sensors and structural health monitoring sensors). This
research will impact the education of undergraduates via REU programs at both
universities, and especially underrepresented students via faculty mentoring
programs. Graduate students will benefit from course development that will
include the research results from this project and from interactions with
industry via industrial centers with annual reviews, journal clubs, and
seminars. Finally, the PIs' will train students in outreach to k-12 students to
continue the broad impact in the next generation.