* 1232035
* Further advances in stability analysis for hybrid adversarial Markov decision processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Andrew Teel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2015
* USD 376,034.00

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this research is to combine advances in the
analysis of non-stochastic hybrid dynamical systems and adversarial Markov
decision processes to generate new results for a broad class of hybrid
stochastic systems. The salient features of hybrid stochastic systems are that
1) the models combine stochastic and worst-case effects to generate non-unique
random processes and 2) solutions combine continuous change with instantaneous
change. Most work on hybrid stochastic systems has focused on systems with
unique solutions. Nevertheless, the combination of worst-case and stochastic
effects is natural and manifests itself in a wide class of engineered systems,
including air traffic management systems, financial systems, and networked and
logic-based control systems. In recent years, important progress has been made
on characterizing robust asymptotic stability for non-stochastic hybrid systems
as well as for adversarial Markov decision processes. General invariance
principles, converse Lyapunov theorems and relaxed Lyapunov-based sufficient
conditions for stability have been codified. In addition, powerful reduction
principles and linearization-based results have been extended to hybrid systems.
The aim of the current work is to develop analogous results for hybrid
adversarial Markov decision processes, which will help pave the way for advances
in robust control design for stochastic hybrid systems.

Broader Impacts:The proposed developments will enhance the engineering education
base by furthering the available graduate curriculum on stochastic and hybrid
systems, and by training graduate students. Tutorial workshops at the main
control conferences will be made available to graduate students, researchers,
and industry personnel. All technical results will be documented in acclaimed
international conferences and prestigious systems and control journals. The work
will foster collaboration with international researchers, continuing student
exchange programs with several international universities. The progress of the
proposed work will be applied to areas that are important to the broad
population, for example the efficient management of air traffic to enhance
throughput in the nation?s aviation system. In addition, early educational
opportunities, down to the freshman level via freshman seminars, will be pursued
to capture the attention of students early in the curriculum through popular
applications of optimization and dynamics.