* 1232656
* Using a Virtual Engineering Internship to Model the Complexity of Engineering Design Problems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Naomi Chesler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 549,999.00

This engineering education research project will use a cyber-learning tool to
understand the relationship between the mathematical complexity of an
engineering design problem and their cognitive complexity. An existing
simulation game will be used to understand student design choices and relate
them to students' knowledge, skills, values, and identity as an engineer. A
detailed theoretical model can then be used to determine how various constructs
of student understanding determines how they engage with engineering design
problems. Design skills are fundamental to engineering work, thus a better
understanding of the relationship between what students know and how they design
can inform curricula and development of pedagogy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader significance and importance of this project is the exploration of cyber-
learning simulations that have the potential to be scalable and customizable to
different engineering degree programs. One of the potential advantages of using
simulations to teach design thinking is the ability to address the needs of
different groups to improve their retention in engineering degree programs. This
project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers
through preparation of an engineering workforce with new capabilities and
expertise. Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for society is enabled by
supporting the development of innovative learning systems.