* 1232949
* EAGER: MINIMUM THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY AND THERMAL EXPANSION CERAMIC NANOCOMPOSITES FOR MICROCOMBUSTOR APPLICATION
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ashwani Gupta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 127,500.00

In micro-scale liquid fuelled combustion systems a finite volume of the
combustor along with a finite residence time is required for fuel vaporization
and mixing. At the small scale this time can be significant compared to the
gaseous premixed residence time because mixing and vaporization at low Reynolds
numbers is generally poor. In both conventional and small scale combustors swirl
is often imparted to the oxidizer flow, the fuel flow, or both, in order to
stabilize the flame and broaden the extinction limits. At the small scale the
swirl flow can be provided by tangential injection, swirl vanes, or step
increases in the cross sectional area of the combustor. In order to minimize the
characteristic length of the combustion chamber a fundamental understanding of
droplet transport, vaporization, and mixing at low Reynolds number is required.
The project objective is to develop efficient and non-polluting very small
volume micro-scale combustor that can be operated with gas and liquid fuels.
Successful demonstration at microscale will allow portable micro-power
generation for use in portable devices, such as, laptops, and also for
applications in micro-propulsion and micro-satellites. The project aims to
develop fuel flexible and efficient micro-combustor (combustion volume of the
order of 0.0018 cubic inches). Such size combustor is smaller than flame
quenching distance. The fundamental understanding developed via experiments and
calculations will allow efficient heat recirculation back into the combustor to
help alleviate thermal quenching of the flame. The fuel will be injected through
a porous heat recuperator for pre-vaporization with measures taken to avoid fuel
coking and deterioration of the porous media that can limit the operational life
of the combustor and micro-thruster. To achieve the project objectives, set of
novel tasks will be developed and tested using experiments and calculations to
enrich knowledge and provide wider applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore means to develop and deposit a novel and innovative ceramic
nanostructured composite materials on inside walls of micro-scale combustor with
ultralow thermal conductivity and near-zero thermal expansion so that no or
minimal heat exchange occurs where it is not desired while maintaining high heat
transfer on the other walls to preheat the reactants prior to fuel-air mixture
entering the combustion volume. Efficient thermal management with efficient heat
exchange between the exhaust gases and fresh reactant mixture is critical. A
recuperator type heat exchanger will be used for heat exchange between the
exhaust gases and incoming fresh fuel-air mixture. For the case of liquid fuel
the vaporization of fuel will be via porous heat recuperator. The emphasis will
be placed on zirconium-based ceramics for micro-combustor for micro-scale power
applications. The approach used will be to manufacture specially-configured
Zirconium-based nano-composites in which thermal conductivity and expansion can
be altered by introducing multi-scale phonon scatters, i.e., rattling atoms
(atomic scale) and interfaces (nanometer scale). Nanosize particles of ultralow
thermal conductivity will be deposited on defined wall of the combustor for near
zero thermal conductivity while maintaining high heat exchange on the other
walls to enhance the efficiency and performance. This project will influence the
development of next generation miniature scale combustion and propulsion devices
for use in terrestrial and space applications.