* 1232535
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The effects of light level and color vision on the foraging behavior of cathemeral red-bellied lemurs (Eulemur rubriventer)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,384.00

Humans and many other primates have trichromatic color vision, which confers the
ability to discriminate between long (e.g., red) and middle (e.g., green)
wavelength chromaticities. Among placental mammals, this feature is unique to
primates, but the underlying genetic basis for trichromacy varies across
lineages. Importantly, the selective pressures favoring the evolution of
trichromacy are still being discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In humans, Old World
monkeys and apes, as well as Neotropical howler monkeys, most individuals in a
population have the capacity for trichromatic color vision. In contrast, most
Neotropical monkeys and Malagasy lemurs maintain a sex-linked polymorphism,
which provides only heterozygous females the potential for trichromacy, while
all males and homozygous females are red-green color blind (dichromatic). This
situation provides a unique opportunity to investigate the potential advantages
and disadvantages to having trichromatic and dichromatic color vision. For
example, it has long been hypothesized that trichromats have an advantage over
dichromats when foraging on red-colored food. Empirical support for trichromatic
foraging advantages, however, particularly in wild populations, is limited.
Recent studies suggest that trichromats might experience more pronounced
foraging advantages under dim light, such as during dawn and dusk, rather than
under bright light levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted by doctoral
student Rachel Jacobs (Stony Brook University), supervised by Dr. Patricia
Wright, tests hypotheses that different types of color vision confer foraging
advantages under bright or dim light conditions in a wild population of
polymorphic and cathemeral (active throughout a 24-hour day) red-bellied lemurs
(Eulemur rubriventer) in Ranomafana National Park, Madagascar. These hypotheses
are tested using a combination of 1) systematic behavioral data collection, 2)
genetic analyses to determine individual color vision status (behavioral
observers will be unaware of the status), and 3) color measurements using
reflectance spectra of red-bellied lemur food items. This research addresses
long-held hypotheses regarding the adaptive significance of trichromatic and
polymorphic color vision in primates. On a broader scale, this project provides
training for a Malagasy student and local Malagasy villagers, supports multiple
national and international collaborations, and is initiating a large-scale
research effort on red-bellied lemurs, greatly facilitating future research on
this species.