* 1232439
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Primate Cranial Morphology in a Comparative Context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2017
* James Cheverud, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2017
* USD 19,216.00

This project by doctoral student Jessica Joganic, under the supervision of Dr.
James Cheverud at Washington University, St. Louis, brings together the fields
of genetics, anatomy, and evolutionary biology in a comparative examination of
primate cranial morphology. The research examines the genetic variants
contributing to normal variation in primate skulls, as well as the molecular
evolution and human population variation of genes responsible for the dramatic
changes in the size and shape of the skull in human and primate evolution. The
organization of the human skull represents a unique departure from the typical
mammalian pattern. It has an enlarged neural vault, a short upright face, and a
flexed cranial base. Genes contributing to variation in these traits that may
have been modified in the human lineage will be identified using a primate
model, the baboon. This will be accomplished by: 1) measuring craniofacial size
and shape variation in a population of pedigreed baboons, 2) identifying genetic
variants contributing to this variation, and 3) characterizing the molecular
evolution of these genetic variants, both across a broad sample of primates, as
well as within human populations.

To achieve these goals, three-dimensional landmark coordinates will be obtained
from the surface and interior of skulls from a large population of pedigreed
baboons using a 3D digitizer and CT scans. These traits will be tested against
variation in the baboon's genomes to identify regions where molecular variation
contributes to craniofacial variation. These regions will be investigated for
signatures of selection and evolutionary rate heterogeneity across primates as
well as within human populations. As genetic variation is the basis for
evolutionary change, identifying the genetic loci underlying trait variation is
a necessary step in studying the evolution of complex morphologies like the
human cranium. Knowledge of a trait's genetic basis and evolutionary history
also informs our ability to manage, treat, and study the origin of skull
abnormalities and diseases that have clinical and biomedical relevance.