* 1232761
* A Synergistic Approach to Prevent Persistent Misconceptions with First-year Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Dazhi Yang, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This engineering education research project seeks to understand how to prevent,
rather than repair, misconceptions in engineering. Misconceptions-students'
misunderstandings of basic scientific principles-are very difficult to correct
once they are established. The investigators will undertake a longitudinal study
with both control and sample groups to investigate the effects of a series of
interventions to prevent misconceptions from developing in thermodynamics and
fluids, areas critical to much engineering practice. The interventions developed
have the potential to be broadly applicable in other STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of this project
will be to demonstrate a path to improve the efficiency of engineering programs
by reducing the amount of time that is spent to correct, or remediate, stubborn
misconceptions. The PIs plan a series of workshops for K-12 teachers following
successful demonstration so that the techniques researched can be applied
earlier in STEM programs, thus further minimizing misconceptions. This project
overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through
preparation of an engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise.
Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for society is enabled by creating results
and research that are useful for society by informing educational policy and
practices.