* 1232908
* University of Minnesota Minority Undergraduate Summer Research Program (May-August 2012)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Robert Meisel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2013
* USD 42,900.00

A persisting gap in recruiting talented students to careers in science is
targeting students from historically underrepresented minority groups. The
number of underrepresented minorities in neuroscience is woefully small despite
the ever growing numbers of these populations in the US. The prevailing view,
supported by studies of high school and college students, is that the solution
to the problem of minority access to research careers is 1) to engage and
nurture these students through early inclusion in research projects, coupled
with 2) academic and social support and professional development. Exposure to
effective role models, i.e. members of underrepresented minorities who have
achieved a measure of success, is warranted as it allows students to see
themselves in similar roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
University of Minnesota Minority Undergraduate Summer Research Program (May
31-August 11) is to establish a rigorous program to recruit, nurture, and mentor
promising undergraduate science majors from traditionally underrepresented
populations to professional careers in research in neuroscience. This project
will 1) recruit these students to a career in science early in their
undergraduate career by providing them with a significant research experience,
2) expose these students to the field of biological sciences at large through a
capstone poster presentation with students in other research areas, and 3)
retain these students in the field, through professional development and ongoing
mentored support.