* 1232745
* "Interfaces in Materials, Biology, and Physiology: A symposium"  to be held at the 2012 MRS Spring Meeting on April 10-13, 2012 in San Fancisco, CA.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Guy Genin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 01/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

1232745&lt;br/&gt;Genin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF support is requested to
support hosting a cross-disciplinary discussion on the broad topic of interfaces
and attachment in materials, biology, and physiology to be held over the
duration of the 2012 Materials Re-search Society Spring Meeting in San
Francisco. The specific expenses requested to be covered by the National Science
Foundation through this grant proposal, as detailed in the accompanying budget
statement, involve registration fees for invited speakers and travel expenses
for junior participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective interfaces between materials present a
grand challenge across a broad range of physical phenomena within both
conventional and biomedical engineering. Many high performance alloys exhibit
property amplifications similar to those observed in nature and physiology, and
the science of relating this property amplification to a material's hierarchical
structure is gaining in maturity. However, careful control of the interfaces and
interphases between constituents continues to pose theoretical and applied
challenges across disciplines, ranging from challenges attaching composite wings
to civil aircraft to challenges in understanding and regenerating attachments
between tendon and bone in rotator cuff reattachment surgery. It will bring
together experts across the life sciences, the physical sciences, and materials
engineering to discuss the state of the art in our understanding of this grand
challenge across disciplines, to identify additional major challenges and
solutions that exist across disciplines, with the goal of providing future
direction to this field. The intellectual merit of this symposium lies in
addressing the critical need to bring together this cross-disciplinary expertise
to unify and identify future directions for this field at an important stage of
the field's development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this symposium lie in the
development of young and future scientists, and the symposium's aim of inspiring
and motivating further inquiry into the study of interfaces. From the human
resources perspective, the program draws organizers and will draw participants
from diverse backgrounds from four continents, and will specifically target
individuals at the beginnings of their careers. Finally, we would like to
facilitate opportunities for junior and early career faculty, post doctoral
fellows and graduate students to present research in an interdisciplinary,
international workshop. Our objective is to have over half of the speakers in
this symposium be scientists who have not previously presented their work at an
MRS Meeting. From the perspective of inspiring and motivating further inquiry
into the study of interfaces, the symposium will serve as a platform for the
broad dissemination of research across disciplines. It is expected to have more
than 200 attendees over the course of the symposium. The symposium will have 48
presentations (27 invited, with five of these being junior investigators) and 15
poster presenters (8 of which are students).