* 1232134
* Collaborative Research: Manipulating Terehertz wave using three-dimensional metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Cheng Sun, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Hao Ling
* 08/31/2015
* USD 223,000.00

Collaborative Research: Manipulating terahertz waves using three-dimensional
metamaterials&lt;br/&gt;PI: Cheng Sun, Weili Zhang, John F. O'Hara, Proposal No.
1232134&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Terahertz (THz) waves remain one of the most underdeveloped regions of the
electromagnetic spectrum, despite the great promise for potential applications
in remote sensing, imaging, spectroscopy, and communications. THz waves carry
unique molecular signatures that are not available in the rest of the
electromagnetic spectrum. In particular, THz waves offer the opportunity for
transformational advances in homeland security, such as applications in standoff
detection and identification of concealed explosive targets. However, THz waves
have proven very challenging to control due to a paucity of electromagnetic
materials with an effective response at THz frequencies. This ?THz gap? results
in a great impediment for the development of functional THz optical components
and systems. In view of these challenges, the objective of this research
proposal is to develop a synergetic approach that incorporates Transformation
Optics (TO) theory, metamaterial design using the effective media approximation,
scalable three-dimensional (3D) fabrication technologies, and a method of
experimental validation to explore a range of novel THz optical components: 1)
TO-enabled aberration free THz imaging lens, and 2) an integrated THz
spectroscopy platform. The collaborative research proposed here will undoubtedly
initiate new possibilities for a variety of much needed THz applications with
unprecedented functionalities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
research addresses the grand challenges surrounding the spectroscopically
important THz frequency range by offering a fundamentally new solution to
control the flow of these waves. The fruition of this research is expected to be
the forging of bridges between the multiple disciplines for creating a new field
of THz Metamaterials, while training the next generation of scientific and
engineering leadership in an interdisciplinary learning environment. The
innovations obtained from this research represent a technological breakthrough,
which will usher in a new generation of THz optical systems with greatly
improved resolution, efficiency, and miniaturization to meet the needs of
commercial and military applications. The proposed THz 3D metamaterials concept
and integrated research protocol can be further extended to the broad
electromagnetic wave spectrum for stealth technology, advanced communication
systems, medical imaging, and remote sensing.