* 1232840
* Mixotrophic bacteria and the cryptic marine sulfur cycle: Mechanisms of carbon assimilation and sulfur oxidation in the Arctic96BD-19 GSO clade
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Robert Morris, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2015
* USD 373,301.00

Intellectual merit: The ocean serves an immense reservoir of carbon, nitrogen,
phosphorus, sulfur, and other elements required for all life. The active and
diverse microbial populations that inhabit the oceans are responsible for
mediating nutrient transformations that maintain the chemistry of seawater. A
recent study identified a ubiquitous group of marine bacteria from the
Arctic96BD-19 gamma-proteobacterial sulfur oxidizer (GSO) lineage that is
closely related to known sulfur oxidizing species that fix inorganic carbon and
oxidize sulfide in low-oxygen waters. The potential for GSOs to use reduced
forms of sulfur in oxygenated waters suggests that they are a keystone species
that link the marine carbon and sulfur cycles. The only known isolates from the
Arctic96BD-19 lineage of GSOs are now in culture, allowing fundamental questions
about their roles in carbon and sulfur cycling to be investigated. Preliminary
data suggest that they use energy from the oxidation of sulfur to assimilate
carbon. This project seek to address the overarching hypothesis that sulfur
transformations provide the Arctic96BD- 19 lineage of GSOs with energy for
organic and inorganic carbon cycling throughout the water column.

Three specific hypotheses will be tested. 1. Arctic96BD-19 cells assimilate
either organic carbon or fixes inorganic carbon, depending on environmental
conditions. 2. Arctic96BD-19 cells oxidize thiosulfate via formation of a
tetrathionate intermediate, or using the branched thiosulfate oxidation pathway.
3. Arctic96BD-19 cells are ubiquitous sulfur oxidizers that assimilate organic
and inorganic carbon through the Pacific Northwest.

A combination of laboratory growth studies of the investigator's pure cultures
and comparative genomic analyses will be used. The genomic data will be used to
determine whether the Arctic96BD-19 cultures possess the genetic potential to
oxidize reduced sulfur to sulfate (based on possession of known core and
ancillary sulfur oxidation genes), which potential oxidation pathways are used,
and whether they can fix inorganic carbon. These data will help guide the
physiology studies by determining the most likely forms of inorganic and organic
compounds that can be utilized.

Broader impacts: Marine bacteria are critical players in global nutrient cycles,
but many of their individual and community functions in the ecosystem are not
well understood. Future oceanographers will need to use cultivation-dependent
and cultivation-independent methods to identify metabolic process that shape
microbial communities and impact biogeochemical cycles. A female graduate
student and two undergraduate students will be trained to use molecular and
physiological data to address hypotheses. Additionally, this project will
increase national exposure of ocean sciences through digital films that
introduce students (particularly ages 15 to 20) to unique and exciting aspects
of oceanographic research. A cross-college collaboration between the UW College
of the Environment and the College of Arts and Sciences will train Master of
Communication in Digital Media students to produce short films that encourage
interest in oceanography among young people. Student education, scientific
advancement, and public awareness are all important components of this project.