* 1232031
* Collaborative Research: Computational Intelligence Methods For Dynamic Stochastic Optimization Of Smart Grid Operation With High Penetration Of Renewable Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ronald Harley, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The objective of this research is to develop advanced computational intelligence
methods to monitor, optimize and control large or so-called wide areas of a
power network that will include solar farms (SFs) and wind farms (WFs), and
controllable network transformers (CNTs), in order to ensure optimum usage of
all these resources both during slow changing semi-steady state conditions, as
well as during transient conditions. The research will be carried out in off-
line simulations and then implemented on a real-time simulator.

Intellectual merit The behavior of renewable energy sources is uncertain and
variable, and it is difficult for static optimization methods to optimize
uncertain non-stationary distributed energy resources in a smart grid for
maximum utilization. A novel ACD controller is proposed for the development of a
real- time dynamic stochastic optimization smart grid engine. Advanced
intelligent methods such as the biologically inspired artificial neural network
and smart devices (CNTs) provide better identification and control capabilities
for implementation of optimal power flows.

Broader Impacts Economically operated reliable and secure power systems that can
accommodate high penetration of renewable energy are of national interest. Being
able to route power through underutilized lines will have major economic and
environmental benefits due to avoiding the need for new lines. This project will
have several dissemination channels, including software, websites, new contents
added to existing courses, special sessions and tutorials at conferences, and
journal publications.