* 1232197
* Second Workshop on Instrumentation Needs of Computer and Information Science and Engineering (INCISE2) Research
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2016
* USD 45,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 12-32197 PI(s): Fortes, Jose A. Institution: University of
Florida Title: Second Workshop on Instrumentation Needs of Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (INCISE2) Research Project Proposed: This
proposal, planning a second workshop to examine more deeply the nature, needs,
importance, challenges, current changes, and funding mechanisms of
instrumentation development, acquisition, utilization, and sharing, for purposes
of ongoing and/or anticipated research in different CISE areas, brings together
recognized CISE research leaders to conduct such an assessment and produce a
report that can be shared with the CISE community, colleagues, academic
administrators, government funding agencies, and industry. CISE research is
increasingly concerned with extremely large and complex objects whose behavior
cannot be entirely distilled from first principles or investigated using
reduction models. Among other factors, scale is a consequence of Moore?s law and
pervasive networking. Complexity arises from the embedding of computing into
artifacts, interconnection of many components and/or multiple layers of
functionality. Research needed to design and/or model such objects often
requires special instruments to either peer into individual components at very
small space/time granularity or to observe/emulate/simulate many objects at
large enough scale and during long enough times. The findings of the first
INCISE workshop held in 2008 confirmed that research instrumentation - broadly
construed to include hardware, software, datasets and services - is essential
for the advancement of CISE disciplines. Since then we have witnessed the
emergence and rapid maturation of cloud computing, global IT systems, community-
oriented instruments, increasingly IT-rich (a.k.a. ?smarter?) systems and
cyberinfrastructures for scientific research. These profound changes in both the
nature of IT systems and how IT systems can be provisioned call for a follow-up
meeting to revisit the scope and need of CISE instrumentation and to discuss
strategies for enabling researchers to create and access the instruments needed
by their projects on a sustainable basis. This proposal requests funds for
organizing such a follow-up meeting ? INCISE 2 ? with diverse participants drawn
from several areas of CISE research. INCISE 2 will take place on two days
preceding the 2012 CRA Snowbird conference whose dates are July 22-24, 2012.
Intellectual merit: Among others, the workshop aims to address the following
questions: 1. Is instrumentation-as-a-service, as provided by clouds or other
means, appropriate for CISE research? When the answer is yes, the workshop will
further investigate and characterize applicable cases and what can be done. When
the answer is no, the workshop will investigate the limitations of
instrumentation-as-a-service and suggest steps to address them. 2. As the needs
and offerings of instrumentation start having a global or regional nature, how
are such needs best met and how are existing global and regional
cyberinfrastructures best used for instrumentation purposes? Can we improve the
community awareness of the existence and uses of these cyberinfrastructures?
What are the relationships between cyberinfrastructure and instrumentation? 3.
What are the main challenges currently faced by CISE instrumentation? For
example, when is reproducibility of experiments needed, possible and/or
affordable? Are there standards emerging for CISE instrumentation? What needs to
be done to ensure sustainability of instrumentation solutions for CISE
communities? Broader impact: The workshop expects to provide a valuable
assessment of the evolving instrumentation needs of CISE research and how they
can be best provided. It will make recommendations to both the community and the
funding agencies regarding the necessary funding mechanisms to meet the
identified needs. The recommendations will be widely disseminated, including
institutions with large enrolments of minority students and underrepresented
groups. An expected impact of this activity is an increased ability on the part
of the researchers of these institutions in competing for instrumentation funds
and an understanding of the nature of CISE instrumentation by academic
administrators and funding agencies. The participants will be diverse with
respect to discipline, gender, ethnic group and geographical distribution in
order to enable different representative perspectives to bear on the conclusions
of the workshop. A verbal report will be made to CISE department chairs at the
CRA workshop, and a written report will be made available to NSF and CISE
departments in more than 200 universities. IT is increasingly being embedded
into artifacts which might include non-IT components whose natures include
mechanical, electrical, communication, energy production, chemical,
transportation, entertainment, medical, and defense. Thus, instrumentation
touches society overall. Over the last two decades the CISE research
instrumentation needs, and mechanisms to address them, have changed as a
reflection of the evolution of IT technology, both from the standpoint of the
research challenges to be faced and the instruments enabled. The amazing
progress of computer and information technologies (IT) has led to the current
era of microprocessors with billions of transistors, software environments with
millions of lines of code, multi-layered IT systems, and networks of thousands
of computers, users, and applications. As a consequence, the objects computer
scientists and engineers study often have an unprecedented scale and complexity.
CISE instruments often grow by connecting many other artifacts (in some cases,
on the fly) leading to complexity that cannot be mastered by any single designer
or user of those objects. Thus, an urgent need exists for such assessment.