* 1232994
* Impact of Photoactive Roads on Urban Air Quality
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Liv Haselbach, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2015
* USD 253,212.00

1232994&lt;br/&gt;Jobson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vehicle emissions are a major
source of urban air pollution in cities worldwide and major contributors to
ground level ozone pollution. One effort taking hold to improve air quality in
cities is the application of titanium dioxide to building and roadway surfaces
to make these surfaces photocatalytic. Upon irradiation with sunlight, these
surfaces efficiently destroy nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), the precursors to ozone. While such surfaces have been shown
to be effective at removing NOx, there has been no systematic study to quantify
their potential to reduce human exposure to ozone and to the toxic compounds
emitted in vehicle exhaust. These surfaces may in fact generate air toxics such
as nitrous acid from NOx, and formaldehyde and acetaldehyde from VOCs.
Preliminary studies by our group have shown that formaldehyde and acetaldehyde
are rapidly generated when gasoline vapor mixtures are exposed to illuminated
titanium dioxide treated concrete. Photoactive roads may in fact increase ozone
in urban areas by decreasing the NOx / VOC concentration ratio and increasing
radical production rates via production of nitrous acid and
formaldehyde.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the net effect of vehicle
exhaust transformation on these surfaces is essential for determining if
photoactive urban materials will in fact improve urban air quality. In this
project chamber studies will be used to quantify NOx and VOCs loss to
photoactive roadway materials (asphalt and concrete) as a function of light
levels, temperature, humidity, and commercial titanium dioxide surface treatment
products. The yields of nitrous acid and aldehydes will also be measured.
Chamber tests will be conducted on prepared test mixtures that mimic vehicle
exhaust including gasoline vapor and in outdoor experiments under ambient
pollution conditions. The surface destruction efficiencies of NOx and VOCs and
yields of nitrous acid and aldehydes will be parameterized and used in an air
quality model to test the resulting impact on primary pollutant concentrations
and ozone formation photochemistry. This project would provide the first
systematic investigation and integrated air quality numerical modeling study of
the impact of photoactive roads on urban air
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide much needed quantitative
information of interest to the public and urban planners on the efficacy of
photoactive roads as a solution to reduce urban air pollution. Exposure to
vehicle exhaust has been shown to have a significant impact on cardiovascular
health. Removing vehicle pollutants at the source with photoactive roads has the
potential to improve health for millions of people living near major roadways.
The results of the research will be used in undergraduate course work and
disseminated in conferences and peer reviewed publications. The research will
help support one graduate student and provide support for a summer research
internship for an American Indian student from the Northwest Indian College.