* 1232590
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Universality and biological mechanisms of subsistence-driven masticatory reduction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Timothy Weaver, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 04/30/2014
* USD 11,970.00

The emergence of agriculture as the predominant means by which people obtain
food resources is one of the most significant economic shifts in human
evolutionary history, and its biological consequences are a frequent subject in
evolutionary anthropology. The history of this subsistence transition is
complex, with agriculture emerging by independent invention in some parts of the
world, and by the spread of cultures and/or people in others. As a result,
studies that test whether the biological consequences of agriculture are better
explained by unique local ecologies and histories, or instead by factors common
to agricultural subsistence, wherever adopted, are of particular interest. This
study by doctoral student David Katz (University of California, Davis), under
the supervision of Dr. Timothy Weaver, provides a global analysis of human skull
shape in order to test two hypotheses regarding the extent of agriculture's
common consequences. First, the investigators test the claim that because the
diets of early farmers were universally softer and more heavily processed than
those of their hunter-gatherer predecessors, the shift from hunting and
gathering to agriculture produced common shape changes - mostly related to
reductions in size - in the chewing architecture of early agriculturalists.
Second, by studying shape changes in the mandible during growth and development,
the investigators test whether differences in skull shape between hunter-
gatherers and agriculturalists are more likely due to natural selection or
skeletal plasticity - bone's ability, particularly during development, to change
shape in response to the demands of lifetime behaviors. The results of the study
will directly inform public understanding of the biological consequences of the
agricultural transition, and also shed light on the much longer-term
relationship between technology, diet, and anatomy over the course of human
evolutionary history. In addition, data from this study will be freely available
on the internet for use as an educational resource.