* 1232814
* GEOTRACES Pacific Section:   Characterizing biogenic trace elements across productivity and oxygen gradients in the eastern South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Benjamin Twining, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2016
* USD 399,960.00

Incorporation of trace elements (TE) into plankton, and the chemical,
geological, biological and biochemical mechanisms which influence this process,
are of central importance to our understanding of the biogeochemical functioning
of the oceans. Bioactive TEs such as Fe, Zn, Co, Cu and Ni have the potential to
control ocean productivity, ecosystem structure, and the utilization of
macronutrients in large regions of the global ocean. Numerous laboratory studies
have been performed to study the responses of cellular TE quotas in model
strains to varying environmental conditions, but accurate measurements of TE
stoichiometries in cells and biogenic material collected from natural
communities are rare. Measurements of bulk particulate TE stoichiometries
typically rely on comparison to laboratory results to assess the biogenic
component, precluding study of cellular responses to geochemical
gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators at the Bigelow
Laboratory for Ocean Sciences and the University of Maine will measure TEs in
plankton cells representing major functional groups and in bulk particulate
matter along the US GEOTRACES South Pacific Zonal Transect from Peru to Tahiti
in 2013. U.S.GEOTRACES is the US component of the international GEOTRACES
program which was initiated to advance our knowledge of the concentrations,
physical and chemical speciation, and spatial distributions of TEs in the ocean.
The Pacific transect will run from a highly productive eastern boundary
upwelling system with an intense oxygen minimum zone to the southeast Pacific
gyre, one of the world's most oligotrophic regimes. Specifically, the
investigators expect to accomplish the following objectives: (1) Measure
cellular quotas of P, Si, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn in major functional groups
of phytoplankton across horizontal productivity gradients in the eastern
tropical South Pacific Ocean; (2) Measure cellular quotas of P, Si, Mn, Fe, Co,
Ni, Cu and Zn in phytoplankton and bacteria across vertical redox gradients in
the OMZ of the eastern tropical South Pacific Ocean; ( 3) Measure total and
labile concentrations of Al, Ti, P, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, V and Mo in bulk
particulate material collected from the upper 500 m with GO-Flo bottles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts and environmental
relevance of this research will be communicated to educators and the general
public through a dedicated webinar series to be organized in coordination with
COSEE-Ocean Systems. This series will involve 5 webinars delivered sequentially
and covering the science results produced by this project, as well as results
and synthesis from four other GEOTRACES projects from the South Pacific cruise.
These seminars will describe the broader goals and significance of the
international GEOTRACES program, promoting this global geochemical program to
educators and citizens, as well as synthesizing findings on various aspects of
the project (dissolved, particulate, and biogenic trace metals; metal binding
ligands; natural radionuclide tracers). Information from GEOTRACES will also be
introduced to undergraduate students through Bigelow's REU program and through
an undergraduate course being taught to students at nearby Colby College.