* 1232551
* Student Travel for Magnetism Summer School. To be held in Chennai, India, May 22-28, 2012.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Albrecht Jander, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2013
* USD 16,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are requested to provide travel
support for U.S. graduates students to attend&lt;br/&gt;the 2012 IEEE Magnetics
Society Summer School in Chennai, India. The Magnetism&lt;br/&gt;Summer School
is the IEEE Magnetics Society?s main outreach effort to
promote&lt;br/&gt;education in the field of magnetism and attract more young
scientists to choose a research&lt;br/&gt;career in magnetism and related areas.
The one-week Magnetism Summer School is&lt;br/&gt;designed for graduate students
studying magnetism, will consist of lectures by&lt;br/&gt;international experts
and will include poster presentations by participating
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. The program will cover fundamentals and advanced
topics in magnetism. The&lt;br/&gt;summer school is a unique opportunity for
young scientists to meet leaders in their field&lt;br/&gt;in a relaxed and
collegial atmosphere and to begin establishing a network of colleagues
in&lt;br/&gt;the international research community. The funds requested from NSF
will provide&lt;br/&gt;additional opportunities for U.S. graduate students to
attend the Summer School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
Summer School provides a forum for exchange of information in the field
of&lt;br/&gt;magnetics research. In addition to formal lectures, each
participating student is required&lt;br/&gt;to present a poster about their
current research. These topics are discussed amongst the&lt;br/&gt;students and
lecturers during poster sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the Summer School lies in the education
of young&lt;br/&gt;scientists and researchers in a fast-moving and economically
important field. Participants&lt;br/&gt;will learn both fundamental as well as
advanced topics through lectures delivered by&lt;br/&gt;internationally-renowned
experts. In addition, there is a degree of cultural
education,&lt;br/&gt;teaching young scientists to interact with and respect
their colleagues from other&lt;br/&gt;countries. The organizers of the Summer
School particularly encourage women and&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities to
apply. The program committee also strives for diversity in &lt;br/&gt;the
lecturers selected for the summer school to provide role models for female and
minority students.