* 1232878
* Collaborative Research: Novel Atomistic-Continuum Simulation of Sequential Grain Boundary-Dislocation Slip Transfer Reactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David McDowell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 246,217.00

The research objective of this award is to advance a coupled atomistic-continuum
simulation method to explore slip transfer at grain boundaries. Lack of such a
method is a current obstacle to progress towards developing constitutive
relations that reflect the structure and behavior of grain boundaries, for
example in polycrystal plasticity. The problem is complicated by the need to
account for long range interactions of dislocation fields while also considering
the atomic-level structural detail of the interface. This research will explore
processes of sequential dislocation reactions with bicrystal interfaces by
maintaining full atomistic resolution of the interface reactions and
successively coarse graining the field description away from the interfaces at
distances that are normally inaccessible to fully resolved molecular dynamics.
Such a capability will enable parametric studies of dislocation-grain boundary
slip transfer reactions over the full range of grain boundary degrees of
freedom, including tilt and twist boundaries, as well as asymmetric boundaries
that often have faceted structure and can give rise to profuse dislocation
nucleation. Nanotwinned structures with a wide range of twin spacing will also
be considered. This work will use state-of-the-art embedded atom method
potentials which have proven quite accurate for fcc metals such as Cu in
modeling various aspects of dislocation nucleation, formation of stacking
faults, and dislocation interactions

This research will advance a computational method that couples fully atomistic
descriptions of nanoscale metallic behavior to mesoscale and macroscale
constitutive behavior. It will permit study of the complex interactions that
occur between dislocations and grain boundaries in polycrystalline metals which
will lead to physics-based predictive constitutive models for metals. This
research will advance the multiscale modeling of metals and lead to improved
simulation and ultimately design of materials. Results of the research will be
incorporated into graduate courses at both institutions.