* 1232353
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  A Community Archaeology of Ancient Maya Household Identity in the Toledo district of southern Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Claire Novotny, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 24,973.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Patricia A. McAnany, Claire Novotny will examine
ancient Maya household architecture and associated artifacts in order to
evaluate social, political, and economic strategies of identity among rural Maya
households in the Toledo district of southern Belize. The geographical location
of the southern Belize region within the Maya area between major sites combined
with the relatively rapid rise of political centers during the Late Classic
period (AD 570 - 850) brings questions of identity and affiliation to the fore:
what was the nature of interaction between hinterland households and political
centers? Did interactions work to construct a regional identity or reinforce a
local one? Excavations of five rural households located on Aguacate community
land present a unique opportunity to understand the nature of social complexity
in rural populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stemming from rich archaeological
data on rural complexity collected from across the globe, this dissertation aims
to expand anthropological knowledge of the negotiations that comprise a social
universe. In southern Belize, the prevailing assumption has been that the
political centers of Lubaantun, Uxbenk치, Pusilh치, and Nim Li Punit were the
organizing forces behind regional political, social, and economic processes.
Previous archaeological research has focused on these centers, while little is
known about the role of rural households. Excavation data drawn from Late
Classic dwellings located midway between Pusilh치 and Uxbenk치 will include
architecture, ceramic vessels, stone tools, specially crafted artifacts, and
soil chemistry signatures. Higher frequencies of materials produced or acquired
regionally could suggest that a regional identity became more meaningful to a
household. By comparing frequencies of regional imports across multiple
households, Ms. Novotny will be able to evaluate whether or not this kind of
social change occurred within the study area and whether it was prevalent or
restricted in distribution. Additionally, soil analysis can provide insight into
daily household activities and how they may have contributed to social life and
identity in southern Belize. All together, the archaeological residues selected
for analysis will inform daily practices performed by ancient farming
households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study include
international cooperation between American researchers and indigenous peoples,
and the engagement of local communities with the process of archaeological
research. A field school conducted with students from Tumul K'in Center of
Learning will promote the creation of historical knowledge by Maya people.
During the field season data will be disseminated to Aguacate villagers through
community meetings and presentations of student projects; a weekly radio
broadcast from Tumul K'in will update surrounding Maya villages on research
progress. Research reports will be made available to Aguacate village and Tumul
K'in in hard copy as well as on a data CD. Volunteers from the United States
will also receive training in archaeological methods and community archaeology.
Results of the research will be presented at international (Belize
Archaeological Symposium) and national (Society for American Archaeology,
American Anthropological Association) academic meetings and published as a
monograph, enhancing international understanding of Maya household archaeology
and community-based archaeology methodologies in Mesoamerica.