* 1232139
* GSE/RES: Enhancing the Rigor of Evidence on Gendered Differences in STEM Persistence:  Female and Male College Students' Subjective Experiences in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Barbara Schneider, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2015
* USD 523,333.00

This research project will analyze data from the Educational Longitudinal Study
and the Beginning Postsecondary Study by using hierarchical linear modeling and
propensity score matching methods to investigate: (a) how gendered differences
in subjective orientations change over time in relation to completion of
relevant gateway courses in secondary and postsecondary school, and (b) how
these orientations influence persistence in computer science and engineering
fields. The researchers will also be utilizing smart-phone technology to conduct
experience sampling methods and obtain data on subjective experiences associated
with enrollment in gateway computer science and engineering courses from first-
year undergraduate students. They will analyze this data in combination with
retrospective and administrative data obtained from the same student population
to explore relationships with (a) students? initially selected preference for a
major prior to matriculation, and (b) the majors they declare at the end of
their second year of postsecondary study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The under-
representation of females in many STEM fields, particularly computer science and
engineering, continues to be a striking labor force statistic. This study is
designed to improve our understanding of the factors influencing females choices
to stay on or move off of carer trajectories in computer science and
engineering. Such information is vital to devising programs and policies to keep
females, in particular, on track to complete the undergraduate programs of study
necessary to pursue careers in computer science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;