* 1232380
* Conference:   Workshop for Emerging Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Scientists, Gallaudet University, Washington, DC
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Caroline Solomon, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 04/30/2013
* USD 18,370.00

The two-day workshop for emerging deaf and hard-of-hearing scientists at
Gallaudet University will bring together deaf and hard-of-hearing people at all
stages of the science, technology, engineering, and technology (STEM) pipeline.
The workshop will utilize vertical mentoring to address common challenges and
barriers involved with pursuing careers in STEM for this severely
underrepresented group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This will be
the first time that deaf and hard-of-hearing people who are pursuing or have
obtained degrees in STEM will have the opportunity to become part of a mentoring
network. Previous efforts have included all disability groups, but have never
focused solely on deaf and hard-of hearing population. The workshop will be
structured based on two successful models in the past for other under-
represented groups: (1) vertical mentoring for women in STEM (Packard 2003,
Packard &amp; Nguyen 2003) (2) vertical mentoring workshop for the Blind in STEM
(http://www.cs.washington.edu/vmwb/) to encourage more deaf and hard-of-hearing
people to pursue scientific endeavors. Data collected before and during the
workshop will result in a white paper that will contain best practices on how to
include deaf and hard-of-hearing people in future NSF-funded
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The key broader impact is
increasing the capacity of deaf and hard of hearing students to succeed in STEM
fields. The number of deaf and hard-of hearing people in STEM fields is very
small (0.13-0.19%) compared to the general population (11-15.3%; NSF 1996, 2004,
2009, 2011). One of the major barriers for deaf and hard-of-hearing people in
STEM is communication with peers. The large communication diversity (e.g. sign
language, captioning, and cued speech) within the deaf and hard-of-hearing
population needs to be considered. Participants that use different modes of
communication will be strongly encouraged to attend, and the appropriate service
providers will be available, and information about the workshop will be
disseminated through major advocacy organizations serving each type of
communication mode.