* 1232683
* Collaborative Research: Mechanical Material Removal Processes for Biological Tissue in Cardiovascular Procedures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Albert Shih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,300.00

The objective of this award is to develop experimentally validated physics-based
models of the mechanical material removal processes in biological tissue
machining. The approach is to characterize unique aspects of biological tissue
machining in four related research activities. 1) Describe the transition from
material deformation and plowing to material removal. The specific objective is
to develop machining test systems and material removal models for the new
classes of work materials being studied. 2) Develop and validate machining force
and debris size models. The specific objective is to predict machined surface
and subsurface damage that is directly related to medical treatment success. 3)
Create artery deformation models that are directly linked to material removal
models. The specific goal is to infer short- and long-term effects in the
project application process of atherectomy, the removal of plaque from blood
vessels. 4) Characterize the dynamic behaviour and effects of long, flexible
tool drive systems on tool-work interactions. The specific objective is to
provide realistic medical procedure inputs to machining process and work damage
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, fundamental machining studies and
research results will be widely useful in many tissue machining processes. The
benefits of this research will be improved performance of commonly used medical
devices, new machining test systems, and new tissue machining models that
include work material deformation models directly related to possible machining
damage and surgical treatment success. The project will extend the integrated
activity of manufacturing engineering, biomedical engineering and health care by
immediately bringing together practicing professionals in engineering, medicine
and medical device design who have committed to actively participate in the
research. These individuals will bring with them graduate and undergraduate
students and working technicians from these fields.