* 1232184
* Novel Device Concepts for High Operating Temperature  Split-Off Quantum Dot  Infra red Photodetectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Unil A. Perera, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 371,477.00

The objective of this research is to study novel device concepts in split-off
quantum dots and to develop high performance photodetectors responding up to the
terahertz range. The unique integration of split-off transitions allows genuine
bound-to-bound transitions in quantum dots, multi-color operation and tailoring
spectral response, while having the advantage of three-spatial confinement for
carriers. The approaches are to investigate photovoltaic structures containing
quantum dots and dots in wells. The ultimate goal is to develop split-off
quantum dot photodetectors operating at elevated temperatures with high
detectivity and sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to
develop a novel technology for optoelectronic devices. The proposed novel
concept of split-off quantum dots addresses limitations presently associated
with regular quantum dot photodetectors, yielding higher performance. Covering
the entire range from visible to infrared, split-off quantum dots can also be an
ideal photovoltaic material for fully absorbing solar energy reaching the Earth.
Hence, this project should advance the optoelectronic device field and innovate
the renewable energy arena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the
new device concepts for quantum dot semiconductor research which could not only
drastically improve detector technology but also revolutionize the solar energy
conversion research. The education and outreach efforts will provide highly
competent post-doctoral, graduate, undergraduate students and K-12 teachers
(P-16) supported by NSF REU/RET supplements in both fundamental research and the
state-of-the-art technological area. Highly sensitive detectors operating at
high temperatures will have a vast range of applications in military/defense,
industrial, and civilian endeavors, creating major potential economic
advantages.