* 1232988
* A Predictive Open-Source Computer Model for Inhaled Nanoparticle Transport and Deposition in Subject-specific Upper Airways
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Clement Kleinstreuer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 324,012.00

CBET - 1232988 Understanding the transport mechanisms of inhaled natural and
man-made nanoparticles and accurately predicting the deposition in realistic
human airways are of great interest. Experimentally validated computer
simulation results are needed to assess health effects of inhaled toxic
nanoparticles appearing in the environment and now more frequently in the
workplace, as well as the fate of administered nanodrugs for therapeutic
purposes. The overall goal of this proposal is to develop a validated,
comprehensive, public-access computer simulation model of inhaled air-particle
dynamics and deposition/clearance for representative, subject-specific cases.
The new computer model will produce realistic and accurate results to gain new
physical insight and provide an array of useful applications. Examples include:
health-care providers focusing on drug-aerosol targeting of lung tumors, federal
regulators assessing toxic nanoparticle deposition from man-made sources, and
scientists interested in nanoparticle clearance aspects. The research plan calls
for a combined computational and experimental approach to understand
interrelated fluid-particle interaction mechanisms and to develop a predictive
computer simulation model. Building on two decades of experience in lung-aerosol
dynamics modeling and simulation by the PI and his Research Team, the novel
submodels for two-way coupled fluid-structure interactions, non-spherical
particle dynamics and air-mucus transport and particle clearance mechanism will
be developed in the MAE Department at NC State University. The experimental
work, focusing on nanomaterial depositions in the same subject-specific airway
models, will be carried out at Mercer University.The anticipated results: (i)
are related to technology innovation (i.e., applied to virtual testing of a
patented smart inhaler system for optimal drug-aerosol delivery); (ii) have
multiple applications (see broader impacts listed); and (iii) interface
engineering and life sciences (e.g., health-care and/or environmental
regulations). Intellectual Merit: The proposed study will provide new physical
insights, a better understanding and novel mathematical and computer models on
air-mucus flow and particle transport, deposition and clearance of real-world
nanoparticles (especially ellipsoids, carbon nanotubes, and nanofibers) in
realistic, subject-specific human airways under realistic, cyclic breathing
conditions with fluid-structure interactions. Open-access software and codes
will be developed to predict both local and regional nanoparticle
deposition/clearance in subject-specific human airways for environmental
specialists, toxicologists, health-care providers, basically free-of-charge.
Broader Impacts: The developed codes and software are free and open to the
public. They will be easily available and updated via a specific website along
with manuals and simulation examples. Modern medical and environmental problems
related to nanoparticle inhalation could be readily solved, for example,(a)
primarily reliable particle-deposition data to analyze the impact of inhaled
toxic nanoparticles or new drugs for pharmacokinetics modeling (b) also, virtual
testing of the new methodology for controlled drug-aerosol inhalation using a
patented smart inhaler system and (c) evaluating the effect of local airway
obstruction, e.g., due to severe asthma, COPD, OSAS, or CF on air-particle flow.
The proposed research activity also has other broader impacts on
research/education via: (i) promoting the teaching and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students; (ii) involvement of students from
underrepresented groups; (iii) establishing research and education
collaborations with students and faculty from an undergraduate institution to
expand their masters-level course offerings and to potentially create a PhD-
level engineering program.