* 1232856
* Collaborative Research: Observation and Prediction of Ocean Acidification in the Western Arctic Ocean - Impacts of Physical and Biogeochemical Processes on Carbonate Mineral States
* GEO,OPP
* 02/02/2012,12/31/2015
* Laurie Juranek, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 250,651.00

The investigators will assess ocean acidification in the western Arctic Ocean,
using ship time that is currently scheduled for annual mooring turnarounds in
the Beaufort Sea. On these cruises, in September of 2011-2013, the investigators
will collect samples for measurement of carbonate system parameters, inorganic
nutrients, dissolved oxygen, oxygen isotopes, and oxygen/argon ratios, as well
as continuous underway measurements of dissolved oxygen, oxygen/argon ratios,
and pCO2. These data will be used to gain insights and perspectives into the
extent of ocean acidification in the western Arctic Ocean; the key physical,
chemical, and biological processes influencing the saturation states of
aragonite and calcite; and potential impacts to pelagic and benthic communities.
Water column observations will be synthesized with data from the associated NSF
AON (Arctic Observing Network)-funded mooring, including temperature, salinity,
nitrate, oxygen, pCO2, and pH, as well as carbon and hydrographic data collected
on other cruises in the region. During each field season the PI will travel to
several native villages to discuss the potential impacts of ocean acidification
at town meetings and in classrooms. The work will contribute to carbon cycle
studies coordinated under a variety of science plans and implementation
structures that aim to establish accurate estimates of carbon budgets and fluxes
and the underlying mechanisms that regulate them. A postdoctoral scientist will
participate directly in this work, and results will be incorporated in one
undergraduate level course and two graduate level courses taught by the lead
investigator.