* 1232520
* GOALI: Investigation of Galvanic Reaction Barriers in High Temperature High Voltage Conductors
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Maciej Kumosa, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 357,338.00

This GOALI project will examine the combined effect of mechanical, electrical
and environmental fields on the structural integrity of glass/polymer composite
sheaths as barriers against galvanic reactions in the next generation high
voltage polymer based composite conductors. Through this project, our
understanding of the combined effects of ozone, pollution, high temperature,
mechanical and electrical loads, and acids/moisture on the composites will be
significantly improved leading to major advances in high voltage engineering.
This research will have very strong interdisciplinary experimental and numerical
components. The composites will be subjected to a variety of extreme high
voltage/temperature in-service stresses and their failure characteristics will
be determined. Various types of transport mechanisms in the composites will be
numerically simulated though multiscale modeling to understand the galvanic
reaction processes in the composites and the conductors. We will optimize the
design of the composites using nanotechnology maximizing their effectiveness as
galvanic reaction barriers for future designs of the conductors. The project
will be done in very close collaborations with several US utilities and
manufactures. Due to the rapidly increasing demand for electric power and the
development of new sources of energy, there is an urgent need in this country to
be able to transport more electric power, more efficiently, using the existing
rights-of-way. However, the current designs of high voltage conductors based on
steel (for strength) and aluminum (for conduction) strands used in regional
grids exhibit several limitations. Therefore, new conductors, with significantly
better resistance to in-service conditions are being designed. One of them is
the Polymer Core Composite Conductor (PCCC). PCCCs are based on a unidirectional
polymer matrix composite core with carbon and glass fibers for strength and
stiffness, and aluminum strands for conduction. They can transport three times
more power than the current designs based on steel and aluminum. And these
conductors will be studied in this research in order to improve their design or
to replace them with entirely new designs. The project will enhance the
reputation of American high voltage manufacturing around the world and will also
improve the level of confidence among the potential users of PCC conductors.