* 1232396
* R/V Oceanus Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Frederick Jones, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2018
* USD 17,017,604.00

Oregon State University (OSU) Ship Operations is awarded funding for operation
of R/V Oceanus in 2012 to support scientific research funded by the National
Science Foundation. The proposed work aboard Oceanus will provide seven
different principal investigators with access to the sea on 17 different legs.
Eighty-four percent (84%) of the 158 operating days scheduled on Oceanus will
support NSF programs; other funding sources (Navy and NOAA) support the
remainder of the year's schedule. R/V Oceanus begins 2012 with a 26-day transit
from Woods Hole, Massachusetts to Newport, Oregon. Upon arrival, OSU will assume
operational control of the vessel from WHOI. After a scheduled inspection in
Mid-March, Oceanus will conduct her first cruise for OSU; Levine's multiyear
project Science and Technology Center for Coastal Margin Observation and
Prediction (C-MOP). Levine will conduct repeat cruises in the fall. Reimers
follows with Continental Shelf Benthic Oxygen project, which will be augmented
with a few days in order to add an ancillary project for McManus' Nd Isotope
work. These two projects will reoccur in September. The remainder of the field
season will largely be in support of Cascadia Fault monitoring work. Toomey,
Carbotte, Bibee, and Carton will deploy and recover a large number of Ocean
Bottom Seismometers over the course of summer and fall.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a five-year cooperative agreement, and funding for
each year of the agreement will be negotiated and is dependent on the number of
days at sea in support of NSF-funded research. R/V Oceanus is owned by the
National Science Foundation and operates as a UNOLS ship, adhers to the UNOLS
safety standards, and NSF inspections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
and technical merit of the research supported by Oceanus is addressed in the
individual science proposals. In 2011 Wecoma carried out research funded
primarily by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the
National Science Foundation (NSF) including through the Ocean Observation
Initiative (OOI). Principal Investigators (PIs) were primarily from OSU and NOAA
as well as others from the University of Oregon and WHOI. In 2012 Oceanus will
primarily support NSF funded projects with PIs from OSU and other institutions
including U of O and WHOI, and WHOI, and NOAA work by NOAA PI Dr. Feely. Oceanus
will also support two Navy funded projects. The supported research is expected
to include scientists and graduate students from a variety of academic
institutions as well as federal agencies. Work conducted by Oceanus will include
biologic, chemical, physical and geological oceanographic investigations along
with atmospheric science studies. It is expected that the research supported
will enhance understanding of various oceanic and atmospheric processes,
contribute to ecologic knowledge in the study areas and provide opportunities
for graduate students in atmospheric and oceanic science to gain research
experience at sea. Much of the work in 2012 will focus on expanding the body of
knowledge of the Cascadia Fault. This unstable fault is similar to the boundary
thrust fault near Japan that lead to the devastating earthquake and subsequent
tsunamis in the Spring of 2011. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSU also provides
opportunities for those not normally involved in oceanographic research to
occasionally participate in at-sea operations. This has included various
undergraduate students from several academic institutions, Teachers at Sea and v
OSUs Hatfield Marine Science Centers (HMSC) volunteer group. In 2011, Oceanus
hosted the first of its kind "At Sea PI Training Cruise" designed to prepare the
next generation of at sea scientists operationally and administratively.
&lt;br/&gt;Other public tours were provided to The West Coast Marine Librarians,
Newport Elementary School (95 children), Trinity Lutheran High School in Bend
Or, Oregon State University undergraduates, the Boy Scouts of America (three
occasions), the Upward Bound Group (three chapters on three occasions), the
GSOC, Waldport Or Elementary School, the Governor of the State of Oregon, Top
Officials from the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Congressional
Staffers, and the Newport Catholic School.