* 1232925
* Collaborative Research:  Motivated Underreporting
* SBE,SES
* 12/30/2011,09/30/2013
* Roger Tourangeau, Westat Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2013
* USD 273,268.00

This research examines three forms of survey measurement error and investigates
the relations among them. The first form of measurement error affects questions
designed to identify members of the population eligible for a given survey (for
example, persons over 65 years old). Several studies find that members of the
eligible population are underreported in screening interviews. Although no
survey perfectly covers its target population, surveys aimed at specific
subpopulations seem especially prone to undercover that particular population.
The second form of measurement error involves filter questions. These are
questions that, depending on how they are answered, either lead to additional
follow-up questions or to the respondent's skipping out of the follow-up items.
Many survey researchers believe that respondents are likely to give false
answers to the filter questions in order to avoid the follow-up questions. As a
result, many surveys ask the filter questions at the beginning of the
questionnaire and administer the follow-up questions later on rather than
interleaving the filter and follow-up questions. The final form of measurement
error involves conditioning, or time-in-sample, effects. Over the last forty
years, many survey researchers have suggested that respondents in ongoing panel
surveys report fewer relevant events across waves of the panel survey and across
time periods in a diary survey.

What the three phenomena appear to have in common is underreporting motivated by
the desire to reduce the effort needed to complete the questionnaire. But it is
not clear whether these forms of error result from something the interviewers
do, something the respondents do, or both. The proposed studies use both new
experiments and analyze existing data to try to pinpoint the locus of these
effects (interviewers versus respondents) and to explore the effectiveness of
different methods for reducing these errors. The project will contribute to the
improvement of various national statistics that are derived from survey items
affected by these problems. The project also will further the training of
graduate students and contribute to the professional training of survey
researchers at both institutions. The research is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey and
statistical methodology.