* 1232222
* 1st International Workshop on Flame Chemistry - in  Warsaw of Poland
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Yiguang Ju, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing concerns of energy security and
climate change, development of alternative fuels and advanced engine
technologies using high pressure, low temperature, thermal and compositional
stratified flow, homogeneous charge compression ignition, and non-equilibrium
plasma discharge combustion at near flammability limit conditions provide
potential approaches to increasing energy efficiency and reducing air pollutant
emissions. The recent nuclear accident in Japan further emphasizes that
combustion will remain a major energy source for even longer than previously
forecast. New combustion technologies at extreme conditions often lead to
increased flame instability and incomplete combustion. It is also of great
importance to advance fundamental understanding of ignition and flame chemistry
at extreme conditions to achieve accurate control of ignition timing, heat
release rate, flame instability as well as emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
better understand this subject, NSF will support the 1st International Workshop
on Flame Chemistry from July 28 to 29, 2012 in Warsaw of Poland before the 34th
International Symposium. The goal of this workshop is to assemble 60 experts and
young researchers in combustion chemistry, flames, modeling, and diagnostics to
identify the pathways for the development of predictive high pressure flame
chemistry and collaborative research. The workshop plans to have 15 to
40-minutes invited lectures on high pressure chemistry, kinetic mechanism,
combustion diagnostics, flame chemistry, and laminar and turbulent transport;
young researchers poster presentations; and separate panel discussions on key
challenges, opportunities, and international collaborations. The workshop will
review the recent progresses in flame chemistry and dynamics, to identify the
pathways for the development of predictive high-pressure flame chemistry in
turbulent flows, and to establish an international collaborative research
relationship. In addition it will provide opportunities for young researchers to
interact with experts. The workshop addresses the key problems in combustion
with new fuels, strong turbulence, and high pressure. It is the first workshop
of this kind. Several challenges in high pressure flame chemistry will be
addressed and this workshop will make focused recommendations of the grand
challenge topics in flame chemistry to combustion research community. It will
also formulate collaborative relationships in research and education. This
workshop is expected to activate international collaboration in high pressure
flame chemistry, accelerate the knowledge transfer between researchers, and
provide a good opportunity to nurse the next generation leaders in combustion.
Detailed information will be available on the following website:
&lt;br/&gt;http://engine.princeton.edu/1st-flamechemistry-
workshop/The_1st_Flame_Chemistry_Workshop-draft.pdf