* 1232458
* Collaborative Research: Electromagnetic Pulse Cutting of Metallic Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Indranath Dutta, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2016
* USD 176,500.00

The objective of this award is to research novel electromagnetic cutting
techniques for freeformed fabrication of shaped parts from thin metallic sheet
and plates with and without mechanical assistance. The processes, termed
Electromagnetic Pulse Induced Cutting and Non-Contact Magnetic Cutting, are
based on the controlled advance of a fine crack under an electromagnetic and in
one case combined mechanical loading. Conceptually, the processes are akin to a
microsized, electromagnetic jigsaw with a kerf measured in microns. The approach
is (a) to develop a theoretical basis for fracture mechanics under combined
mechanical and electromagnetic forces through a combination of modeling and
experiment, (b) to experimentally optimize the conditions for controlled
electromagnetically driven crack extension, with and without simultaneous
mechanical loading and active sample cooling, and (c) to develop experimental
testbeds for demonstrating electromechanical driven freeform metal cutting.

If successful, the benefits of this research will include increased
understanding of the nature of the electromechanical cutting processes
culminating in creation of laboratory demonstration testbeds and leading
eventually to technology transfer and commercialization; education of
undergraduate and graduate students; and dissemination of results. The results
of the proposed research will impact domestic competition by providing novel
manufacturing processes for commercialization. Several undergraduate students
will assist in the research funded by associated Research Experience for
Undergraduates grants at both universities. Under-represented minority
undergraduates will be hired who show strong potential for graduate pursuits.
Results of the project will be broadly disseminated to enhance specific and
technological understanding. This will be done both through faculty and student
participation at meetings of learned societies and the National Science
Foundation Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Grantees
Conferences.