* 1232429
* GSE/RES- Patching the STEM Pipeline between College and Work: Investigating Gender Issues in Embeddedness
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Debra Major, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2017
* USD 574,667.00

This project applies Embeddedness Theory to understand the differential
experiences of men and women pursuing STEM majors in college as well their
experiences in transitioning from college to the workforce. The concept of
embeddedness is applied to describe the extent to which one is rooted in her or
his STEM major or occupation. Embeddedness is comprised of three factors: Fit
(i.e., the extent to which one sees her or his capabilities as matching the
demands of the particular STEM major), links (i.e., social ties that a student
has within the major), and sacrifice (i.e., the extent to which leaving the STEM
major is perceived as coming at a cost). Human capital (i.e., acquiring
knowledge and skills) and social capital (i.e., developing interpersonal
relationships and networking) investments are examined as key predictors of STEM
major embeddedness and occupational embeddedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research contributes to that literature by extending embeddedness theory's
application to the educational experience prior to workforce entry and by
demonstrating linkages between college and workforce embeddedness experiences.
The project contributes to the literature on gender differences in STEM by
taking a broad contextual view of the experiences that may differentially anchor
men and women to STEM majors and occupations. In particular, Embeddedness Theory
offers explanations beyond abilities and attitudes, which seem inadequate in
explaining women's underrepresentation STEM. The combination of multiple methods
(qualitative focus groups and individual interviews; quantitative longitudinal
surveys) allows for an examination of STEM experiences in the college context as
they are occurring, and also incorporates reflection on those experiences in
light of the workforce transition. The sample used for this research includes
multiple STEM disciplines and closely mirrors national populations of STEM
majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides national benefit by linking
college level experiences in STEM to early career experiences in the STEM
workforce. Embeddedness theory provides a meaningful framework for understanding
why some stay and others leave the STEM pipeline. Research findings will
identify gender differences in building social and human capital and
transporting capital to embed individuals in their careers. In particular, this
research will address a gap in the "leaky pipeline" between college and work, an
under-researched area where many women are likely to leave STEM. This research
will help to identify levers for anchoring STEM individuals, especially women,
in their careers at both the university and workforce stages. Findings will
inform college curriculum development as well as organizational approaches to
retaining a gender diverse student body and workforce. Dissemination of research
findings will occur via the project website, national conference presentations,
and peer-reviewed journal publications.