* 1232704
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Study of Mineral-Fluid Fractionation of Non-Traditional Isotopes (Fe, Cu, Zn, S) with Implications for Seafloor Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2016
* William Seyfried, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2016
* USD 267,976.00

Many empirical studies of hydrothermal vent systems on the seafloor and an
increasing number of biogeochemical studies are being carried out to look at
various mineralogical and biological processes using unconventional stable
isotopes (i.e., those of heavy elements such as iron, zinc, copper, and sulfur).
To allow quantitative and predictive results of these empirical studies,
fractionation factors of these isotopes must be known. However, at present, no
experimental work to derive these coefficients and parameters have been carried
out. This research builds off a one-year proof-of-concept study to show that
fractionation occurs in these systems in a systematic way. The new project
examines the effects of temperature, fluid chemistry, and reaction rate on the
fractionation of non-traditional stable isotopes (Fe, Cu, Zn, S) between sulfide
minerals and fluids at elevated temperatures and pressures. The work will
include phase separation experiments to assess the role of fluid chemistry on
non-traditional stable isotope fractionation between vapor and brine. It will
use isotope tracers in equilibrium experiments to look at reaction progress and
to see how isotope systematics respond to reaction rates and mechanisms. Sulfur
isotope exchange for homogeneous and heterogeneous systems will also be tested
experimentally. Broader impacts of the work include building fundamental
infrastructure for science via the development of kinetic and fractionation
factors that are essential for the development of theoretical models for
predicting stabilities of minerals containing Fe, Cu, Zn, and S. Impacts also
include the engagement of graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-
art experimental studies of water-rock interaction and the involvement of an
early career PI from an institution in an EPSCOR State (Louisiana).