* 1232937
* Minimal Gels of Anisotropic Colloids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Solomon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 329,770.00

1232937&lt;br/&gt;PI: Solomon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
anisotropic colloids as a means to extend the limits of stability of colloidal
gels to ultra-low volume fractions. Colloids are submicron to micron scale
particles that pervade both the natural world and a broad range of consumer
products and advanced materials. Examples of anisotropic colloids include
colloidal ellipsoids, Janus particles, and particles that combine these
anisotropy dimensions. Recently, a revolution in the synthesis of colloids with
anisotropic shapes and interactions has introduced a new means to design
pathways for colloidal self-assembly. At the same time, there is a strong
scientific and engineering need to produce gels of colloids at very low volume
fractions, because such gels could stabilize a broad range of complex fluid
formulations with minimal material requirements. This aim is currently
accomplished by means of the gelation of spherical colloids with strong, short-
range pair potential interactions. This project will apply new developments in
anisotropic particle synthesis and assembly to extend the capabilities of
minimal gelation far below that currently possible with spherical particle gels.
These new methods will be applied to three research tasks. First, by extending
the colloidal building block from spherical to ellipsoidal shape, we will
discover the degree to which minimal gelation conditions can be extended to
ultra-low colloid volume fractions. Second, by adding patchy interactions and
Janus functionality to the ellipsoidal colloidal shape, we will explore the
scope to lock in disordered microstructure and elastic rheology at even lower
volume fractions. Third, we will subject these minimal gels to large, non-linear
deformations, and probe by in situ confocal microscopy and macroscopic rheology
the response and resilience of the anisotropic microstructure to imposed flow.
Unique elements of the technical approach include: (i) addition of Janus
functionality to the base ellipsoidal shape by new methods that add patchy
interactions at either the tips, or at the center, of the ellipsoidal colloids;
(ii) implementation of time-resolved two-color confocal microscopy combined with
quantitative image processing to yield the position and orientation of all
anisotropic colloids in the minimal gel microstructure; (iii) specific targeting
of the relationship between microstructure and rheology because of the critical
nature of this relationship for material design. In addition to these technical
aims, the project will achieve outcomes in graduate student education, as well
as K-12 outreach to groups of middle school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal particle suspensions such as studied in
this project are a unique form of matter because then can self-assemble into
equilibrium phases with useful mechanical and optical properties. A broad range
of advanced materials, consumer products and pharmaceutical formulations are
stabilized by the soft elastic rheology of colloidal suspensions when they are
transformed into gels. Because of their widespread use in these industries and
products, there is a very strong technological driver to generate solid-like
elasticity in complex fluids by adding the minimum possible number of colloidal
particles. This project will discover scientific principles governing such
minimal gelation of colloids. To accomplish this aim, it will make creative use
of recently synthesized particles with uniquely tailored interactions and shape
as well as new developed advanced imaging techniques in confocal microscopy. The
principles discovered will be immediately applicable to the design of gels with
elastic mechanical properties at vanishingly small volume fractions. This
project will yield new opportunities for societal gain through invention of
minimal colloidal structures that enhance the functional capabilities of
commercial complex fluids and soft matter. In addition, this project will
advance K-12 outreach by moving forward our recent efforts to use gels and shear
thickening fluids as a test bed for middle school girls to experience first-hand
the difference between the roles of science and of engineering in society.