* 1232724
* Extrapolating the Concept of Protein Corona for Understanding Nanoparticles at Large
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Samuel Cho, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2016
* USD 306,000.00

Abstract

#1232724 Ke, Pu-Chun

The scientific community has recently determined that the physical and
physicochemical properties of nanoparticles (NPs) deemed so desirable in terms
of application are often the direct causes for their complex behavior in the
environment. Upon entering the environment through air, water and soil, and
during the lifecycle of manufacturing, transport, use and disposal, NPs "at
large" undergo constant transformations from their interactions with light,
natural organic matter (NOM), microorganisms, and plants. The goal of this
proposal is therefore to elucidate the mutable behavior and fate of discharged
NPs by extrapolating the established concept of protein "corona", i.e., surface
modification of NPs by plasma proteins in the bloodstream, to "biocorona" in the
environment. The notion of biocorona encompasses NOM, proteins and carbohydrates
that are ubiquitous building blocks of nature. This proposed treatment is
validated in that a) biological systems are an essential and integral part of
ecosystems, and b) it is the transformed rather than the pristine material, that
must be evaluated for potential environmental impact.

Intellectual Merit: Technically, the introduction of biocorona exploits the
established experimental, theoretical and computational approaches developed for
the research areas of protein adsorption and folding while integrating the
elements pertaining to nanotechnology and environmental systems. The three
specific aims of this proposal are to elucidate a) NP-biocoronas in the natural
aqueous environment, b) NP-biocoronas in plants, and c) biotransformation and
degradation of NP-biocoronas by aquatic organisms. The parameter space to be
mapped includes solvent hardness and pH, NP size and solubility, protein
conformation and binding thermodynamics, plant cell translocation, transport and
phytotoxicity, ROS production, and photosynthesis. Results from these studies
will offer essential information on the stability and transformation of NPs in
the natural aqueous environment, facilitate our understanding of the uptake,
biodistribution and toxicity of NPs in plant species, and provide key indicators
for evaluating aquatic response to NP exposure.

Broader Impacts: Recent literature on the environmental health and safety of
nanotechnology (NanoEHS) has expanded exponentially. Much NanoEHS study is now
converging from phenomenological observation and mass testing toward amassing a
knowledge base of increasing efficiency and prediction power. To keep pace with
the vast variety and growing application of nanomaterials and to accommodate the
vast complexity of the environment, methodical approaches such as extrapolated
concept of biocorona are logical and cost-effective solutions to environmental
risk assessment of nanotechnology. In addition to promoting interdisciplinary
research and education at Clemson and Wake Forest University in the Carolinas,
funding of this proposal will catalyze fusion of the protein folding community
with the community of NanoEHS for cutting-edge innovation with potential
economical gains. Furthermore, this proposed frontier research will necessarily
foster exchanges between the PIs' labs and their collaborators at Delaware
State, Denison, Duke, and Rice Universities, and the National Institute of
Chemical Physics and Biophysics in Estonia.