* 1232522
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Fossil footprints and the dynamics of footprint formation: Implications for the evolution of human gait
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Brian Richmond, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2014
* USD 14,925.00

Bipedalism is a fundamental modern human behavior yet many questions about its
evolution in our extinct ancestors remain unanswered. Paleoanthropologists
studying fossilized skeletal anatomy have analyzed these data in many different
ways, only to arrive at conflicting conclusions regarding when and how
bipedalism evolved. New approaches are necessary to resolve this ongoing
debate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral student Kevin Hatala (The George
Washington University), under the supervision of Dr. Brian Richmond, will pursue
a novel approach that circumvents these problems by analyzing a new type of
'fossilized behavior' data, in the form of recently discovered fossil hominin
footprints. With a growing sample of fossil footprints from different times
throughout the Plio-Pleistocene, these data can be used to investigate the
evolution of human foot anatomy and bipedal locomotion. Before scientists can
take advantage of the information stored in these footprints, however, there is
need to determine how anatomy and gait are recorded in footprints. This study
will use experimental biomechanics to investigate the dynamic process of
footprint formation, and will apply this knowledge to the analysis of fossil
hominin footprints from Laetoli, Tanzania; Ileret, Kenya; and Engare Sero,
Tanzania. These analyses will directly test the hypothesis that modern humans'
anatomical and functional adaptations for bipedal locomotion were present in
hominins at 3.7, 1.5, and 0.12 million years ago,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through collaboration with the Rutgers
University/National Museums of Kenya Koobi Fora Field School, this project
involves extensive training of undergraduates from Kenya, South Africa, and the
US. Results will be presented to scientific audiences through publications and
conferences, and to the public through ongoing collaborations with the
Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History Human Origins Program. A new
archival system will be developed at the National Museums of Kenya, allowing
students and other researchers to access the original three-dimensional scans of
fossil footprints generated during this project.