* 1232601
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Architecture and Distributed Management for Reliable Mega-scale Smart Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Panganamala Kumar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 227,240.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Abstract (NSF 1035906): &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to establish a foundational framework for smart
grids that enables significant penetration of renewable DERs and facilitates
flexible deployments of plug-and-play applications, similar to the way users
connect to the Internet. The approach is to view the overall grid management as
an adaptive optimizer to iteratively solve a system-wide optimization problem,
where networked sensing, control and verification carry out distributed
computation tasks to achieve reliability at all levels, particularly component-
level, system-level, and application level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit. Under the common theme of reliability guarantees, distributed monitoring
and inference algorithms will be developed to perform fault diagnosis and
operate resiliently against all hazards. To attain high reliability, a
trustworthy middleware will be used to shield the grid system design from the
complexities of the underlying software world while providing services to grid
applications through message passing and transactions. Further, selective
load/generation control using Automatic Generation Control, based on multi-scale
state estimation for energy supply and demand, will be carried out to guarantee
that the load and generation in the system remain balanced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The envisioned architecture of
the smart grid is an outstanding example of the CPS technology. Built on this
critical application study, this collaborative effort will pursue a CPS
architecture that enables embedding intelligent computation, communication and
control mechanisms into physical systems with active and reconfigurable
components. Close collaborations between this team and major EMS and SCADA
vendors will pave the path for technology transfer via proof-of-concept
demonstrations.