* 1232076
* Optimizing Electric Power Distribution Network Operation with Demand Response, Solar Photovoltaics and Energy Storage to Mitigate the Impact of Growing Electric Vehicle Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Manisa Pipattanasomporn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2017
* USD 397,187.00

The objective of this research is to develop a set of algorithms to optimize the
operation of an electric power distribution network incorporating demand
response practices in combination with solar photovoltaics and energy storage
technologies to absorb the new crop of electric vehicles (EVs). The approach is
to apply the traditional knowledge of electric power distribution system
analysis, together with agent-based technologies and mathematical models of
various supply/demand devices, to address EV penetration challenges at the
distribution feeder level.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - The proposed
algorithms are expected to potentially modernize current practices of electric
power distribution network operation by contributing to load factor improvement
and allowing EVs to interface with the grid without adding new peaks. Additional
major contributions lie in the methodology to analyze and quantify demand
response potentials, as well as the approach to quantify values of solar
photovoltaics and storage to mitigate the impact of growing EV penetration.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - The proposed algorithms will contribute greatly to
a more efficient operation of the electric power distribution network. It will
allow electric distribution companies to manage end-use demand without
compromising customers? way of life, while avoiding/deferring extensive upgrades
of transformers and switchgears with the large-scale penetration of EVs.
Regulators and policy makers can make use of the research outcome to decide what
technology combination makes sense in mitigating growing EV penetration. The
research outcome will also contribute to the development of a demand response
laboratory at Virginia Tech, which will broaden student exposure beyond the
academic environment.