* 1232658
* Workshop Proposal for the International Conference on Sustainable Design, Engineering and Construction 2012 (ICSDEC 2012), Fort Worth, TX, November 7-9, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Wai Kiong Chong, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

1232658 (Chong). This workshop will be held at the 2nd International Conference
on Sustainable Design, Engineering and Construction in Fort Worth, TX, November
7-9, 2012. The purpose of the workshop is to establish the sciences and research
agenda around the theme of sustainability quantification for buildings and
infrastructure. The workshop will focus on identifying the knowledge and
research needs to support the development of the sciences behind sustainability
quantification for building and infrastructure design, engineering and
construction (S2QBIDEC), and to initiate a platform to support cross-
disciplinary sustainability knowledge exchange. The workshop will establish a
network of researchers in the area of sustainability quantification for building
and infrastructure design, engineering and construction. Academia and industry
participants at the workshop will be multi-disciplinary,coming from the fields
of social science, mathematics, engineering, urban planning, architecture, and
law. The workshop will bridge a cross-disciplinary knowledge gap and foster
closer working relationships between academics and industry professionals. The
funds from NSF will be used to support travel for younger faculty and students
to attend the S2QBIDEC Workshop (part of ICSDEC 2012 conference). Funded faculty
and students will be required to submit concept paper(s) to the conference,
which will be used to develop the workshop. The concept papers will also be
presented at the conference. A website will be established that publishes and
documents the workshop.