* 1232127
* Tracking Control of Nonlinear Systems Under Sensing, Computational, and Communication Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Nikhil Chopra, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 324,463.00

Objective: The research objective of this proposal is to investigate control
algorithms for resource constrained trajectory tracking in nonlinear systems.
Tracking controllers are widely utilized in several applications, for example in
robotic systems for manufacturing applications. However, the implementation of
these controllers is subjected to several practical constraints that limit
overall system performance. In applications, such as robotic systems for
industrial automation, these problems have prevented the realization of high
precision tracking, thereby stymieing the potential impact of robotic systems.
In contrast to time-triggered periodic sampling, in this proposal a Lyapunov
function based event-triggered approach is utilized for addressing resource
constrained tracking in nonlinear systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The research deals with design of tracking controllers for nonlinear
systems under sensor, computational, and communication constraints. The approach
is based on event-triggered controllers for trajectory tracking in nonlinear
systems and by co-designing event- triggers and quantizers for nonlinear
systems. The research will lead to the development of a hybrid control framework
where various resource constraints can be treated in a unified manner. The
proposed approach will provide a rigorous solution to the important problem of
tracking in robotic systems under sensor constraints, thereby significantly
impacting industrial automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
understanding of resource constrained trajectory tracking using an event-
triggered controller will provide a useful alternative to the classical time-
triggered control framework. The proposed research is anticipated to
significantly enhance the tracking performance of robotic systems under sensor
constraints and render them viable for several emerging manufacturing
applications. Graduate students will directly benefit from the proposed
research, and it is expected that several undergraduate and graduate students
will benefit from the enriched curricula and project work at University of
Maryland. High school students from underrepresented groups will be included in
the research effort through the University of Maryland?s ESTEEM program.