* 1232498
* Fouth International Conference on Biomolecular Engineering (ICBE) Jan 13-16, 2013 in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Miriam Cortes-Caminero, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2013
* USD 9,800.00

1232498 &lt;br/&gt;Cortes-Caminero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of
biomolecular engineering has rapidly emerged as an important area of research
with affects ranging from the environment to medicine; however, there are few
forums that bring together biologists, chemists, and engineers to discuss ways
in which their disciplines can collaborate to find novel solutions to
fundamental and applied problems that are limiting the development of new
technologies and therapies. In response to this need, we are organizing the
Fourth International Conference on Biomolecular Engineering (ICBE). The Fourth
ICBE will be held from Sunday, January 13 through Wednesday, January 16, 2013,
in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. It is anticipated ~200 attendees, a size that is
accommodated routinely by the meeting site. It is envisioned that roughly 30% of
the attendees will be graduate students and young investigators. As currently
defined, biomolecular engineering covers the multidisciplinary interface between
molecular biology and quantitative engineering science. Established research
subfields have come to include protein, metabolic, cell, and tissue engineering.
The growth of these areas has paralleled the rapid sequencing of genomes, large-
scale elucidation of protein structures, and expansion of computational
resources. These developments have expanded the availability of biological data
exponentially in ways that few foresaw. The key challenge confronting the
emerging field of systems biology is integrating all this information across the
varied levels of biological complexity, from molecules to pathways, from
pathways to cells, and from cells to tissues. The lines between these subfields
are increasingly blurred as they coalesce under the umbrella of molecular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics
covered by this conference share a common theme: they will require the
intersection of viewpoints, knowledge, and technologies from biology and
engineering, from both academia and industry. The time is ripe to bring leading
researchers with these complementary backgrounds together to aid in furthering
the field of biomolecular engineering, as well as to provide a strong
educational forum to train young researchers as future leaders in this emerging
field. There is an increasing need for biologists, engineers and biochemists to
collaborate and to train one another in complementary viewpoints and expertise.
The conference will be a unique coming together of researchers from academia and
industry, who are using quantitative approaches to advance the understanding and
application of biology at the molecular level. The conference will stimulate
integration of these approaches across the molecular, cellular, and higher
scales of biological complexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Aims of this conference are to provide a
venue:&lt;br/&gt;1. for scientific presentations from a diverse group of leading
biology, chemistry and engineering researchers who cover the breadth of
Biomolecular Engineering;&lt;br/&gt;2. for interactions between academic and
industry researchers, who bring different approaches and perspectives to the
field;&lt;br/&gt;3. for active participation by Ph.D. students and postdoctoral
researchers, who represent the future of biomolecular engineering;
and&lt;br/&gt;4. for bringing scientists and engineers together to provide an
atmosphere and venue to discuss their disciplines and approaches, and to
motivate new research into barriers limiting the development of biomolecular
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope, theme, and aims of the meeting
fall squarely within the mission of NSF, which has been increasingly committed
to integrating the engineering sciences with the life sciences, encouraging
research and development in multidisciplinary areas, educating the next
generation of young scientists and translational medicine, and increasing the
diversity of the workforce in science and engineering. This application, if
successful, will directly impact Aims 3 and 4, by providing support for graduate
student/postdoctoral associate participants, and by providing a forum for the
interactions between normally separated leading scientists and engineers to
stimulate new ideas that could benefit economic, health and environmental
related activities. Conference chairs will actively encourage participation of
women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities in all meeting
announcements and in the application process for student/postdoctoral awards.
Selection of awardees will include this as a criterion.