* 1232275
* Trilayer and Superlattice Half Metal Thin Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ching Yao Fong, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;There has been intense interest in silicon based
spintronic materials, particularly half-metals, for room temperature device
applications. In previous studies, half-metallicity has been predicted in thin
films of Mn-doped Si. However, the Mn atoms need to occupy the energetically
costly substitutional sites that require breaking of Si-Si bonds. This bond
breaking process has been the major obstacle for achieving this class of
materials that may take advantage of the mature Si technology. Very recently,
the PI has predicted half-metallicity in two Mn/Si/Mn trilayers with Mn
concentration at 0.5 monolayer and occupying the energetically favorable
interstitial sites, and a 0.5 monolayer hole doping in the spacer layer. These
exciting results suggest that half metallic Si-based trilayers and their related
superlattices are within reach. This project combines theoretical and
experimental efforts to design and realize such trilayer and superlattice
pseudo-spin valves of silicon-based half-metal in thin film forms. The search
for the ideal half-metallic trilayers and superlattices in ferromagnetic or
antiferromagnetic phases, and modifications of existing algorithms to treat
transport properties for proposed pseudo-spin valves will provide new knowledge
concerning magnetism and electronic properties in layered structures. Doping in
the Si spacer layer will be used to enhance the magnetic coupling between the
two Mn layers. New algorithms of magnetic susceptibility will allow accurate
determination of Curie temperature in any magnetic systems. Structural,
magnetic, and magneto-transport measurements will be performed in order to
characterize the fabricated structures and compare their properties with
theoretical predictions. The use of silicon-based materials would enable rapid
development of technological applications for spintronic devices. The synergy of
the theoretical and experimental efforts is expected to facilitate the optimal
design and fabrication of these novel devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed pseudo-spin valves are expected to exhibit new
and intriguing half-metallic properties, which are highly relevant for the
development of novel spintronic devices, such as sensors, switches, magnetic
memory, and logic devices. Furthermore, new understandings will be gained on:
(i) how can the hole doping between two layers of transition metal elements
cause the half metallicity and couple the magnetic moments between Mn layers in
the trilayers and superlattices? (ii) unique new knowledge about manipulating
growth parameters to obtain samples of Si-based trilayer and superlattice
pseudo-spin valves with predicted properties by the synthesis method. These
advancements will significantly facilitate future developments of spintronic
devices. The PIs will actively recruit underrepresented minority students to
work with them. They have collaborations with research groups in the US, as well
as in Sweden, Germany, China, Spain and Turkey. Graduate students will have the
opportunity to interact with leading researchers in the field nationally, as
well as internationally. The PIs also strive to integrate research with
educational and outreach activities to enhance the learning experience of
students from junior high school through graduate school.