* 1232602
* CPS: Small: Delays, Clocks, Timing and Reliability in Networked Control Systems: Theories, Protocols and Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Panganamala Kumar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 486,071.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to address
issues related to the platform revolution leading to a third generation of
networked control systems. The approach is to address four fundamental issues:
(i) How to provide delay guarantees over communication networks to support
networked control? (ii) How to synchronize clocks over networks so as to enable
consistent and timely control actions? (iii) What is an appropriate architecture
to support mechanisms for reliable yet flexible control system design? (iv) How
to provide cross-domains proofs of proper performance in both cyber and physical
domains?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Currently neither theory nor
networking protocols provide solutions for communication with delay constraints.
Coordination by time is fundamental to the next generation of event-cum-time-
driven systems that cyber-physical systems constitute. Managing delays and
timing in architecture is fundamental for cyberphysical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Process, aerospace, and automotive
industries rely critically on feedback control loops. Any platform revolution
will have major consequences. Enabling control over networks will give rise to
new large scale applications, e.g., the grand challenge of developing zero-
fatality highway systems, by networking cars traveling on a highway. This
research will train graduate students on this new technology of networked
control. The Convergence Lab (i) has employed minority undergraduate students,
including a Ron McNair Scholar, as well as other undergraduate and high school
researchers, (ii) hosts hundreds of high/middle/elementary school students
annually in Engineering Open House. The research results will be presented at
conferences and published in open literature.