* 1232164
* Hybrid Wireless Network-on-Chips
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 432,000.00

Intellectual Merit: On-chip radio-frequency (RF) wireless communication will be
investigated to propose a unified design framework for its applicability on
contemporary Multi-Processor System-On-Chips (MPSoCs) in 2D and 3D semiconductor
technologies. RF wireless communication will be established with multiple
antennas on the same die for a 2D integrated circuit (IC), or multiple antennas
and/or couplers on the same 3D IC package. In order to enhance these on-chip
wireless communication channels, novel approaches in reconfigurability of
wireless interconnects will be utilized, as well as exploring the applicability
of various wireless communication schemes of the proposed research is in
leveraging the diverse knowledge in wireless communications to improve the MPSoC
performance in computing and power efficiency. Performance profiling of proposed
communication circuits and channel quality will be examined on a network-on-chip
system to observe the direct impact of proposed novelties in MPSoC efficiency,
highlighting trade-offs in physical, wireless, channel and communication quality
and the MPSoC computing efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Proposed research will enable the next generation of low-power, increased
functionality ICs, as well as providing a high performance interconnect for
current and future&lt;br/&gt;(i.e. 3D IC, MPSoC) microelectronic devices.
Wireless interconnects are a vehicle to alleviate the power wall and
communication challenge in contemporary MPSoCs and enabling the further scaling
of complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor technology by replacing the power-
hungry wire-based interconnects. Impacts on education include those generated by
new course modules developed to integrate in undergraduate-level wireless
communications and very large scale integration (VLSI) design courses, a new
graduate course, student projects (independent and research experience for
undergraduates projects) and outreach to high-school students to promote
science, technology, engineering and mathematics disciplines. Investigators are
proactively participating in outreach activities to create synergy in VLSI and
wireless communities, including a recent newsletter article on wireless
interconnects to 3000+ recipients in the VLSI community.