* 1232447
* GSE/RES: Latinas in Computer Science and Engineering:  A Qualitative Study Examining Identity and Agency for Resilience and Persistence
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Patricia Nava, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2016
* USD 524,960.00

Intellectual Merit: This qualitative research investigation by an
interdisciplinary team of scholars at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP)
is exploring factors that influence Latinas' decision to major in and persist in
computer science and/or engineering as a course of study. The theoretical frame
of the study includes a socio-cultural theory of identity in which identity is
dynamically shaped and mediated by personal, socio-economic status, linguistic
and cultural knowledge, beliefs, and values. Researchers are interviewing
between 20-30 graduating seniors and 2nd year majors in depth about their
experiences as computer science and/or engineering majors. Data gathering also
includes participant observation protocols and focus groups. Data are analyzed
using discourse analysis and life charting as interconnected interpretative
practices for analysis. The expected outcome is new knowledge and theory
building that could eventually inform a wide audience of stakeholders of how to
support positive factors (and counter negative factors) that influence career
choice and persistence among Latinas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed work will contribute to the body of knowledge and build new theories
around Latinas' recruitment to, retention and completion of degrees in computer
science and engineering. Currently, there is a lack of research that focuses
solely on Latinas in these disciplines. The findings will lay the groundwork for
further studies that can advise stakeholders of ways to modify and extend the
educational and experiential approaches to broadening participation of Latinas
in engineering. Understanding the mitigating factors, such as socio-economic
class, language, cultural knowledge, beliefs, family dynamics and values, that
influence Latinas' education and career choices in computer science and
engineering could inform appropriate interventions in educational settings and
outreach programs. The investigators will disseminate the results and
recommendations through publications and presentations.