* 1232436
* Collaborative Research: Frequency Selective Structures for High Sensitivity/High Resolution Damage Identification via Impediographic Tomography
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Kon-Well Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

The main objective of this research is to advance the state of the art of
Structural Health Monitoring &lt;br/&gt;(SHM) systems by creating novel
Frequency Selective Structures (FSS) and an FSS-based &lt;br/&gt;Impediographic
monitoring technique. The proposed approach is based on the concept of
concurrent &lt;br/&gt;design where the SHM system is no longer retrofitted to an
existing structure but, instead, it is designed &lt;br/&gt;concurrently with the
structure itself. The system is achieved by implementing the idea of Frequency
&lt;br/&gt;Selective Structure. FSS exploit the concept of mistuned periodic
structures as a general framework to &lt;br/&gt;synthesize dynamically tailored
components with self-focusing vibration energy capabilities. The new
&lt;br/&gt;structural design approach will allow delivering targeted excitation
to the damaged areas even in complex, &lt;br/&gt;non homogeneous components. The
integration of FSS with the impediographic approach will then enable
&lt;br/&gt;advanced damage identification capabilities characterized by high
sensitivity, high resolution and a &lt;br/&gt;minimized transducer and sensory
network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will create a
transformative intellectual pathway in synthesizing novel and
&lt;br/&gt;realistic structural damage identification methods of the next
generation for complex mechanical systems. &lt;br/&gt;The technology will have
general applicability and could be implemented across the aerospace,
&lt;br/&gt;mechanical and civil engineering fields leading to the next
generation of transportation and infrastructure &lt;br/&gt;systems having
advanced health monitoring capabilities. The proposed technology will also
eliminate the &lt;br/&gt;barriers that have prevented, to date, the experimental
implementation and validation of the &lt;br/&gt;impediographic approach.
Experimental findings will allow an unprecedented insight into impediography
&lt;br/&gt;and provide critical inputs to foster its application to diverse
fields, such as medical imaging, where &lt;br/&gt;remote non-invasive monitoring
techniques are of primary importance. The results will be disseminated
&lt;br/&gt;through classroom teaching, undergraduate and graduate student
mentoring, community outreach, and &lt;br/&gt;collaboration with potential
users.