* 1232982
* Ocean's dark energy: Global inventory of chemoautotrophs in the aphotic realm
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Brandon Swan, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 900,000.00

The dark ocean, defined as the water column below the photic, contains one of
the largest microbial biomes on earth, composed of active and metabolically
diverse microorganisms. These biota impact local processes and the global carbon
cycling, e.g. by conducting a large fraction of marine organic matter
remineralization. An increasing body of evidence suggests that chemoautotrophy
in the dark ocean may also be significant, with potentially major implications
to the dark ocean's microbial ecology and biogeochemistry. However, it remains
largely unanswered what energy sources and metabolic pathways are used to
support this microbial-driven dark carbon fixation and which microbial taxonomic
groups possess chemoautotrophic metabolic pathways in the dark
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The overall goal of this project
is to obtain a comprehensive, global inventory of chemoautotrophs in the dark
ocean through large-scale microbial single cell genomics, supplemented with
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing. The investigators will address
the following general hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Multiple prokaryote
taxonomic groups found in the dark ocean contain chemoautotrophic
metabolic&lt;br/&gt;pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Both known and previously
unrecognized chemoautotrophy pathways are present in dark
ocean's&lt;br/&gt;prokaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Dark ocean
chemoautotrophs are broadly distributed around the globe, with biogeographic
patterns&lt;br/&gt;determined by the isopycnal movement of water masses, water
mass age, and the downward flux of&lt;br/&gt;organic
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Diverse chemoautotrophy pathways are expressed
in the dark ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of the project, single
amplified genomes (SAGs) will be generated from all major intermediate and deep
water masses around the globe, representing all major taxonomic groups of
bacteria and archaea that are known to be present in the dark ocean. These SAGs
will be analyzed for specific chemoautotrophy-indicative genes. Whole genome
sequencing will be performed on a subset of SAGs, enabling detailed annotation
of chemoautotrophy pathways. Metagenomic and metatranscriptomic fragment
recruitment will be used to determine global patterns of chemoautotroph
distribution and chemoautotrophy pathway expression. This ambitious project is
made possible by the recent development of techniques and facilities for high-
throughput genomic DNA recovery from individual cells at Bigelow Laboratory,
genomic sequencing support provided by the U.S. Department of Energy Joint
Genome Institute, and the establishment of a broad network of collaborations
among many leading dark ocean microbiologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. One beginning researcher will be involved in this project as a co-PI,
providing first-hand exposure to grant writing, project management and
undergraduate student mentorship. The project will generate a large quantity of
unique reference materials, laying a solid foundation for future studies of dark
ocean microorganisms, including 207 microbial genomes, representing all major
taxonomic groups of bacteria and archaea from the dark ocean, multiple
metagenomes, metatranscriptomes and pyrotag data sets, as well as genomic DNA
from ~2,000 individual cells from diverse prokaryote taxonomic groups, water
masses and geographic locations. The work will improve our understanding of the
global carbon cycle, with direct relevance to climate change studies. Further
improvements in single cell genomics technology and its accessibility will
likely benefit human health-related studies (e.g. human microbiome and cancer
research) and bioprospecting for new energy sources and natural products.