* 1232639
* Collaborative Research: Emotional Sophistication - Studies of Facial Expressions in Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alan Sanfey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2016
* USD 166,977.00

Social and economic decisions cannot be fully explained by "rational" attempts
to maximize monetary gain, even in very simple game-theoretic scenarios. Complex
emotional processes such as anger, guilt or generosity act as hidden forces that
lead to observable actions. Such "non-rational" motivations can drive our own
decisions and they affect our beliefs about what motivates others' decisions as
well. The goal of this project is to use automatic measurements of dynamic
facial expressions, in combination with other measurements such as functional
MRI (fMRI) and eye-tracking, to investigate the role of non-rational motivations
in social decision making. The core of the approach is to use state-of-the-art
computer vision techniques to extract facial actions from video in real-time
while participants interact with a computer or with each other, in some cases
viewing live video of each others' faces. The investigators will use powerful
statistical machine learning techniques to make inferences about the
participants' internal emotional states during the interactions. The goal is to
use the inferences concerning emotional state (a) to predict participants'
behavior; (b) to explain why a decision is made in terms of the hidden forces
driving it; and (c) to build autonomous agents that can use this information to
drive their interactions with humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary project contributes to several fields such as psychology,
neuroscience, and economics. First, it develops new methodologies to study
decision processes. Second, it uses these methods to test hypotheses about
social decision-making and to bridge the gap between observable actions and the
internal states that generated them. Third, the investigators intend to make
available a dataset and toolset that should be an extremely useful for other
investigators analyzing facial expression in multiple contexts. Additionally,
automatic and on-line decoding of internal motivational states lays the
groundwork for "affectively-aware" interactive computers, or artificial systems
that can make inferences about the emotions and intentions of their users.
Through the development of these systems, this project will make a significant
contribution to the growing field of human-machine
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[Supported by Perception, Action and
Cognition, Decision, Risk and Management Sciences, and Robust Intelligence]