* 1232318
* Coding and System Design for Wireless Cooperative Relaying
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Borivoje Nikolic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to build on the
theoretical foundations of cooperative communications, and to develop key
components of a communications system that would enable such a system in
practice. In particular, the goal is to investigate the detailed implementation
of a cooperation technique between the source terminal and multiple relays to
increase the capacity of an uplink in the context of WLAN and cellular systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this program is the development of the theoretical foundation, the necessary
system design principles, and the demonstration of a prototype system of
cooperative wireless systems that will enable future capacity scaling of
wireless communications. The goal of this system will be to achieve a throughput
gain in wireless systems that increases with the number of single-hop relays in
the system, while maintaining low-complexity operations at each of the relays.
The target system will be designed and evaluated on a configurable radio
platform. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
include the development of networks that meet the vision of inexpensive wireless
broadband access everywhere as outlined in the National Broadband Plan. Through
our industrial relations, the developed technology will be transformed from
theory toward a commercial practice, simultaneously providing means for
corresponding regulatory and standardization changes. A new generation of
engineers will be educated, able to envision, analyze and develop practical
wireless communications systems of the future. To broaden the impact, practical
applications of our work will be incorporated in graduate curricula and outreach
to underrepresented groups.