* 1232370
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Maternal reproductive trade-offs and the duration of exclusive breastfeeding in a natural fertility population
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Gurven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 22,746.00

International health organizations recommend exclusive breastfeeding for the
first 6 months of life to promote optimal infant growth and reduce risk of
infectious illness. Globally, however, exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months is
relatively rare - including in many less developed populations with high rates
of infectious disease. For many mothers, the risks associated with complementary
feeding before 6 months of age may not be apparent, or may be outweighed by
competing time and energy demands. This study will examine differences in infant
feeding patterns and associated outcomes in an economically marginalized
population, the Tsimane of Bolivia.

This research by doctoral student Melanie Martin (University of California,
Santa Barbara), under the supervision of Dr. Michael Gurven, tests the
hypothesis that maternal work and childcare demands reduce the length of
exclusive breastfeeding. Furthermore, because nursing mothers rapidly lose
weight and do not menstruate, Tsimane mothers may introduce complementary foods
before 6 months of age to minimize the caloric losses of nursing. This offset
may enable postpartum weight maintenance and earlier resumption of menstruation.
Tsimane women do not have access to contraceptives; early complementary feeding
may therefore contribute to Tsimane mothers' high fertility rates (average 9
children).

The researchers will survey Tsimane mothers to determine if the length of
exclusive breastfeeding varies with infant condition, maternal age and
condition, and maternal work and childcare demands. Researchers will also
prospectively collect dietary, behavioral and biological data from Tsimane
mothers and infants to examine how complementary feeding patterns affect
maternal energy, menstrual status, infant growth and incidence of illness. The
study will examine how local beliefs and Tsimane mothers' perceptions of infant
health, growth, and development further influence feeding decisions. Results
will aid in devising strategies to promote culturally acceptable infant feeding
practices that optimally benefit maternal and infant health.