* 1232821
* Development of a Full-Field Digital Stress Gradient Sensor for Failure Characterization of Transparent Structural Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Hareesh Tippur, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2017
* USD 248,592.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a full-field, non-contact,
optical technique to quantify angular deflections of light rays caused by non-
uniform stress fields in optically transparent solids. The method exploits the
elasto-optic effect in concurrence with the digital image correlation
methodology to extract orthogonal stress gradients in transparent solids. The
feasibility of the method to study failure behavior of solids under quasi-static
and high strain rate loading conditions will be demonstrated using visible and
near infrared radiation. The successful development of this new method will
provide a powerful, complementary measurement tool for experimental solid
mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical transparency is a common characteristic
of solids used in many engineering applications including electronic displays,
automotive windshields, aircraft windows and canopies, hurricane resistant
windows, and helmet visors. This research contributes towards understanding
failure mechanics of such materials under quasi-static and stress wave loading
conditions. Education and training of undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary areas of optical metrology and mechanical characterization of
structural materials is integral to this research. Findings from this research
will be displayed during annual undergraduate and graduate recruitment events to
attract K-12 and underrepresented students to engineering. The findings will
also be integrated into graduate courses taught by the PI and disseminated
through archival journals and conference publications.