* 1232239
* Collaborative Research: Photonic and Electronic Devices Based on Self-Assembling DNA Templates
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Gleb Finkelstein, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The objective of this program is to develop reliable protocols for fabricating
functional photonic and electronic nanostructures using bioinspired, molecular
assembly methods. In one of the proposed tasks, seed nanoparticles will be
selectively attached through molecular recognition to the ?DNA origami? template
and fused to form the electrodes; a separate nanoparticle island will be
separately attached forming a single-electron transistor. In the other major
task, plasmonic bow-tie antennae will be assembled from nanoparticles, and the
optically active nanoscale object will be attached in the hot spot.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project stems from
the convergence of recent advances in DNA-based self-assembly methods with
promising preliminary results on specific surface binding of solution-assembled
complexes. These nanostructures may develop into a new class of naturally
biocompatible sensors that will have transformative applications in the
biomedical field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the development
of alternative, cheaper (most steps are in aqueous solution) and more versatile
fabrication methods for making composite bio-nano-devices. The proposal has a
strongly emphasized outreach component: the PIs plan to recruit MSc students
from the North Carolina Central University ? a historically black university
(HBCU). The program will train the students in the unique combination of
biochemical and physical methods of modern nanotechnology that are relevant for
both industrial and academic careers. Disadvantaged high school students
(Project SEED) will participate during the summer months to get a feel for the
emerging field of nanoscience.