* 1232389
* Forced Transients in Water Mass Transformation and the Meridional Overturning Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 532,439.00

Idealized eddy resolving numerical ocean models will be combined with analytic
theory to better understand how the low-frequency ocean thermohaline circulation
responds to changes in atmospheric forcing. It is hypothesized that the
generation and influences of anomalies in the thermohaline circulation are
controlled by the propagation of information along and across geostrophic
contours, and that eddy fluxes of heat and salt play a central role in the
communication between regions of open and closed contours. The general approach
is to use the theory to define the relevant non-dimensional numbers and provide
a dynamical framework with which to guide and interpret the numerical model
calculations. The numerical model will be used to test the basic predictions
from the theory and to incorporate the high latitude convection regions into the
large-scale ocean circulation. Quantities of interest include the properties of
convective water masses, the meridional (poleward) heat transport, the
meridional overturning circulation and ocean circulation
anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The combination of
analytic models and eddy resolving numerical models will provide a useful
complement to more traditional large-scale climate models and very idealized box
models that do not resolve essential physical processes. The theoretical
underpinning of information propagation along and across geostrophic contours
will provide both dynamical understanding of the dominant physical processes and
an explicit theoretical estimate of the relevant time scales for the propagation
of information and the transition between flow
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the low-
frequency variability of the thermohaline circulation is a central problem in
climate science that has direct influence over a wide range of disciplines,
including: atmospheric science, biogeochemistry, ecosystems, and carbon uptake.
The research results from this project will contribute to both undergraduate and
graduate education programs at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
Undergraduate students will be recruited to work on aspects of the analytic
model through the Summer Student Fellowship Program, while the Principal
Investigator will incorporate results from this program into graduate level
classes and lectures at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Summer School. Results
from this work will also be made broadly available through the peer reviewed
literature, national and international meetings and the Principal Investigator's
web page.