* 1232740
* Planning Grant: Developing a National Higher Education Student Unit Record Database
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Matthew Ohland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 07/31/2013
* USD 219,185.00

This engineering education research project is the planning stage of
constructing a national, longitudinal, student unit-record database that will
enable researchers, faculty, administrators and policy makers to understand
retention and other metrics that define student pathways through engineering
consistently. This award funds the planning of such a database, which builds
from a successful prior effort that has led to several insights about student
pathways through engineering degree programs. The project will engage a broad
array of stakeholders and experts to craft a value proposition for creating and
maintaining the proposed database.

The broader significance and importance of this project will be to create
resources and networks that can help the United State understand issues in
retaining students in engineering degree programs. Research using existing, but
small-scale databases, has shown that engineering students from different groups
may take follow different trajectories in obtaining an engineering degree or
leave degree program for different reasons. The proposed project will extend our
understanding of these issues. This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals
of transforming the frontiers through preparation of an engineering workforce
with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for
society is enabled by creating results and research that are useful for society
by informing educational policy and practices.