* 1232777
* The Field Tradition in Geomorphology: 43rd Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Richard Marston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2014
* USD 33,953.00

For more than four decades, the Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium has been an
annual conference designed to bring together geomorphologists from across the
disciplines of geology, geography, and environmental engineering in order to
enable them to exchange research results, become aware of new techniques,
explore special themes, identify future opportunities, and enhance collaborative
networks. The 43rd Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium will be held in September
2012 at Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The theme of this symposium is the field
tradition in geomorphology. Participants will hear papers, view posters, and
engage in field explorations as they reflect on the history of the discipline,
acknowledge key contributions by a number of pioneering geomorphologists who
have recently passed away, and consider the role of field work as researchers
begin to tackle challenging, societally relevant questions involving climate
change and sustainable management of the Earth system. The conference
proceedings will be published in a special volume of a leading journal. NSF
funding will provide support to facilitate the involvement of students and
invited presenters.

The 2012 Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium will provide a forum to honor the
field tradition in geomorphology and explore its potential to help advance the
field in the future. It will facilitate greater cross-fertilization among
research groups from different regions, and it will pass on the field tradition
to the next generation of geomorphologists to early-career researchers and
students.