* 1232319
* CNH:   Indigenous Fire Regimes, Land-Use Ecology, and Contemporary Livelihoods in Northern California
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Lisa Curran, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2014
* USD 249,949.00

One of the longest standing and most sweeping effects of humans on natural
systems in fire-prone areas has likely been intentional wildfire: people burning
natural grasslands and woodlands on purpose. Within North America, intentional
wildfire has almost certainly been widespread for over 5,000 years in what is
now California, and may have changed the ecology and driven the evolution of
species in woodlands in ways that in turn affect the ability of people to obtain
natural resources. This project will measure direct effects of indigenous
burning practices on woodlands and low-elevation, mixed forests in the Central
Valley, Klamath Mountains, and Sierra Nevada, and indirect effects of these
practices on the availability of wild foods and materials used by indigenous
peoples that inhabit the woodlands. Researchers will quantify differences in
plant species composition between areas burned by local groups of Native
Americans and areas subject to fire suppression, and test effects of burning
practices on the regeneration of oaks that dominate the woodlands and on
infestation of their acorns by insects. Detailed studies of time required to
harvest and process foods and materials such as stems for construction of
household items will show whether burning does in fact improve resource
availabilities for people. This work will take a scientific look at a
potentially very important interplay between humans and nature that has been the
subject of intensive debate but little quantitative
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project personnel will collaborate with tribal
and other land managers to develop a better understanding of how to manage fire
to achieve social goals and to restore and maintain natural systems. As
currently managed, much of California's oak woodlands and low-elevation conifer
forests ecosystems are under a threat of high-intensity, destructive wildfires.
These ecosystems may in fact be adapted to frequent, low-intensity fires that
burn off understory debris, increase species diversity, and reduce the threat of
future wildfires. The project will disseminate findings to tribal and federal
agencies.