* 1232070
* Collaborative Research: Computational Intelligence Methods for Dynamic Stochastic Optimization of Smart Grid Operation with High Penetration of Renewable Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2018
* USD 196,263.00

The objective of this research is to develop advanced computational intelligence
methods to monitor, optimize and control large or so-called wide areas of a
power network that will include solar farms (SFs) and wind farms (WFs), and
controllable network transformers (CNTs), in order to ensure optimum usage of
all these resources both during slow changing semi-steady state conditions, as
well as during transient conditions. The research will be carried out in off-
line simulations and then implemented on a real-time
simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of
renewable energy sources is uncertain and variable, and it is difficult for
static optimization methods to optimize uncertain non-stationary distributed
energy resources in a smart grid for maximum utilization. A novel ACD controller
is proposed for the development of a real- time dynamic stochastic optimization
smart grid engine. Advanced intelligent methods such as the biologically
inspired artificial neural network and smart devices (CNTs) provide better
identification and control capabilities for implementation of optimal power
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Economically operated
reliable and secure power systems that can accommodate high penetration of
renewable energy are of national interest. Being able to route power through
underutilized lines will have major economic and environmental benefits due to
avoiding the need for new lines. This project will have several dissemination
channels, including software, websites, new contents added to existing courses,
special sessions and tutorials at conferences, and journal publications.