* 1232124
* Controlled polarization in plasmons propagating from metal into semiconductors in multicomponent nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sean Washburn, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 320,270.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Objective: We have studied the propagation of light in
nanoscale wires comprising a metal segment and a semiconducting segment, and we
have observed that efficient electrical and optical coupling can be achieved
between these two segments. We posit that tailoring the shape of the junction
will control the polarization rotation of the light emitted from the distal
semiconducting end of the nanowire relative to incident light coupled into the
metal end of the nanowire. Our time-domain simulations reproduce many of our
preliminary observations. We propose to optimize the asymmetric metal-
semiconductor junctions for electrical and optical transport, and we describe a
series of preliminary chemical sensing experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Propagation of plasmons in single-
component metal nanowires is well understood, but propagation between different
materials is still being explored. Control of polarization in such structures
can be critical to the design of larger scale devices, but manipulation of the
polarization in such structures is essentially untouched as a research field.
This project will explore these areas, and will study potential sensing
applications of this polarization rotation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Fundamental understanding and control of polarization in nanoscale photonic
systems will have broad potential impacts in the technology of national security
and communications. Sensing of pollutants and toxins has obvious importance in
society and national security and experiments here may inform new methods of
nanoscale sensors. In addition this project will focus on the recruitment of
both undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented groups (NSF-
AGEP, SMART, eg).