* 1232085
* Mixed Signal Techniques for Analog-to-Digital Converter Design with Sub-Picosecond Time-Domain Performance in Nanometer CMOS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John McNeill, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 08/31/2016
* USD 263,842.00

MIXED SIGNAL TECHNIQUES FOR ANALOG-TO-DIGITAL CONVERTER DESIGN WITH
&lt;br/&gt;SUB-PICOSECOND TIME-DOMAIN PERFORMANCE IN NANOMETER
CMOS&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit Low-cost
high-performance analog-to-digital converters are required in many rapidly
growing mixed-signal application areas such as ultrawideband wireless data
standards, wireline serial data transmission, and high-density disk drives. To
address needs in these areas, the objective of the proposed work is the design,
test, and verification of low cost, high speed, energy efficient analog-to-
digital converters operating at sample rates from 3 to 40 GSps and resolutions
of 5-8 bits. Novel aspects of the proposed approach address difficulties in the
area of analog-to-digital converter calibration and precision of sample clock
timing. Calibration is addressed by extending a background digital correction
technique developed by the principal investigator specifically tailored to the
constraints of nanometer-scale digital integrated circuit technology. This
correction technique has been extensively investigated by the principal
investigator (and many others) as a promising approach in a diversity of higher
resolution (12-16 bits), lower speed (1-100 MSps) architectures including
cyclic, successive approxÂ¬imation, pipeline, time-interleaved, and oversampling.
In the proposed work, the technique will be applied for the first time to
digital background calibration of flash analog-to-digital converters operating
at speeds of 1 GSps and higher. Operating at these conversion rates requires
that sample clock timing errors (jitter) be less than 1 picosecond. To address
sample clock timing issues, the principal investigator?s previous work with
fundamental limits on oscillator noise will be leveraged to enable low jitter
high speed on-chip clock generation from a moderate cost, low frequency,
commercial-off-the-shelf frequency reference. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
Combining these techniques will result in a low-cost, high speed analog-to-
digital conversion capability required for a wide range of emerging mixed-signal
applications. In particular, achieving this capability in an energy-efficient
manner will allow continued improvement in system functionality when low power
consumption is critical; for example, in mobile and untethered applications. In
addition to technical advances, the project will also contribute to the goal of
expanding education by supporting a Ph.D. student to perform much of the
research work. Every effort will be made to identify an individual from an
underrepresented group when recruiting for this position. Research results will
be integrated into classroom and project materials at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels; this has proven to increase student engagement and
interest in the field of mixed signal integrated circuit design. Finally,
research materials at all levels of detail will be made available to the wider
technical community through open access to design information.