* 1232371
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Mechanisms of inbreeding avoidance in Cebus capucinus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Susan Perry, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,821.00

White-faced capuchins (Cebus capucinus) live in social groups comprised of
extensive networks of both maternal and paternal kin - a demographic
circumstance that is rare among mammals, but one that accentuates the importance
of evolved mechanisms of inbreeding avoidance. Research on how such primates
develop reproductive aversion toward certain individuals, and not others, will
improve our understanding of these mechanisms and the limits of kin recognition
in highly social animals. This project also will provide comparative work that
may contribute to understanding the origins of, and variation in, incest
avoidance across human societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research by doctoral
student Irene Godoy (University of California, Los Angeles), under the
supervision of Dr. Susan Perry, combines behavioral observation, genetics, and
endocrinology to study mating behavior in the Lomas Barbudal population of wild
capuchins in Costa Rica. These data will test the hypotheses that (a) early
social familiarity, (b) phenotypic matching, or (c) the use of such cues as age
proximity and adult male rank are the mechanisms by which individuals avoid
mating with close relatives. Additional hypotheses regarding female versus male
responsibility for behaviors that prevent inbreeding, and the importance of
developmental aspects of co-socialization, also will be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observational data will be collected on the
behavior of 24 adult females. Fecal samples will be collected non-invasively for
later extraction of DNA or steroid hormones to determine paternity and maternity
of individuals, and to track changes in female reproductive phase. Laboratory
analyses will take place at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project
will support training of research assistants and a multi-ethnic, first-
generation Latina graduate student. Outreach presentations will be made at six
local elementary schools in Costa Rica, promoting interest among the students in
careers in science and encouraging conservation efforts to protect the highly
endangered tropical dry forest environment.