* 1232725
* 4D Imaging of Oceanic Transform Fault Material Properties Variations During the Earthquake Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert van der Hilst, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,027.00

Many large and damaging earthquakes occur in highly populated areas, such as
Indonesia, Japan, Chile and California. For that reason, forecasting
earthquakes, and predicting their effects is a long-sought goal of earthquake
seismology. Achieving those goals requires improved understanding of the faults
and fault processes that lead to large earthquakes. That understanding is
impaired by the extreme complexity of most fault and fault systems. Though they
do not occur in populated areas, oceanic transform faults are comparatively
simple natural laboratories, where some fundamental processes have been
observed. Transform faults on the East Pacific Rise (EPR) offer a unique
opportunity to study how spatial and temporal variation of fault zone properties
control earthquake rupture because the largest earthquakes on these faults occur
at regular intervals, and related variations of the properties in the fault zone
have been observed. This project has three objectives that will advance out
understanding of fault mechanics. One is to determine which spatial variations
of material properties control the occurrence of the largest earthquakes. The
second is to understand how fault zone properties change with time over the
earthquake cycle, and the third is to understand how variations of the material
properties are related to earthquake seismicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project include support for two young post doctoral
researchers; the primary broader impact is that, while it is not directly
focused on seismic hazard estimates, may be expected to lead to a better
understanding of earthquake processes, with accordingly high potential societal
benfits.