* 1232251
* Multi-Frequency Multi-Parametric Acoustophoretic Microfluidic System for Particle and Cell Separation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Arum Han, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 07/31/2015
* USD 380,000.00

PI: Kim, Yong-Joe&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas A&amp;M University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectural Merit: The objectives of this project are
(1) to develop novel, transformative, two- and three-dimensional numerical
modeling methods to analyze acoustophoretic separation of particles and cells in
microfluidic systems under multi-frequency acoustic excitations, and (2) to
develop an acoustophoretic microfluidic platform for separating particles and
cells having different vibro-acoustic properties and validating the numerical
models experimentally. Compressibility is an interesting physical property that
can be utilized in label-free separation; however, systems capable of continuous
and simultaneous label-free separation of particles and cells based on both
their sizes and compressibility at high throughput do not exist.
Acoustophoresis-based microfluidic separation utilizes intrinsic differences in
vibro-acoustic properties of target samples under acoustic excitations, and can
be achieved using simple microfluidic systems without need for cumbersome sample
preparation steps. Thus, this approach has gained significant interest as the
most viable label-free separation method in terms of its strong force
generation, high throughput, high specificity, and low capital and operation
cost. However, the design of state-of-the-art acoustophoretic microfluidic
systems has been mainly derived from a simplistic one-dimensional analytical
acoustic model in a "static" fluid medium. Therefore, it is not possible to
consider the real-world effects of two- or three-dimensional geometries,
"moving" fluid media, and viscous boundary layers that significantly influence
the motion of particles and cells. In this analytical model, particles or cells
are also modeled as homogenous, compressible spheres to consider only their
"static" physical characteristics, and their frequency-dependent vibro-acoustic
characteristics cannot be analyzed. The proposed methods address these
deficiencies to significantly improve the predictability and specificity of the
acoustophoretic separation. Novel particle and cell models are also proposed to
understand their frequency-dependent, vibro-acoustic characteristics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A transformative, multi-frequency, multi-
parametric, acoustophoretic microfluidic platform enabled by these new modeling
capabilities and utilizing the frequency-dependent vibro-acoustic properties
will allow simultaneous fractionation of complex samples. This project will
provide undergraduate and graduate students an excellent interdisciplinary
research opportunity combining acoustics, microfluidics, lab-on-a-chip, biology,
and computational physics. In particular, this work will (1) provide research
opportunities and training for highly motivated undergraduate students and
underrepresented minorities, and (2) expand the formal classroom curriculum in
mechanical and electrical engineering to include learning objectives in
microfluidic lab-chip systems and acoustophoretic separation. The results of the
proposed research will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal
publications and presentations at professional conferences and used to enrich
teaching materials for undergraduate and graduate courses. A publicly-available,
acoustophoretic modeling method as proposed here will significantly advance the
design of acoustophoretic separation systems by enabling "virtual reality"
prototyping.