* 1232915
* Low-Cost and Energy-Efficient Vibration Reduction in Ultra-Precision Manufacturing Machines using Mode Coupling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Chinedum Okwudire, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 352,258.00

The objective of this award is to investigate mode coupling in passively
isolated systems to provide the theoretical basis for achieving low-cost and
energy-efficient reduction of unwanted vibrations in ultra-precision
manufacturing machines, which play a central role in advanced manufacturing
processes. The research approach involves three main tasks: (1) mathematical
characterization of the so-called "critical configurations" induced by mode
coupling, as a function of key isolation system design parameters; (2)
determination of the mathematical connections among re-leveling controller
stability, gravitational stability and mode coupling; and (3) investigation and
implementation of optimization schemes that effectively utilize the knowledge
gained from Tasks 1 and 2 to methodically select system parameters that ensure
optimal vibration reduction without compromising the stability of the isolated
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the knowledge created by this
research will enable cutting-edge ultra-precision manufacturing machines to be
designed using passive isolators in place of active systems, which can cost up
to 90 percent more than passive systems and double the energy consumed to move
the machine?s axes. The broader impacts of this research are directed to
industry, education and outreach. Collaborations with leading U.S.-based ultra-
precision machine manufacturers will enable the results of this research to be
transferred to industry. Knowledge from this research will be incorporated into
a revamped graduate-level course that aims to equip the next generation of
machine tool designers with a mechatronics-based approach to designing
manufacturing machines. Finally, a promising but unconventional outreach
approach aimed at inspiring underrepresented middle/high school students towards
pursuing science/engineering careers by presenting science/engineering careers
in their socio-cultural context will be pursued.