* 1232431
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamics of eruptive plumes above a submarine arc volcano
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Joseph Resing, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 31,419.00

The ability to maximize usage and develop new tools for exploring the ocean, in
particular the behavior and features that occur within the water column is
important both for US oceanographic research capacity as well as increasing the
effectiveness of investment in sea-going platforms and infrastructure. This
research explores the possibility of expanding the capability of multi-beam
sonar systems recently installed on some ships in the University National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) fleet. The research will consist of
analyzing mid-water sonar soundings serendipitiously collected on a cruise of
exploration to Rota 1, an actively erupting undersea volcano in the western
Pacific Ocean, while investigators were studying the eruption dynamics and
volcanological deposits from the volcano. During the cruise, it became evident
that the new sonar ws able to inage volcanic gasses that were emmanating from
the eruption and being expressed as trains of bubbles coming from the volcanic
vent. Research will include examination and processing of the new sonar data to
try and extract eruption plume height, intensity, and direction as well as how
these change with time. It will also compare the mid-water plume results to
visual and chemical data collected for purposes of the originally funded project
so that the results can be calibrated with complementary physical measurements
taken by remotely controlled submarine vehicles that were simultaneously
operating in the area. A major goal of this newly funded work will be to gauge
the usefulness of mid-water multibeam bubble train datasets and find out what
can be learned from these data in terms of understanding undesea volcanic
activity. If successful, the same techniques could be applied to better
understand low temperature seeps on continental margins and bubble trains
associated with marine gas hydrate deposits. Broader impacts of the work include
the development of new infrastructure for science by developing a new mid-water
imaging capability for multi-beam sonar on UNOLS ships and graduate student
training.