* 1232274
* US-Ireland Partnership: WiPhyLoc8: Dynamic WiFi Positioning using Physical Layer Parameters for Location-based Services and Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Joseph Cavallaro, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 09/30/2016
* USD 392,000.00

Objective: The objective of this program is innovative research in new
transformative algorithms for high-precision localization services using low-
cost WiFi technology. Features of the Physical Layer RF signal will be exploited
to create transformative localization algorithms which are vital for next
generation indoor navigation, network security, emergency evacuation and
commercial services. The program connects researchers from Rice University (RU),
University College Dublin (UCD) and Queen?s University Belfast (QUB) with
expertise in localization algorithms (UCD), baseband/FPGA processing
architectures (QUB/RU), WiFi Physical Layer networking (RU/QUB) and localization
applications (UCD/QUB); the UCD and QUB work is funded by their national funding
agencies.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is the creation of the Spotlight and
Location-Sync algorithms to achieve sub-meter accuracy in real-world indoor
environments. Spotlight will utilize multiple antennae at the Access Point and
beamsteering for a combined Direction of Emission - Receive Signal Strength
signature, thereby reducing multi-path and occlusion. Location-Sync uses a Time
of Flight approach to measure the range between WiFi nodes; it enhances
precision through joint clock synchronization and location estimation and fusion
of clock and range parameters over time and between multiple nodes.

Broader Impact: The broader impacts are significant improvements to Location
Based Services benefitting the wider community through more effective indoor
pedestrian navigation. In addition to research publications, the modules
distributed for the WiPhyLoc8 platform (Rice University WARP with Xilinx 10G
NetFPGA) will provide algorithm performance measurements in network security and
geofencing applications. The WiPhyLoc8 project plans to develop open-access
educational materials and semester length courses.