* 1232623
* Design of Efficient Saddle Point Algorithms for Large-scale/Complex Geometry Convex Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Arkadi Nemirovski, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

This award provides funding for theoretical and software development of novel
algorithms for processing large-scale optimization models arising in Signal
Processing, Medical Image Reconstruction, Machine Learning, and high-dimensional
Statistical inference, where huge and steadily growing amounts of underlying
data result in the necessity to process optimization problems with hundreds of
thousands of variables and constraints. In addition, some of applications, such
as low rank matrix approximations, lead to problems with difficult geometry,
which amplifies significantly the challenges caused by sheer problem sizes.
These challenges will be met via developing algorithms with cheap iterations
utilizing state-of-the-art approaches, primarily bilinear saddle point
reformulation of the problem of interest combined with duality-based handling
difficult geometry and accelerating algorithms via various types of
randomization. Theoretical and algorithmic developments will be adjusted to
several generic applications (sparsity- and low-rank oriented Signal Processing
and Machine Learning, extensions of total variation-based Image processing, and
some others) and will be aimed at developing optimization techniques with good
theoretical performance guarantees and visible practical potential; the latter
will be validated by extensive numerical experimentation with both simulated and
real life problems.

If successful, the research will advance theory and practice of optimization by
enriching its abilities to process large-scale/complex geometry problems and
thus will contribute significantly to the computational toolboxes in Signal
Processing, Image Reconstruction, Machine Learning, and some other subject
domains. As a byproduct, the research will contribute to recent tendency of
bridging the corresponding research communities, with clear mutual benefits. In
addition, the results of the research could form the base of new Ph.D.-level
optimization courses.