* 1232279
* Optoelectronic Tweezers on Sapphire for Compact High Throughput Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Pei-Yu Chiou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 09/30/2016
* USD 432,000.00

PI: Chiou, Pei-Yu Institution: University of California-Los Angeles Title:
Optoelectronic Tweezers on Sapphire for Compact High Throughput Fluorescence
Activated Cell Sorter



Intellectual Merit: High throughput single cell analysis is the future trend for
quantitative biology. Florescence activated cell sorter (FACS) is the most
powerful and gold standard tool for high speed and multi-parametric single cell
analyses. It has broad applications from fundamental research in immunology,
cell biology, molecular biology, to clinical applications, such as AIDS and
cancer detection and analysis. However, the current FACS is bulky, expensive and
requires well-trained technician to operate in a centralized facility. High
performance and low cost FACS for applications in clinics and resource-limited
areas are highly sought but have not been realized. Many microfluidic FACS
systems have been proposed over the past ten years, yet sorting live mammalian
cells at high speeds with high sort purity and high cell viability remains a
major challenge and the integrated system is not compact. Bulky optics such as
PMT tubes for optical detection, and bulky external fluid pumping systems for
fluid delivery are the two major barriers for FACS miniaturization. This
proposal aims to develop a compact and high throughput FACS enabled by a novel
ultrahigh sensitivity optoelectronic tweezers (OET) fabricated on a transparent
sapphire substrate. This platform provides millions of light-actuated single
cell trapping wells to provide a high throughput single cell sorting based on
multicolor fluorescence signals. The massively parallel OET enabled optical
manipulation gives O-FACS a throughput of 55,000 cells/sec on a smartphone size
system, a throughput equivalent to current high-end benchtop FACS systems.

Broader Impacts: The proposed compact, handheld, and high throughput O-FACS
platform will provide paradigm-shifting impacts in cell sorting fields. It will
have broad applications from fundamental biological research to clinical
applications. Results and expertise developed during the course of this project
will also be incorporated into the PIs? teaching activities at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Minority graduate and undergraduate students
will participate in these projects through independent research courses.
Students involved in this project will be exposed to an excellent
multidisciplinary training environment in the UCLA Engineering School. The PIs
will also be involved with the outstanding outreach program (CEED) in UCLA to
recruit underrepresented college students for short-term project through the
Introduction to Engineering Disciplines (E 87) course.