* 1232919
* 2012 Gordon Conference on Tribology - Paths of Dissipation; Colby College, Waterville, Maine; 8 - 13 July 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Mark Robbins, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 09/30/2012
* USD 26,000.00

This NSF grant provides partial support for attendees of the 2012 Gordon
Conference on Tribology - Paths of Dissipation, to be held July 8 - 13, 2012 at
Colby College in Waterville, Maine, USA. Tribology, the study of friction, wear
and lubrication, is an extremely complex and multi-disciplinary field that
involves processes over a wide range of size and time scales from atomic
interactions to entire machines. The biennial Gordon Research Conference on
Tribology is a unique forum for gathering experts in disparate fields to advance
our understanding of the complex problems tribology presents. Leading scientists
and engineers from universities, national laboratories and industry meet with
young scientists and newcomers to tribology for one week of formal and informal
discussions on state-of-the art issues. This opportunity for a lively and open
exchange of new ideas shapes the future of the field. Addressing many of the
great challenges in tribology will require an improved understanding of
dissipation mechanisms. There remains a large gap between the scales considered
by computer simulations and experiments and the dissipation mechanisms they
reveal, as well as between atomistic perspectives and applied tribology. The
2012 Gordon Research Conference will highlight the coincidences and
discrepancies between experiments and simulations and changes in dissipation
mechanisms across the many orders of magnitude in time and length
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tribology affects nearly every aspect of our daily
lives and technology. Improved understanding of the paths of dissipation is
expected to have a profound impact on applications in aircraft and car engines,
production technology, hip and knee joints, shrinking devices to micro- and
nanometer scales, and expanding the range of temperatures, speeds, and chemical
environments where such devices operate. The Gordon Conference is a key
mechanism for linking the basic sciences with an engineering discipline of
significant importance to the US and world economies. Tribology advances require
a constant input of new ideas between these researchers and disciplines. The
conference also provides opportunities for young investigators, students, and
those new to tribology to learn from those with a deep understanding of
tribological problems and cutting edge approaches. This NSF grant provides
support for conference fees and/or travel expenses that will enable key
participants to attend the Gordon Conference. The conference organizers will
strive for gender balance and also favor under-represented ethnic minority or
disabled individuals that apply. Support from this grant will play a
particularly important role in allowing attendance of students, postdoctoral
fellows, and junior faculty that otherwise be unable to participate due to lack
of funds.