* 1232109
* Collaborative Research:  CCSS:  Cyber-Enabled Smart Systems for Seamless Secure Monitoring and Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Tongtong Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to address the security
and capacity requests raised in cyber-enabled secure monitoring and control, and
to accomplish a human-device interaction platform by conjoining the
communication capability and computational resources of the ubiquitous wireless
networks with general physical components and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is the development of practical multi-layer techniques that enable
seamless, secure mobile-based device monitoring and control, and of the
analytical and design tools that are broadly applicable to related engineering
problems. More specifically: (i) For security enhancement and privacy
protection, the innovative access control and privacy protection schemes can
achieve secure authentication without providing non-repudiation evidence; (ii)
For capacity improvement, efficient and inherently reliable wireless systems are
developed through network-centric airlink interface design and spectrum sharing;
(iii) For system development and integration, the multi-layer design strategy is
realized through penetration of high layer techniques into lower layer physical
system design, which greatly reduces the system complexity, management overhead
and security risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts are: (i) It will lead to a seamless and secure mobile-based device
monitoring and control mechanism which can be utilized for a broad scope of
applications critical to national competitiveness and homeland security; (ii) By
integrating the technological advances resulting from this project into the
undergraduate/graduate curricula, and through outreach activities, significant
impacts are expected from this project on training a highly-skilled and diverse
workforce in the area of cyber-enabled systems.