* 1232413
* Collaborative Research: Iodine in Foraminifera as a proxy for ocean deoxygenation during the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ellen Thomas, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,929.00

Oxygen levels in the ocean are expected to decrease as global warming
progresses, with potentially serious implications for marine life. To forecast
future changes in ocean oxygen levels, a better understanding is needed of
deoxygenation associated with past warming events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, a collaboration between researchers at Syracuse and Yale Universities,
will use iodine in benthic foraminiferal tests as a novel proxy for past
oxygenation conditions. The research is motivated by the a close relationship
between redox conditions and iodate (IO3-) concentrations in seawater, which
affect I/Ca values in foraminiferal tests. The project will expand upon
preliminary work in order to better calibrate the iodine proxy, then apply it to
a study of the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), a warming event that
occurred ~55 million years ago. The researchers will reconstruct temporal,
bathymetric, and geographic variations in ocean oxygenation during the PETM,
using benthic foraminifera in cores collected by the Ocean Drilling Program from
the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Ocean basins, as well as land sections from
the Mediterranean, eastern U.S., and New Zealand. In addition, they will examine
the link between deoxygenation and benthic extinctions, and consider patterns of
hypoxia/anoxia to assess which factors (e.g., temperature, productivity,
circulation, local methane oxidation) most influenced the development of low
oxygen conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will collaborate
internationally on proxy refinement with institutions in Germany (GEOMAR) and
the UK (Oxford), and will engage policy makers through venues like the Yale
Climate and Energy Institute. Funding will support an early-career investigator;
additionally, the project will train one PhD, one MS, and two undergraduate
students. The project will involve underrepresented high school students through
EVOLUTIONS, an NSF-funded after-school program at the Peabody Museum (Yale).
Results will be incorporated into university coursework and exhibits targeted at
undergraduates.