* 1232570
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Impact of Genetic Health on Parasite Prevalence, Diversity, and Burden in Wild Ring-Tailed Lemurs, Lemur catta
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Christine Drea, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,986.00

In vertebrates, genetic diversity influences many elements of an individual's
fitness, such as health, survival, and reproduction. 'Inbred' individuals with
less genetic diversity have greater parasite loads, reduced survivorship, and
produce fewer surviving offspring than do more genetically diverse, or 'outbred"
individuals - a phenomenon called inbreeding depression. Beyond these individual
costs, inbreeding depression also has negative consequences on populations and
species; therefore, understanding how genetic diversity impacts fitness has
significant implications for conserving endangered species. Primates are
especially vulnerable to inbreeding depression because of their long lifespans
and low reproduction rates, yet thus far, no study has investigated how the loss
of genetic diversity affects the health, survival, and reproduction of a wild
primate population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The challenge remains to identify the
specific genes that can serve as estimates of 'genetic quality' because they
influence variation in individual health, survival, and reproduction. One
protein-coding region likely to contribute to individual differences is the
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC). This family of genes controls the immune
system's ability to recognize bacteria, viruses, and parasites, and thus, plays
an essential role in the survival of an individual and their
offspring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To examine how MHC impacts fitness in a
threatened primate, the ring-tailed lemur (Lemur catta), doctoral student
Kathleen Grogan (Duke University), under the supervision of Dr. Christine Drea,
will compare MHC diversity against survival, reproductive success, and health
across an environmental stressor in a wild population at Beza Mahafaly Special
Reserve, Madagascar. Survival and reproductive success, measured using long-term
census data, and health, measured as parasite prevalence, diversity, and burden
in fecal samples collected (a) under 'typical' environmental conditions and (b)
following a severe drought, will be compared against MHC diversity. By examining
the relationship between genetic diversity and fitness in wild ring-tailed
lemurs, this research tests how individual differences in MHC diversity
influence that individual's health, survival, and reproduction. This award will
support the training of a graduate student. Additionally, the genetic
information will inform conservation efforts.