* 1232204
* GSE/RES-  Collaborative Research - Practical Logic of STEM Career Choice: A Critical Interpretive approach to profiling IT Career Pathways of African American Males at HBCUs
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Kshiti Joshi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 279,919.00

Intellectual Merit: This research study focuses on critically examining and
tracing the career pathways of successful African American male college students
who have opted to pursue IT-related careers. Grounded in the theory of power and
practice posited by Pierre Bourdieu, the study uncovers the practical logics
that African American men employ when making career choices to pursue IT-related
disciplines. The sample consists of 100 African American male students who have
expressed interest in IT careers and who are currently enrolled at Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). A small sample of African American men
at Predominantly White Institutions is also included. The researchers use a
critical interpretive approach in which concepts of capital, field and habitus
are employed as a framework to build and verify midrange theories about this
historically underserved group's engagement with IT by focusing on group-level
experiences that influence their decision to pursue an IT career. The research
includes conducting person-centered analysis that is well grounded in theory and
employs rigorous qualitative approaches. The proposed work contributes to the
limited literature on African American men's academic success and helps clarify
some of the mixed and contradictory findings about their career choices that
exist in the current literature.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results of this research reveal how and which social structures enable or
constrain African American men's IT-related career choices; information which
may be useful to policy makers, teachers and school counselors, and that may
inform the creation of innovative interventions. Findings may also contribute to
the increase in the STEM workforce while expanding the career options for
African American men who are historically disproportionately affected by
economic downturns. The research continues a collaboration between Washington
State University and Pennsylvania State University as well as strengthens
ongoing partnerships with the four participating HBCUs.