* 1232203
* Cloud Forming Potential of Marine Biogenic Aerosols and Their Physiochemical Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 661,683.00

This project will investigate the hypothesis that many types of marine primary
organic aerosols (POA) including phytoplankton, act as efficient ice nuclei (IN)
under atmospherically relevant conditions. The experiments will build upon
previous studies by experimentally examining the physical and chemical
characteristics of other marine organic and biogenic constituents present in the
sub-micrometer sized particles, which can be most easily carried aloft, that
allow these particles to act as efficient IN and under what conditions. Not only
will the governing mechanisms relevant for the aerosol life cycle at
temperatures below the freezing point be identified for a variety of POA, but
the ability to derive ice nucleation parameterizations, will enable climate
modelers to include the formation of ice crystals and clouds in climate models
for better understanding the hydrological cycle and radiative forcing. Perhaps
most significantly, the novel experimental approach for studying ice nucleation
in combination with micro-spectroscopic single particle analytical tools using
specific staining and epifluroescence microscopy, scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), near-edge x-ray absorption fine structure (STXM/NEXAFS) spectroscopy, and
computer controlled scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive analysis
of x-rays (CCSEM/EDX and HRTEM/EELS), will allow the specific physiochemical
properties of particles which do and do not nucleate ice to be
contrasted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project have the potential
to shift paradigms regarding the fine scale picture of heterogeneous ice
nucleation and thus can change the way aerosol induce ice nucleation, and thus
ice cloud formation processes, are represented in models. The long-term economic
benefits to federal, state, and local governments of better understanding
hydrological cycles and being able to predict rates and the nature of climate
changes are great. Collaborations with scientists at Lawrence Berkeley and
Battelle Pacific Northwest National Laboratories will allow synergistic
expansion of the scope and depth of the research and will significantly enhance
the experience of students. They will also provide an opportunity for the
investigators to obtain knowledge that will be transmitted to other scientists
through publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at
national/international multi- and interdisciplinary conferences. The project
will allow the research group to extend its history of being involved with
public outreach projects and mentoring male and female graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students of diverse ethnic backgrounds and nationalities.
Promoting the development of the next generation of scientists engaged in
cutting edge research, having access to sophisticated state-of-the-art
analytical equipment, trained in experimental procedures, quantitative data
analysis, and numerical modeling techniques is critical for understanding the
link between the Earth's oceans and atmosphere and addressing global climate
change issues.