* 1232997
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial and Temporal Variability of Post-Fire Conifer Regeneration in Lower Treeline Forests of the U.S. Rocky Mountains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,993.00

This dissertation project is about the impacts of increasing environmental
variability on tree regeneration following wildfires. Sharp increases in
wildfire activity since the early 1980s in forest ecosystems in many parts of
the world have been linked to warming trends. Questions have arisen about
whether post-fire recovery will be to the same type of forest or to a different,
possibly non-forested vegetation type. Preliminary observations of lower
treeline forests in the Colorado Front Range that burned during the past
approximately 25 years have led to the hypothesis that under a warmer climate
there is less post-fire tree regeneration in comparison with fire events that
occurred in the late-19th to mid-20th centuries. Although numerous retrospective
studies document the general success of tree regeneration following fires in the
late-19th to mid-20th centuries, such studies are ambiguous about the actual
timing and abundance of tree regeneration and potential relationships to annual-
scale climate variability. Few studies have examined how climate change may
alter forest resiliency to future climate-related disturbances such as fire, and
this research addresses the unanswered question of how lower treeline Rocky
Mountain forests may be less resilient to wildfire given warmer, drier
conditions. The research objectives are to: 1) quantify post-fire conifer
establishment and survival by examining the density of conifer juveniles across
a range of lower treeline sites that have burned since the mid-1980s, 2) examine
the spatial variability of juvenile conifer densities in relation to site
factors such as fire severity (as indicated by percent tree mortality),
competition with herbaceous and woody species, distance to seed source, and
topographic variables including elevation and slope aspect, 3) analyze
relationships between post-fire conifer regeneration and annual climate
variability to determine if certain climate conditions limit or favor
establishment and survival, and 4) experimentally manipulate microclimate to
determine effects on conifer seedling survival and growth by increasing air
temperature and examining both the direct effects of warmer temperatures and the
secondary effects of changes in relative humidity and soil moisture.

This research will contribute to the understanding of vegetation adaptation and
possible mitigation activities in response to expected impacts of continued
warming on forests in the central Rocky Mountains. Although these forests
historically exhibited high resiliency to wildfires, changes in fire severity
may be limiting the capacity of conifer trees to reestablish following such
fires. Decision-making by land managers may be improved by a better
understanding of the factors that drive spatial and temporal variability in
patterns of post-fire forest recovery. This research will foster science
education through involvement of undergraduates in field and laboratory work as
well as extensive educational outreach at the K-12, college, and community
level. Undergraduate involvement in research and other educational outreach
efforts will target inclusion of underrepresented groups. Findings will be
disseminated to other researchers, land managers, and the broader public through
peer-reviewed publication, presentation at conferences, online data sharing, and
public education efforts including a museum exhibit and video documentary. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
invaluable support for a capable student to launch an independent research
career.