* 1232582
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The origins and dispersal of ancient leishmaniasis in the New World: A bioarchaeological and molecular approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Anne Stone, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 30,401.00

Leishmaniaisis affects millions of people worldwide today, resulting in
disfiguring lesions and fatal complications. The World Health Organization
regards leishmaniasis as a "Neglected Tropical Disease," endemic to poverty-
stricken countries and rising in incidence by nearly two million cases annually,
but lacking effective treatment or prevention. Its worldwide geographic
distribution and its impact on human health and well-being make leishmaniasis
one of the most significant of the neglected diseases. Leishmaniasis is not,
however, solely a contemporary affliction. The fields of bioarchaeology,
ethnohistory and genetics provide evidence to support that leishmaniasis has
been a burden to humanity long before recorded history. Nevertheless, the
origins and movement of the parasite as it evolved and dispersed throughout the
globe remains poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project by doctoral
student Kelly Harkins (Arizona State University), under the supervision of Drs.
Anne Stone and Jane Buikstra, will use molecular and bioarchaeological
techniques to obtain DNA from a sample of poorly understood contemporary
Leishmania strains and archaeologically recovered human remains. These data will
be used to test hypotheses that address the evolutionary history of the parasite
Leishmania and the emergence of human leishmaniasis in the New World, both of
which are the source of ongoing debate. Specifically, this project proposes to
characterize strains from the earliest known skeletal cases of New World
leishmaniasis in the Andes, to explore the relationship of these early strains
to modern strains found throughout the globe today, and with additional data
from archaeological and ethnohistoric contexts, to address the nature of the
disease's movement in prehistoric South American populations. This project will
publicly disseminate new genomic sequence data, essential for understanding
pathogen biology and also a powerful tool for those fields and researchers
working to improve global public health.