* 1232883
* Roll-To-Roll Electrostatic Printing for Manufacturing Few-Layer-Graphenes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 404,557.00

This grant provides funding to develop roller-based electrostatic printing
systems for massively producing pristine, orderly arranged few-layer-graphene
structures for scale-up applications in electronics and optoelectronics. The
primary research objectives are to (i) experimentally study roll-to-roll and
roll-to-plate electrostatic transfer-printing processes, aiming to enable the
continuous production of device patterns of few-layer-graphenes on inch-scale
wide substrates with a high throughput; (ii) obtain an in-depth understanding of
underlying scientific mechanisms associated with the precise exfoliation of
atomically layered structures of van der Waals solids through the modeling of
roll-to-roll processes using dynamic simulation tools; (iii) quantitatively
identify the effects of key processing parameters, such as printing pressure,
electric strength, and roller speed on the final printing quality in terms of
transfer efficiency, uniformity of graphene thickness over substrates, density
of defects, and electrical properties of printed graphenes; and (iv) explore the
novel application of electrostatic printing in the fabrication of graphene-based
optical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this work
will broadly contribute fundamental knowledge in the areas of high-speed
manufacturing technologies and significantly expand the capability to process
emerging atomically layered materials. It is anticipated that the proposed roll-
to-roll electrostatic printing techniques, if successfully realized, will
surpass the capability of current technologies for producing few-layer-graphenes
in terms of a high degree of material crystallinity comparable to that of the
best crystal graphite, a high degree of simplicity for realizing multi-scale
patterning, a high roll-to-roll throughput &gt; 50 ft/min, and a low patterning
cost less than $2/m2. It also holds the significant potential to be developed
into cost-effective, environment-friendly industrial manufacturing processes
that can address global needs for addressing future energy needs and US
industrial competitiveness. In addition, the program will provide new education
and outreach opportunities for involving K-12 students and underrepresented
undergraduates into manufacturing-related research activities.