* 1232851
* Convection in the presence of a very strong magnetic field
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Oleg Zikanov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,746.00

CBET-1232851&lt;br/&gt;Oleg Zikanov&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan ?
Dearborn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An applied constant magnetic field can completely
change the structure and behavior of a flow of an electrically conducting fluid,
such as a liquid metal, and the way in which the flow transports heat and reacts
to temperature non-uniformities. The transformation is especially dramatic in
the case of strong magnetic fields, as characterized by the values of the
Hartmann number much larger than one. The starting point of the project is the
finding of the recent experimental and computational studies of mixed convection
in the pipe flow with transverse magnetic field. It has been demonstrated that
the commonly accepted view that the anisotropic Joule dissipation of the induced
electric currents leads to suppression of turbulence and establishing of a
laminar flow with steady-state velocity and temperature fields is not always
correct. There is a possibility that, while turbulence is suppressed, the
buoyancy-induced instability to the perturbations uniform along the magnetic
field lines survives and leads to development of large-scale unsteady coherent
structures that cause anomalous temperature fluctuations characterized by high
amplitudes and low dominant frequencies. The phenomenon has potentially
disruptive and, at the moment, ignored implications for the Li-based cooling and
breeding blankets for the nuclear fusion reactors. Should the anomalous
fluctuations develop in the blanket, their amplitude can, in the presence of
high thermal load, reach several tens of degrees. The resulting unsteady thermal
stresses will cause rapid deterioration of the wall material. The objective of
the proposal is to investigate the mechanisms leading to the anomalous
fluctuations from the fundamental science perspective and to assess their
likelihood in the configurations corresponding to the principal components of
the blankets currently developed in the U.S. and Germany. The specific cases to
be considered include the mixed convection in horizontal and vertical ducts with
transverse temperature gradient and natural convection in rectangular
enclosures. The research combines the high-resolution three-dimensional
numerical simulations and experiments, both based on the recently developed
methods that, for the first time, make the convection with strong magnetic field
amenable to rigorous scientific analysis. The project is conducted in
collaboration with the Ilmenau University of Technology and Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology in Germany. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore the
nature of the paradoxical strong fluctuations of temperature recently detected
in flows of liquid metals subjected to very strong (several Tesla) magnetic
fields. In addition to advancing the basic knowledge, particular attention will
be paid to the danger of such fluctuations for the operation and structural
integrity of the lithium blankets developed for nuclear fusion reactors and
planned for testing at the currently constructed ITER (International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) facility. Using the massively parallel
computations and novel numerical and experimental techniques, the project will
clarify the mechanisms, by which the fluctuations develop, and identify the
configurations of the blanket components that have to be avoided. The project
will be undertaken as international collaboration with two universities in
Germany. It will provide educational opportunities and exposure to international
research environment to one graduate and several undergraduate students.