* 1232271
* Optimal sizing and control of distributed storage devices in grid-connected photovoltaic systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jan Kleissl, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2016
* USD 309,999.00

Under high solar photovoltaic (PV) penetration scenarios, energy storage devices
at the community level will become crucial for reducing peak loads and improving
grid reliability. Currently, pilot projects are aimed to demonstrate the value
of utility-owned community energy storage systems that are centrally operated.
However, the centralized control architecture is prone to single point failure
of the control hub, it does not scale well to large regions, and has only
limited benefits to electricity customers other than improving the power quality
of the utility, and providing limited blackout protection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research deals with synthesis of
scalable and robust distributed energy storage systems to improve grid load and
grid reliability, by exploiting solar photovoltaic (PV) systems. Progress will
be made on two fundamental issues: first, on the development of quantifiable PV
forecast methodologies that can help the effective operations of distributed
energy storage. Second, on the theoretical analysis that can guide the design of
distributed storage sizing over different communities; investigating community
decomposition, optimal joint sizing of community energy storage, and the optimal
operation of the storage based on forecasts, anomalies, and distributed
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The research will impact
higher level of renewable energy penetration by making use of distributed
storage devices in the distribution systems. The education and outreach efforts
will include a number of activities such as (1) an annual half-day workshop on
renewable energy to San Diego K-12 teachers, (2) weekly visits by UCSD
undergraduate engineering students to Encinitas Unified School District 5th and
6th grade elementary schools to present lesson plans on renewable energy, and
(3) a dorm building dashboard energy display indicating current energy use and
current potential for demand response (4) mentoring of minority students through
summer internships via the UCSD IDEA student center, and (5) minority outreach
efforts via the societies of Women in Engineering at UCSD and the Society of
Hispanic Professional Engineers.