* 1232578
* Selecting and Applying an Inverse Method to Infer Particle Dynamics from GEOTRACES Data
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Olivier Marchal, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2016
* USD 529,388.00

Processes affecting ocean particles have important consequences for the marine
biogeochemical cycles of trace elements; however, our present understanding of
these processes is incomplete, as shown by the very large uncertainties
(spanning orders of magnitude) of current estimates of particle cycling rates in
the ocean. The extensive trace element dataset being generated as part of the
GEOTRACES program provides an opportunity to enhance our knowledge of particle
processes in a variety of oceanic environments. A scientist from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution plans to determine the adequacy of different inverse
methods to constrain particle processes such as solid-solution exchange and
particle processes in the water column from measurements of thorium isotope
activity, particle composition, and particle concentration in different size
fractions. To attain this goal, the researcher would first assess the adequacy
of different inverse methods to infer, from such an eclectic dataset, rate
constants of sorption reactions (adsorption and desorption) and particle
dynamics (aggregation, disaggregation, sinking, and remineralization). The
second step would involve applying the selected method to estimate these
constants and their uncertainties at the "superstations" of the GEOTRACES North
Atlantic Zonal Section. Once the model is in place, the scientist would test the
hypotheses that the rate constants varied (1) vertically within the mesopelagic
layer and the deeper layers at these stations and (2) horizontally across the
diverse environments sampled along the section.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The software to be developed would be archived with the Biological and
Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office with instructions so other
scientist can use it. One graduate student would be trained on the use of
inverse methods in data analyses.