* 1232979
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Pacific Section: Mercury Speciation Along a Zonal Section in the Eastern Tropical South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Chad Hammerschmidt, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2016
* USD 179,081.00

Scientists from Wright State University and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
will participate in the 2013 GEOTRACES cruise to the Eastern Tropical South
Pacific (ETSP). Seawater samples collected during this transect from Peru to
Tahiti will be analyzed for total mercury (Hg), monomethylmercury (CH3Hg+),
dimethylmercury ((CH3)2Hg), and elemental Hg (Hg0) to construct high-resolution
vertical and horizontal sections. In addition to filtered seawater samples, the
scientists will also analyze suspended particles for total Hg and CH3Hg+, as
well as rain and aerosol samples for Hg species and dissolved and particulate
thiols, such as cysteine and glutathione.

The cruise track extends from the upwelling region off Peru, to an expansive
oxygen minimum zone (OMZ), followed by the hydrothermal vent fields of the East
Pacific Rise, and finally into the highly oligotrophic waters near Tahiti. These
different oceanographic features will allow the researchers to determine their
influence on the inputs and cycling of Hg in the ocean. Specifically, they plan
to assess whether (1) continental margins off Peru are a significant source of
Hg, CH3Hg+, and (CH3)2Hg; (2) the OMZ sustains the highest levels of methylated
Hg in the ocean; (3) hydrothermal systems are important sources of total and
methylated Hg; and (4) the large gradient in productivity along this track
impact the vertical distribution of this element, its bioavailability, and its
speciation.

In terms of broader impacts, this research may have societal benefits in helping
to understand the source of methylmercury in the ocean, which bioaccumulates in
fish and poses a hazard to those who eat seafood. In an effort to improve
science education, the proponent from Wright State University and his graduate
student plan to involve a class of 7th graders at Bellbrook Middle School in the
Dayton area in their research experiences at sea via classroom visits, a blog,
and interacting with them during the cruise. One graduate student and one
undergraduate student from Wright State University would be supported and
trained as part of this project.