* 1232424
* Proportional Hazards Model for Various Types of Censored Survival Data with Longitudinal Covariates
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Jian-Jian Ren, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 59,465.00

The interrelationships between time-to-event (survival time) variable and
longitudinal covariates is often the primary research interest in medical and
epidemiological studies. Due to the challenges encountered in some important
clinical trials on AIDS and cancer research, recently the statisticians started
modeling survival data and longitudinal data jointly via Cox's proportional
hazards model. Such a joint modeling procedure or methodology has broad
applications in many scientific research fields, but it is a considerably
difficult problem due to censoring on the survival time and that the covariate
process is only observed at some given time points. Up to now, statistical
methods on this topic have not been fully or well developed, while the
importance and needs for developing these methods have become more evident when
the proposer and her collaborators recently encountered some more complicated
problems which have not been studied in statistical literature; see examples
listed below. Specifically, there have not been any modeling procedures that
directly study the relationship between survival time and within-subject
historic patterns of change in longitudinal covariates, nor have there been any
works on joint modeling doubly censored or interval censored survival data
together with (intensive or multi-phase intensive) longitudinal covariates,
which is far more challenging than right censored data problem. In fact, there
have been no published works on the Cox model with doubly censored data, not
even for the case with time-independent covariates. In this research, asymptotic
methods and simulations will be mainly used in the studies, and the issues under
consideration include: (a) derivation of the empirical likelihood based MLE for
the Cox model with longitudinal covariates for right censored, doubly censored
and interval censored survival data, respectively; (b) computation algorithms
for the MLE; (c) asymptotic properties of the MLE; (d) Wilk's theorem for the
MLE; (e) goodness-of-fit tests for the Cox model; (f) comparison with
alternative methods. At least two Ph.D. students of the proposer will be
involved in and benefit from the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
new statistical methodology to be developed in this project has direct impact to
medical research, epidemiology, social and behavioral sciences, etc. For
instance, the data examples which we have encountered and motivate the research
of this project include the following problems on joint modeling survival time
and longitudinal covariates. In a prostate cancer study on mice, part of the
research focus is joint modeling interval censored survival time and
longitudinal covariates. In a smoking cessation study, the research focus is
joint modeling right censored survival time and intensive longitudinal
covariates. In a recent study of child development, the research focus is joint
modeling doubly censored survival time and multi-phase intensive longitudinal
covariates.