* 1232442
* Collaborative Research: Processes Determining the Abundance of Terrestrial Wildlife Communities Across Large Scales
* BIO,EF
* 12/22/2011,07/31/2016
* Roland Kays, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2016
* USD 840,939.00

Understanding the processes determining abundance of terrestrial wildlife
communities across large scales and estimating the abundance of wildlife across
large areas remain a major challenge. For most species, the factors that
regulate their distribution and yearly fluctuations in population size are
unknown. This project takes advantage of the key innovation of using motion
sensitive camera traps as a network of sensors for estimating animal abundance.
This new approach can produce abundance data for any terrestrial animal greater
than 100g, typically about 60% of the terrestrial animals in the eastern USA.
Furthermore, the method is amenable to citizen science programs, without the
biases or data quality issues typical of other programs, opening the possibility
of a sustainable dense sampling effort across large areas. Software will be
developed efficiently enter and to manage camera images and associated data.
Using standardize field techniques citizens groups will sample their local
wildlife communities with cameras. The resulting data will be analyzed using new
multi-scale statistical models to discover the processes regulating wildlife
abundance over large areas. Mapping the local abundance of wildlife populations
across broad areas will be key to understanding the mechanisms responsible for
changes resulting from land-management decisions and regional climate variation.
By involving citizens in data collection this project will be helping local
wildlife populations. All data and images will be made freely available online,
providing a tool not only for scientists, but also to give the public a new
window into the animal communities of their region.