* 1232987
* Testing geochemical proxy relationships under variable paleo-seawater chemical compositions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Baerbel Hoenisch, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2017
* USD 418,861.00

The application of proxies to paleoceanographic reconstructions relies on
calibrations that may be sensitive to changes in the ocean's chemistry (e.g.,
elemental abundances, isotopic composition). This project, led by a faculty
member at Columbia University's Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory, will test the
assumption that the sensitivity of paleo-proxies has remained constant as ocean
chemistry has changed over time. Planktonic foraminifera, a common paleo-proxy
archive, will be cultured in the laboratory under a range of seawater
chemistries representing changing ocean conditions from the Eocene to the
Cretaceous (~50 to 100 million years before present). The effects of these
changing conditions will be assessed for several proxies, including stable
oxygen and carbon isotopes and the B/Ca proxy for seawater carbonate chemistry.
Complementary studies will examine the association and photosynthetic activity
of symbiotic algae, which also affect chemical proxy composition in foraminifera
shells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our capacity to
quantify past changes in ocean and climate, and thereby to understand potential
for future changes. Funding supports a variety of education, outreach, and
service activities. One graduate and one undergraduate student from the U.S.
will be involved in the project, and two graduate students from Australia will
also contribute. In addition, two high school students from the Young Women's
Leadership School in East Harlem, New York City, will participate in the
culturing program.