* 1232393
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Novel 3D analysis of hip joint mobility and the evolution of locomotor abilities in Miocene hominoids
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Carol Ward, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,765.00

Research by doctoral candidate Ashley Hammond (University of Missouri-Columbia),
under the supervision of Dr. Carol Ward, will identify how hip joint mobility
relates to locomotor behavior and anatomical form in living anthropoids (apes
and monkeys) in order to reconstruct behavioral capabilities in fossil apes from
the evolutionarily critical Miocene time period (ca. 23-5 million years ago).
Below-branch suspensory behaviors distinguish modern apes from most monkeys, and
the emergence of great ape-like locomotor behaviors has become the defining
issue in reconstructing how apes evolved. Behavioral capabilities are
notoriously difficult to infer in fossil apes, however, because most fossil apes
display unusual combinations of primitive and modern anatomies.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Suspensory behaviors are hypothesized to require high hip joint
mobility, providing a method for evaluating suspensory abilities in fossils
based on joint function, but the influence of soft tissues on range of motion
must be characterized prior to reconstructing joint movement from just fossil
bones. This study tests the hypothesis that suspensory anthropoids have larger
ranges of hip mobility than non-suspensory anthropoids by measuring passive
range of motion on a large sample of living (in vivo) apes and monkeys. The
measures collected from live animals are then statistically compared to range of
motion estimates from virtual models that rely on bony anatomy to limit joint
movement. The validated model of joint movement is then used to assess the
influence of anatomical variation on hip joint mobility and applied to all
available fossil apes in order to identify whether they were adapted for using
suspensory behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study establishes a method to
test locomotor hypotheses in fossil apes, providing critical data for
evolutionary scenarios of human origins. The shape analysis techniques developed
here will be useful for all vertebrate morphologists, and the validated virtual
models will serve as a comparative model for researchers to approach joint
function in any mammalian species. More broadly, this project will identify how
specific variation in hip joint anatomical form affects mobility, which can be
integrated into clinical models of hip function. This project provides training
opportunities for undergraduate students, including minorities, and is
supporting the research of a female doctoral student being mentored by a female
scientist.