* 1232752
* EAGER: Defining the SUMOylation System in Maize and its Roles in Stress Protection
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Richard Vierstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 04/30/2016
* USD 359,100.00

The ability to detect and respond to stress is central to a plant's survival in
a host of unfavorable environments and a key determinant of agricultural
productivity under sub-optimal field conditions. Although a number of pathways
have been described that confer specific protection to various abiotic and
biotic challenges, a recent discovery of a potentially universal protective
mechanism involving the Small Ubiquitin-related MOdifier (SUMO) may transform
the current appreciation of stress biology. Specifically, it has been shown that
the Arabidopsis SUMO polypeptide becomes covalently attached to numerous nuclear
proteins and that the levels of these conjugates rise rapidly and reversibly
after exposing plants to various abiotic stresses. Using novel quantitative
proteomic approaches, it has been discovered that many of the SUMOylation
targets are known critical regulators with their collective functions implying
that SUMO addition engages a protective response that broadly alters chromatin
accessibility, transcription, and mRNA processing/export. Taken together, these
results suggest that SUMO might offer unique opportunities to globally
manipulate the stress response for agricultural benefit. Unfortunately, the
organization and functions of the SUMO system are largely unknown in other plant
species, including all important agricultural crops, thus precluding rational
redesign to improve crop plant productivity. Moreover, preliminary genome
analyses of maize and rice revealed that the organization of the SUMO system in
cereals might differ significantly from that in observed in Arabidopsis. This
EAGER project proposes to define how SUMOylation works during stress in crops
using maize (Zea mays) as the model. The specific aims are to: (i) delineate the
SUMOylation system in maize using bioinformatic and biochemical methods and
define kinetically how the system responds to stress; (ii) generate a library of
maize mutants and transgenic lines affecting key components required for SUMO
addition and release; (iii) define the "SUMOylome" of maize, quantify how the
SUMOylation status of individual targets changes during stress and after
recovery; and (iv) analyze SUMO pathway mutants phenotypically to determine how
stress-induced SUMOylation may help maize survive adverse environments.
Collectively, this project will generate much-needed tools and germplasm that
can be exploited to understand how SUMO might reorganize maize chromatin and its
transcriptome during stress, and identify key points in plant stress responses
involving SUMOylation that can be manipulated for improved yield.

The current understanding of SUMOylation in plants is still rudimentary and
almost nonexistent in crop species where its manipulation may have substantial
agricultural impact. This project will provide interdisciplinary training of the
next generation of plant scientists working on crops. This research will
collectively incorporate postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduates as well
as high school students sponsored by the Wisconsin Youth Apprenticeship Program
(YAP) in Biotechnology. During the course of this project, reagents, techniques,
mutants, and transgenic lines will be generated that will provide a much needed
foundation to investigate SUMOylation in maize, and hopefully offer new
strategies to rationally alter the SUMO system for agricultural and medicinal
benefit. Plant resources will be available through the Maize Genetics
Cooperative Stock Center (http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu). Raw and processed
experimental data will be deposited into NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
and at Maize GDB (http://www.maizegdb.org/).