* 1232910
* Short-crested Breaking Waves and Surfzone Vorticity
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 849,955.00

Beaches and the adjacent surfzone are threatened by terrestrial pollution that
often drains onto the shoreline where it is transported and dispersed within the
surfzone (region of breaking waves near the shoreline). Polluted water causes
costly beach closures and endangers public health, but currently there are no
predictive models for surfzone pollution and the surfzone dispersion rates
required for such a model are not known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent fieldwork
has found surfzone tracer (e.g., pollution, nutrients, larvae) dispersion is
correlated with the strength of horizontal eddies within the surfzone.
Observations and model results indicate there is a wide range of surfzone eddy
sizes and time scales, but the structure and origin of this rich vorticity
(rotation) field is unknown. This study will use a unique circular array of
current meters to make the first sea-swell (0.05-0.25 Hz) and lower frequency
measurements of surfzone vertical vorticity (e.g., from horizontal eddies) over
a range of incident wave conditions on a natural beach. A pilot test done in
2011 suggests the circular array measurements can be used to estimate vorticity
over a wide frequency range, which would allow the testing of the hypotheses
that mean vorticity increases with mean wave angle and wave height, and that
vorticity variance increases with wave directional spread, mean wave angle, and
wave height. There are many potential sources of surfzone vorticity. In
particular, it is hypothesized that vorticity is generated at the ends of a
breaking wave crest (crest ends), and a recent modeling study suggests that
crest ends may be a primary forcing mechanism for surfzone eddy diffusion. Here
surfzone vorticity measurements will be combined with video observations to
quantify changes in vorticity during crest-end events, and to estimate crest-end
vorticity generation. Crest-end forced vorticity will be compared with other
possible eddy forcing mechanisms, including wave groups and shear instabilities
of the mean alongshore current (shear waves), over a range of conditions. The
surfzone enstrophy (squared vorticity) spectrum will be compared with
theoretical spectral shapes and may indicate a primary stirring
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This investigation of
vorticity will increase knowledge of surfzone eddies and mixing, and may lead to
eddy diffusivity estimates using only video observations or offshore wave
conditions. Diffusivity estimates are necessary to model surfzone pollution, and
thus to improving public safety and beach management decisions.&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this work and the team's field experiences will be shared with high
school oceanography and coastal studies students through the Woods Hole Science
and Technology Education Partnership (WHSTEP). In collaboration with a high
school teacher the team will lead fieldtrips and discussions with students, and
will create a lesson on surfzone processes that fits within National Science
Education Standards and can be adapted to different learning levels. A website
will be developed to host the finished self-contained product (lesson plans,
presentations, activities, and assessments) so it can be used by educators in
the WHSTEP and across the nation.