* 1232991
* GEOTRACES Pacific Section: Measurement of Helium Isotopes, Tritium, Noble Gases, and Radiocarbon
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2017
* USD 797,709.00

The biogeochemical cycling of trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) in the marine
environment is an important research area within the context of global change
that motivates the International GEOTRACES program. Some trace elements are
known to play potentially important roles as micronutrients in biological
cycling, particularly in regard to enzymatic and catalytic processes in the
marine environment. Radioisotopes, transient tracers, and noble gases are
valuable tracers of these and related processes, and of the ocean?s interaction
with the atmosphere and the solid earth, which in turn play a role in shaping
many trace element distributions within the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the GEOTRACES Science Plan, the guiding
mission of the GEOTRACES program is "to identify processes and quantify fluxes
that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean".
The key observational strategy for GEOTRACES is an internationally-coordinated
global-scale ocean survey of key TEIs. The second US GEOTRACES section, set for
the Eastern South Pacific in 2013, is aimed at the characterization of key
processes in an oxygen minimum zone (OMZ), as well as a major abyssal
hydrothermal plume extending westward from the East Pacific Rise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help achieve these goals, with support from this grant,
a research team at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will collaborate
with other GEOTRACES investigators on the Eastern South Pacific expedition to
measure a suite of tracers useful for interpreting the rest of the synoptic TEI
data. Specifically, the team will make measurements of the noble gases, helium
isotopes, tritium, and radiocarbon include in order to: (1) quantify
ventilation, circulation, and diapycnal mixing in the OMZ to enable estimation
of fluxes and transformation rates of key TEIs; (2) determine upwelling rates in
the oxygen minimum zone (OMZ) over a range of timescales to constrain the fluxes
of biogeochemically important properties; (3) estimate hydrothermal fluxes of
key TEIs using 3He as a flux gauge, and also use 3He as a measure of downstream
dilution in the hydrothermal plume; (4) use radiocarbon to estimate abyssal
remineralization rates for key TEIs; and (5) probe for evidence of off-axis
contribution of hydrothermal processes to TEI distribution. The collective
effort will allow marine geochemists to understand mechanistically and
quantitatively how a variety of physical, chemical, and biological processes
join to determine the distribtuion of TEIs in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It has been argued that
anthropogenic influence on the global cycles of many elements is emerging as
significant. As outlined in the International GEOTRACES Science Plan, the
broader impacts of this activity include both an important "baseline snapshot"
of the biogeochemical state of the oceanic environment, and a quantitative
improvement in the characterization and understanding of important processes in
the marine environment. Both of these build a foundation for improved models and
quantitative predictions of the oceanic response and role in global change and
climate, particularly with anthropogenic forcing. For example, recent evidence
of "ocean deoxygenation" has profound implications for marine biologic response.
In particular, the evolving state of marine OMZs represents an important
biogeochemical "climate canary". A key benefit of diagnosing trace metal
dynamics and response to changing redox conditions is the improvement in
prognostic capabilities of coupled ocean-atmosphere biogeochemical models for
global change.