* 1232962
* Studies of Turbulence and Mixing in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, a Continuation of DIMES
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,224,357.00

Intellectual Merit: The Diapycnal and Isopycnal Mixing Experiment in the
Southern Ocean (DIMES) is a study of ocean mixing in the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (ACC) which runs west to east all around the continent of Antarctica,
south of the other continents. This current system is somewhat of a barrier to
transport of heat, carbon dioxide and other important ocean constituents between
the far south and the rest of the ocean, and mixing processes play an important
role in those transports. DIMES is a multi-investigator cooperative project, led
by physical oceanographers in the U.S. and in the U.K. A passive tracer and an
array of sub-surface floats were deployed early in 2009 more than 2000 km west
of Drake Passage on a surface of constant density about 1500 m deep between the
Sub Antarctic Front and the Polar Front of the ACC. In early 2010 a U.S. led
research cruise sampled the tracer, turbulence levels, and the velocity and
density profiles that govern the generation of that turbulence, and additional
U.K. led research cruises in 2011 and 2012 continue this sampling as the tracer
has made its way through Drake Passage, into the Scotia Sea, and over the North
Scotia Ridge, a track of more than 3000 km. The initial results show that
diapycnal, i.e., vertical, mixing west of Drake Passage where the bottom is
relatively smooth is no larger than in most other regions of the open ocean. In
contrast, there are strong velocity shears and intense turbulence levels over
the rough topography in Drake Passage and diapycnal diffusivity of the tracer
more than 10 times larger in Drake Passage and to the east than west of Drake
Passage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DIMES field program continues with the U.S.
team collecting new velocity and turbulence data in the Scotia Sea. It is
anticipated that the tracer will continue passing through the Scotia Sea until
at least early 2014. The U.K. partners have scheduled sampling of the tracer on
cruises at the North Scotia Ridge and in the eastern and central Scotia Sea in
early 2013 and early 2014. The current project will continue the time series of
the tracer at Drake Passage on two more U.S. led cruises, in late 2012 and late
2013. Trajectories through the Scotia Sea estimated from the tracer
observations, from neutrally buoyant floats, and from numerical models will be
used to accurately estimate mixing rates of the tracer and to locate where the
mixing is concentrated. During the 2013 cruise the velocity and turbulence
fields along high-resolution transects along the ACC and across the ridges of
Drake Passage will be measured to see how far downstream of the ridges the
mixing is enhanced, and to test the hypothesis that mixing is enhanced by
breaking lee waves generated by flow over the rough
topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: DIMES (see web site at
http://dimes.ucsd.edu) involves many graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers. Two graduate students, who would become expert in ocean turbulence
and the processes generating it, will continue be trained on this project. The
work in DIMES is ultimately motivated by the need to understand the overturning
circulation of the global ocean. This circulation governs the transport and
storage of heat and carbon dioxide within the huge oceanic reservoir, and thus
plays a major role in regulating the earth?s climate. Understanding the
circulation and how it changes in reaction to external forces is necessary to
the understanding of past climate change and of how climate might change in the
future, and is therefore of great importance to human well-being. The data
collected and analyzed by the DIMES project will be assembled and made publicly
available at the end of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DIMES project is a
process experiment sponsored by the U.S. CLIVAR (Climate variability and
predictability) program.