* 1232168
* Grid Challenges for a Smart Transit System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Qipeng Zheng, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 322,501.00

This project will develop technologies for a sustainable, fully-automated Smart
Transit System (STS) which will operate in grid connected and transit mode on
fixed pathways. It will develop advanced modeling and simulation to identify
optimization and control requirements for smart transit system integration with
the grid, including scheduling and routing methods required for joint management
of the grid and transit aspects of the integrated system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will develop the kinds of
tools which will be needed to upgrade electric power distribution systems in
general, in order to accommodate more electric transportation. Basic challenges
include when and how to charge (drawing from grid), ancillary and intermittency
mitigation (giving back to grid), jointly optimizing routing and charging
strategies, power quality solutions and integration of electric vehicle with
renewable sources. &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a simulation platform for
interfacing with multiple stakeholders on current issues. The sustainable
automated transport system can provide stability to grid by providing ancillary
services during contingencies and voltage support after a fault resulting in
more stable and secure operation of grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The new unified system will benefit local consumers, who will be able to
participate through demand response and on-demand sustainable transit, which
saves them money both on electricity and on transit costs, while providing more
convenience and flexibility. The research will benefit the university, and will
be widely disseminated through interactions with utilities, auto industry,
conferences, seminars and workshops. There will be outreach to local schools and
communities to develop and plan for local energy and transportation needs and to
heighten electric vehicle awareness. This project will support West Virginia?s
Vision 2015 strategic plan to make research and innovation as number one driver
of West Virginia's economy.