* 1232461
* GSE/RES: Gender Equity in Afterschool Computer Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Melissa Koch, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Dana Britton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 524,452.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SRI International and the California School-Age Consortium
seek to explore whether computer science afterschool activities in single-sex
settings are more effective than computer science afterschool activities in co-
ed settings. The research involves 25 after school sites, each with
approximately 30 minority girls and boys randomly assigned to a single-sex male
environment, single-sex female environment, or coeducational environment. The PI
uses the Build IT curriculum developed with prior NSF funding in all three
research conditions based on the high impact and appeal of the Build IT units to
engage girls and boys in scientific discovery. The PI approaches this work by
paying close attention to and use of culturally relevant instructional
materials, providing role models, addressing stereotype threats, encouraging
effort-focused mindsets, and training in equity for staff. The research
questions are (1) Does a computing curriculum that was effective for African
American and Latina girls in an afterschool organization focused on serving
girls have equal benefits for girls when grouped in a single-sex or coed
environment? (2) Do boys benefit from the curriculum and, if so, do they benefit
more from single-sex or coed environments? (3) What individual differences the
backgrounds (e.g. parental support, cultural stereotypes) of boys and girls;
characteristics (e.g. gender, race, culture), and technology experiences prior
to program, regardless of setting impact attitudes towards and understanding of
computer science? (4) To what extent do facilitators implement gender-equitable
practices and which of these practices inhibit or promote the interest of girls
and boys in and understanding of computer science?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
employs a rigorous experimental design that uses Eccles' expectancy-value model
as the theoretical framework. Eccles' expectancy-value model assesses
attitudinal changes and conceptual understandings as well as encourages African
American and Latina students to pursue STEM learning and careers. It describes
how key socializers such as parents, teachers, peers, role models, and
afterschool facilitators can shape the attitudes of girls and boys toward their
future success. It also highlights the support youth need to see STEM as part of
their identity to pursue STEM goals. A train-the-trainer approach to
professional development supports 25 facilitators and their managers on the use
of the Build IT curriculum. All trainers, facilitators, and managers participate
in Build IT professional development offerings that include strategies for
working with boys and girls in the various environments. The intervention allows
low SES students to build information technology fluency through design and
exploration of IT careers, become more innovative with technology as
entrepreneurial environmental engineers, and delve in computational thinking.
The expected outcome is that this research will shed light on when single-sex
and coeducation works and for whom.