* 1232339
* Collaborative Research: Mechano-Lipidomics and Mechano-Cytosis of Drug Delivery Liposomes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Robert Campbell, Massachusetts College of Pharmacy
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2016
* USD 75,200.00

The research goal of this proposal is to build a comprehensive model of mechano-
lipidomics and mechanocytosis by designing careful experiments and constructing
solid-mechanics based models that are consistent with the classical
understanding of membrane fusion mechanics. Nano-/micro-scale liposomes and
freestanding membranes will be fabricated using common drug delivery lipids and
lipid extracts from cell membrane of ovarian cancer cells. Empirical
investigations will include: (i) membrane-elasticity characterization, where a
nano-indenter or AFM tip indents and taps the sample vesicles and freestanding
membranes, and an optical microscope monitors and records the deformed profiles
in-situ; and (ii) mechano-cytosis test, where a mechanical probe forces
endocytosis of a liposome into a freestanding membrane or to another liposome. A
comprehensive model of deformation-adhesion-endocytosis mechanics will be
constructed based on (i) linear elastic approximation, (ii) visco-hyperelastic
behavior of lipid membranes, (iii) nonspecific intersurface forces at liposome-
membrane and liposome-liposome interfaces, (iv) thermodynamic energy balance for
adhesion-fusion. Analytical solutions will first be derived by assuming
axisymmetric geometries, linear elastic material responses, and square-well
adhesion potential (i.e. cohesive zone approximation), in order to identify the
system parameters. The more realistic but sophisticated materials laws and
surface potential will then be implemented using numerical routines.

Despite progress in empirical design of drug delivery liposomes, mechanical
deformation is missing from the fundamental understanding of lipid membrane
fusion and endocytotic energetics. This research will address this shortcoming
by designing feasible experiments to investigate the mechanical aspects of lipid
membranes and liposomes with a focus in mechano-cytosis and constructing
biomechanics models, aiming to build mechano-lipidomics. The research will
addres a small but critical part of mechano-lipidomics, rather than building a
comprehensive model for lipidomics and drug delivery. Outcomes from these
measurements, models and analysis will be used by pharmacist to design and
fabricate the next generation of drug delivery liposomes to be tested in-vivo in
the future.