* 1232491
* RAPID: Effect of Oil Spill on Organic Carbon Partitioning and Transformation in the Water Column in the Northern Gulf
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Laodong Guo, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 05/31/2013
* USD 50,403.00

With funding through this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID), researchers
at the University of Southern Mississippi will examine the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill in the northern Gulf of Mexico -- an oil spill of national significance --
to study the fate, transport and transformation of crude oil components and
their interactions with marine organic matter from baseline to maximum impact in
a complete time series. Their working hypothesis is that the crude oil
components are isotopically light (in terms of carbon-13) and distinct in
optical properties (UV-vis and fluorescence emission-excitation matrices [EEM])
from natural marine organic matter, thus allowing the use of stable isotopes and
fluorescence techniques for quantitative understanding of their fate, transport,
and transformations in the northern Gulf of Mexico. They will collect seawater
samples at a station in the Mississippi Bight in the northern Gulf of Mexico
from base line conditions to maximum impact. EEM fluorescence, stable isotopes,
and flow field-flow fractionation techniques will be employed. Measurements will
include dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and
particulate organic carbon (POC) and their stable carbon isotopic composition
(C-13), optical properties, including UV-vis absorbance, adsorption coefficient,
spectral slope, and EEMs, composition and size spectrum of DOM, chlorophyll-a,
and other common environmental parameters, such as salinity, temperature,
dissolved oxygen, and nutrients. Results of this study are expected to provide
new insights into how organic matter from oil spills interacts with marine
organic matter affecting the ocean carbon budget, biogeochemical processes, and
marine ecosystems as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Combined
with planned and ongoing research in response to this unprecedented oil spill in
the northern Gulf of Mexico, this research will contribute to the understanding
of the fate, transport and transformation of spilled oils and their interactions
with natural marine organic matter in the water column in the coastal
environment. The investigators will collaborate with other funded projects for
data sharing. The project will support one graduate student, who will gain
valuable experience in rapid response research as well as in interacting with
other research teams in the Gulf Coast region.