* 1232544
* International Conference on Stem Cell Engineering, April 29, 2012 - May 2, 2012, Seattle, WA
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Miriam Cortes-Caminero, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2013
* USD 9,800.00

1232544/ Cortes-Caminero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to help support
"The Third International Conference on Stem Cell Engineering" to be held April
29 through Wednesday, May 2, 2012, at the Sheraton Hotel in Seattle, WA. The
conference chairs are Sean Palecek and Charles Murray.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
field of stem cells has rapidly emerged as an important multidisciplinary area
of research in biology, bioengineering, and medicine. There are no forums,
however, whose primary goal is to bring together biologists, physician-
scientists and engineers to discuss ways in which their disciplines can
collaborate to find novel solutions to problems that are limiting the
development of new technologies and therapies. In response to this need, SBE in
collaboration with AIChE is organizing and instituting the Third International
Conference on Stem Cell Engineering (ICSCE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Third
ICSCE will be the third in a series of ICSCE meetings, held every two years,
designed to bring together researchers from academia and industry that are using
quantitative approaches and novel technology development to advance the
understanding and application of stem cell biology and engineering. The ICSCE
meeting series will serve to promote, shape, and refine the definition of the
Stem Cell Engineering field. Approximately 200 people are expected to
attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;There is currently no
other meeting that provides a forum for the emerging field of Stem Cell
Engineering. Although engineers attend international meetings such as the
International Society for Stem Cell Research meeting, there is no direct forum
for interactions between stem cell engineers and stem cell biologists at this or
similar events. The fact that the ISSCR has agreed to co-organize this event is
a testament to the recognition of the importance for balanced interactions
between these two communities.&lt;br/&gt;From the bioengineering side, although
there are other conferences that have some programming in stem cell engineering
(AIChE, ACS, BMES), this programming is often diffuse and does not include the
presence of world leaders in multiple facets of stem cell biology or stem cell
engineering. In these three cases, the format of the large meetings also does
not foster the same level of interaction among participants. There are also
smaller meetings on stem cells, of similar size to ICSCE, such as Keystone
Symposia. These have very high quality programming, but their focus has been
more in the area of stem cell and developmental biology, with limited to no
engineering content. Finally, there are also small scale, for-profit conferences
that successfully draw elements from academia and industry, but these are often
not attended by leading figures from biology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;None of the
organizations cited above caters to the specific aims of the ICSCE. Furthermore,
we believe that our emphasis on the integration of stem cell biology and
engineering at many levels is new and unique, and this theme is reflected
throughout our scientific program. Support is sought for the Third ICSCE in this
application, and the organizers intend for this conference to continue to be
held every two years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Theme of this third meeting is
?Designing Cellular Therapies?, and the Aims of this conference are to provide a
venue:&lt;br/&gt;1. For scientific presentations from a diverse group of leading
stem cell biology and engineering&lt;br/&gt;researchers who cover the breadth of
the emerging field of Stem Cell Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;2. For interactions
between academic and industry researchers, who bring different approaches and
perspectives to the technical aspects and commercialization potential of Stem
Cell Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;3. For active participation by Ph.D. students and
postdoctoral trainees in stem cell biology and&lt;br/&gt;bioengineering fields,
who represent the future of stem cell biology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;4. For
bringing biologists, physician-scientists and engineers together in an
collaborative atmosphere to discuss their disciplines and approaches, and to
motivate new research that overcomes barriers limiting the development of stem
cell-based technologies.&lt;br/&gt;5. For improving the access of the field of
Stem Cell Engineering to a diverse group of scientists,&lt;br/&gt;including
bioengineers with little stem cell experience and women and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;6. For understanding the increasingly global nature of the
field of Stem Cell Engineering and identifying how international collaborations
can facilitate the advancement of this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope,
theme, and aims of the meeting fall squarely within the mission of the NSF,
which has been increasingly committed to integrating the physical and
engineering sciences with the life sciences, encouraging research and
development in multidisciplinary areas, educating the next generation of young
researchers, and helping increase the diversity of the workforce in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;This application, if successful, will directly impact
Aims 3-6, by providing partial support for graduate student/postdoctoral
associate participants, and by providing a forum for the interactions between
normally separated leading scientists and engineers to stimulate new ideas that
could benefit economic and health-related activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding
from NSF would go specifically to support young investigators and graduate
students. Attention was paid to increase numbers of women and underrepresented
minorities on the organizing committee, and as speakers, as well as among
attendees. Conference materials will be available on a public web site after the
conference.