* 1233626
* Scalable Fabrication of Smart Polymer Surfaces Using Nanoimprint Lithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Yifu Ding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 279,056.00

This grant supports research on a novel fabrication methodology for creating
smart polymer surfaces and nanostructures that are capable of changing shapes at
nanoscale. The proposed methodology combines the nanofabrication capability of
nanoimprint lithography (NIL) with the stimuli-responsive 'shape memory' effect
of network polymers. An experimental platform will be developed to precisely
determine the geometry and the energy associated with the nanoscale shape
change, which, in turn, will enable systematic examinations of how the NIL
parameters such as temperature, pressure and processing time influence the
nanoscale shape memory effect. A range of bulk shape memory polymers with
systematically-varying chemical and physical properties will be studied for
their applicability as the proposed new class of smart surfaces and
nanostructures. In addition, unique applications enabled by this new fabrication
methodology in areas of optics and biomaterials will be explored. If successful,
the results of the research will advance our current understanding of nanoscale
shape memory effect of polymers, and shed light on the entropic (or rubber)
elasticity of polymers at length scale approaching the network structures. The
research will also provide a new methodology for fabricating smart polymer
surfaces and nanostructures at low cost and without the need for complex
chemistry, and establish the structure-processing-property relationships needed
for using this methodology for scalable manufacturing. This research will also
enhance the professional development of graduate students, promote diversity in
science and engineering disciplines, and enrich K-12 outreach, with a focus on
emerging polymer-based nanofabrication technologies.