* 1233592
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Synoptic Climatological Approaches to Assessing Subcanopy Hydrologic and Nutrient Fluxes in a Temperate Deciduous Forest
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Delphis Levia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2014
* USD 13,805.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the flow of water and
chemicals through forest canopies under different precipitation regimes.
Deciduous temperate forests comprise over 280 million hectares in North and
Central America and provide vital ecosystem services through the cycling of
water and nutrients. During storm events, water moves through the forest canopy
and exchanges nutrients and pollutants with vegetation and deposits the
chemically altered precipitation to the forest floor. Both storm
characteristics, such as intensity, duration, and magnitude, and the structural
parameters of forest canopies have a significant control on the quantity and
quality of such water, but how these may be influenced by altered precipitation
regimes as a result of changing climates is largely uncertain. This project will
yield a better understanding of the cycling of nutrients and pollutants within a
forest canopy through hydrologic pathways that are ultimately controlled by
atmospheric circulation and precipitation patterns at a field site in the Mid-
Atlantic region. The doctoral student will link synoptic climatology with water
and solute flux in temperate forests. Meteorological characteristics will be
monitored at 5-minute intervals. These real-time ground observations will
complement a long-term synoptic calendar, which will be developed to categorize
common weather patterns experienced in the region. The partitioning of
precipitation into throughfall (water intercepted by the canopy that continues
to fall to the forest floor) and stemflow (water that is intercepted by the
canopy and funneled down the tree trunk and deposited directly to the base of
the tree) will be measured by automated tipping buckets at 5-minute intervals
during storm events for two tree species of varying bark thickness and canopy
geometry in order to understand the varying responses of precipitation in a
heterogeneous forest canopy. Precipitation, throughfall, and stemflow samples
will be collected after storm events and analyzed for important nutrients, such
as dissolved organic carbon, calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium, and for
anions, such as nitrates and sulfates, which can form acid rain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new methodologies for estimating
hydrologic and nutrient fluxes in forest canopies by integrating techniques of
synoptic climatology and weather pattern analysis. This study will demonstrate
how synoptic analysis of large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns may be
used to estimate surface environmental conditions, thus reducing the demand for
costly, fine-scale field observations. The dataset compiled in this study will
be used to reconstruct a historical nutrient budget of Mid-Atlantic forests of
similar composition and potentially forecast changes in forest hydrologic and
nutrient budgets as a result of climate-induced changes to precipitation
regimes. A more thorough understanding of the movement of water, nutrients, and
pollutants in forest ecosystems will improve management capabilities and climate
change mitigation efforts. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.