* 1233126
* Self Repairable Seals by Crack Healing of Glass and Glass-Ceramic Composites for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Raj Singh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

The primary objective of this grant is to establish a fundamental understanding
of the crack-healing mechanism in promising glasses and glass-ceramic composites
useful for advancing a transformative concept of self-repairable seals for fuel
cells. Glasses are used as seals in solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) for
generating electricity directly. It requires hermetic metal-ceramic seals
functioning at 800°C, which is challenging and susceptible to glass seal
cracking during operation. To address this challenge, a novel concept of active
self-repairable seals driven by surface energy will be pursued. The rationale
behind this novel concept is that at the SOFC operating temperature of 800°C a
sealing glass with appropriate surface and thermophysical properties can heal or
repair cracks created during thermal transients. However, a fundamental
understanding of the kinetics and mechanism of crack healing in glasses and
glass-ceramic composites is currently lacking. With such an understanding, one
can identify the crack-healing/self-repair mechanism and be able to predict the
healing time required for achieving self-repair in a functioning SOFC. In
addition, the role of the crystalline ceramic phase created either by
crystallization of the glass or added intentionally for influencing crack
healing behavior will be better understood so that the glass-ceramic composites
with optimum load-bearing capability and self-repairability can be designed for
use as seals in a SOFC. Through this grant, the PI also will develop analytical
models to describe and predict crack-healing and self-repair behaviors observed
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seals play a critical role in several high-
technology areas including SOFCs, vacuum technology, microelectronics, power
electronics, and microelectromechanical systems. The proposed research will
train graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates in
invaluable technical and research skills applicable to both academia and
industry and advance the resources of our institution by new facilities for the
synthesis of glasses and glass-composites for high-technology applications. In
addition, with the current emphasis on conserving our limited natural resources
for energy production, efficient SOFCs will result in direct savings by lower
fuel consumption for power generation and environmental impact. The
minority/women undergraduate and high school students will be mentored and
exposed to this research through Multicultural Engineering Program (MEP), and
WEAT (Women In Engineering, Architecture &amp; Technology) programs. A
significant outreach to high schools is proposed through ASM materials workshops
and camps for teachers and students.