* 1233151
* Nanosphere Coatings on Silicon Thin Film Photovoltaics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Paul Leu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 301,593.00

This grant provides funding for research enabling the development of numerical
tools and nanomanufacturing processes for characterizing the structure-process-
performance relationships of nanosphere coatings on silicon thin films. These
coatings have the potential to not only enhance solar efficiencies without
introducing additional surface recombination, but also reduce manufacturing
processes and costs. The developed numerical tools will determine optimal
structures for enhanced efficiencies while considering both ordered and
disordered structures. Detailed simulations will be performed on optimal
structures to determine the role of scattering and whispering gallery modes as
well as to determine the angular performance of coated solar cells and evaluate
transport characteristics. Scalable, inexpensive spin coating methods will be
used to understand how nanosphere coatings may be assembled onto silicon thin
film photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;Manufactured samples will be characterized
structurally, optically, and electronically to validate
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will lead to
improvements in the design of next-generation solar cells. This could also have
a profound impact on other nanophotonic applications that make use of whispering
gallery modes such as optical filters and biosensors. A broad impact is
envisioned in the areas of solar cells, topology optimization, and
nanomanufacturing. This project will also educate and outreach to next-
generation engineers through open source software development, the introduction
of various education modules, and involvement with the Pitt Office of
Diversity's INVESTING NOW summer program.