* 1233337
* Stochastic Sequential Assignment Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Sheldon Ross, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 247,826.00

This project will utilize dynamic programming to develop approaches for solving
problems where&lt;br/&gt;sequentially arriving jobs can either be rejected or
assigned to a currently unassigned worker. In&lt;br/&gt;the general model the
resulting reward from an assignment will be determined by an
arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;function that depends on both the characteristics of the job
and the worker. Particular cases,&lt;br/&gt;such as where the reward is binary,
yielding a reward of 1 when a job is assigned to a qualified&lt;br/&gt;worker,
will be considered. Models where the problem ends when each worker has been
assigned&lt;br/&gt;and ones where workers return for reassignment after a random
time will be considered. In the&lt;br/&gt;case of returning workers, probability
distributions for the time it takes each worker to complete&lt;br/&gt;a job are
assumed, and problems will be analyzed both when these distributions are
assumed&lt;br/&gt;known and when they are unknown. Results will determine
optimal policies when possible, good&lt;br/&gt;heuristic policies otherwise.
Simulation techniques, using innovative variance reduction ideas,&lt;br/&gt;will
be used to analyze the performance of policies. The project will will yield
important insights&lt;br/&gt;as to how to solve and approximate dynamic
programming problems having multidimensional&lt;br/&gt;state
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will impact many
important application areas. For examples, in health care, workers might be
patients waiting for organ transplants, and jobs could be arriving organs. The
model is also equivalent to one that&lt;br/&gt;assumes that an organization has
jobs to fill, with each sequentially arriving job seeker having&lt;br/&gt;a
vector giving the values to the organization of assigning that candidate to the
different jobs.&lt;br/&gt;