* 1233037
* Collaborative Research: Geochemical Effects on the Functional Microbial Community Dynamics of Hydrothermal Deposits along the Eastern Lau Spreading Center
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Seewald, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 238,350.00

Extreme environmental gradients exist at deep-sea hydrothermal vents where high
temperature, low pH and reduced fluids mix with cold oxygenated seawater. This
results in a plethora of microbes taking advantage of abundantly available
microniches. From small subunit (16S) rRNA gene surveys and directed enrichment
culturing of vent deposits from many sites, patterns in diversity are emerging
that suggest that geochemical processes, particularly those that affect fluid
pH, play a fundamental role in regulating microbial diversity and community
composition. This a three year study at vent fields along the Eastern Lau
Spreading Center (ELSC) to investigate the relationship between vent
geochemistry and microbial community dynamics. The ELSC was chosen because it
provides large and systematic changes in fluid and rock geochemistry, spreading
rate, magmatic/tectonic processes, and proximity to the volcanic arc over its
relatively short length of 397 km. The individual vent fields therefore provide
excellent natural laboratories for exploring, in depth, the factors that
influence the diversity and relationships of microbial communities associated
with actively forming deep-sea hydrothermal deposits. The study will be carried
out at 3 geochemically different hydrothermal fields along the ELSC. The
scientists will document microbial community composition and diversity
associated with hydrothermal deposits from each area for comparison with data
obtained in 2009 and 2005. The close proximity of these geochemically distinct
vent areas within the ELSC provides an ideal opportunity to investigate the
effect of vent fluid and deposit geochemistry on the structure and function of
microbial communities, as well as the specific roles of individual populations,
associated with active hydrothermal deposits. The investigators hypothesize
that, given the extreme environmental characteristics (e.g., low fluid pH and
high iron at Mariner), they will see distinct differences in the metagenomes and
particularly in the metatranscriptomes among the Kilo Moana, ABE and Mariner
vent fields. The specific objectives are to: 1) Link geochemical and microbial
dynamics along the ELSC (from 2005-­2013); 2) Use of metagenomic and
transcriptomic data to explore biogeochemical cycles that are regulating the
functional roles of the microbial communities in vent fields along the ELSC; and
3) Use the metagenomic information to enrich for targeted novel Thermoprotei and
acidophiles. Active hydrothermal metal sulfide deposits and fluid samples will
be collected from the vent fields along the ELSC. Bar-coded pyrosequencing of
archaeal and bacterial 16S rRNA amplicons will be obtained for over eighty
samples. The geochemical environment of the chimneys will be modeled to
determine in situ geochemical conditions. These values will be used in
statistical analyses to explore the factors affecting the observed differences
in the communities. Using the 16S rRNA gene 454 pyrotags coupled with the
geochemical characterization, specific samples will be selected for metagenomic
and metatranscriptomic analyses (1-3 of each per site). The molecular
information will be used to target specific samples that: (i) harbor novel
unclassified diversity; (ii) have vent endemic lineages; and (iii) have
acidophilic relatives from terrestrial systems, for enrichment culturing (using
the geochemistry to help constrain culturing conditions). Broader Impacts. The
project will expand our understanding of the extent of the microbial biosphere.
At least one graduate student will participate in interdisciplinary studies that
involve next-­generation sequencing, molecular microbial ecological techniques,
and geochemical modeling. ALR will involve a registered PSU Pacific Islander
student in the research and requested research cruise. Undergraduate students
from Bridgewater State University will be involved in the fluid sampling
program, thereby providing a meaningful and exciting research experiences. The
PIs will share the excitement of new deep-sea vent discoveries with the public
through writing general articles, giving lectures at schools, and through
continuing education for school teachers through existing programs (e.g. through
the Saturday Academy, PSU (http://www.saturdayacademy.org/).