* 1233250
* Radically New Convection Battery for a Sustainable Transportation Future
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Galen Suppes, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2016
* USD 299,926.00

PI: Suppes, Galen&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1233250&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Missouri-Columbia&lt;br/&gt;Title: Radically New Convection
Battery for a Sustainable Transportation Future&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An increase
in the battery capacity is needed for transportation applications. The PI has
come with an innovative convection battery with a new design that can achieve
significantly high ion fluxes through the separators between the electrodes. A
convection battery uses a pump to circulate a liquid electrolyte directly
through permeable electrodes and the permeable membrane that separates the
electrodes. It is a new approach to battery design; more specifically, no
evidence of previous batteries utilizing membranes permeable to fluid flow has
been located. The proposed work aims to simultaneously improve performance and
decrease costs for batteries sized at &gt;2kWh for transportation and stationary
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research include (a) synthesis
and characterization of materials; (b) assembly and testing of convection
batteries; (c) extending convection battery testing to measure voltage profiles
using a custom-fabricated reference cell; (d) evaluating/modeling and evolving
theories describing the battery performance; and (e) adopting alternative
separators, supports, electrolytes, and chemistries based on opportunity and
need. A particularly intriguing development in this research is the
identification of how separator materials have a major impact on counter-ion
counter-diffusion. Theories related to dimensionless diffusivity, nearest
molecular neighbor separation, and ion hopping rate constants appear to be
applicable. The modeling studies are designed to improve the understanding of
parameters (such as these) that impact the performance of the convection battery
and to improve the understanding of how material properties impact dimensionless
diffusivity for counter-ions undergoing counter-
diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The convection battery can substantially
eliminate the reliance of the US on imported oil and will advance sustainable
electrical power production. Extensions of both proposed modeling and
experimental research on batteries will be used in undergraduate and graduate
courses. The laboratories of the PI will actively recruit and foster
undergraduate researchers including minorities and females who are encouraged to
pursue graduate degrees. The undergraduate research program is a key part of the
program and the equipment and resources of this effort will enhance that
infrastructure.