* 1233909
* Multifunctional Surface Engineering using Severe Plastic Deformation in Machining-Based Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* M Ravi Shankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 370,000.00

The research objective of this award is to understand the physical principles
that underlie the evolution of integral regions of refined microstructures on
surfaces of bulk metallic materials in a new class of machining-based processes.
This elucidation will focus on material systems that can manifest enhanced
biological and mechanical properties, when grain-refined to the nanostructured
state. Deformation configurations will be designed to allow for the removal of
pre-set depths of material, while simultaneously endowing a freshly generated
surface with extensive microstructure modification, in a single processing step.
First, the process-structure interrelationships will be elucidated by measuring
in situ, the thermomechanics of deformation using simultaneous high-speed image
correlation and infrared thermography. Then the resulting surface
microstructural consequences will be characterized using electron backscattered
diffraction and X-ray diffraction. Resulting empirical data will be encapsulated
in novel microstructure maps and modeled computationally. Ultimately, the
process-structure-performance triad will be completed by measuring the
osseointegrative response, corrosion properties and mechanical
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these breakthroughs can enable a
practical utilization of newly-discovered functional properties of
nanostructured metals, including the extensive proliferation of osteoblasts on
nanograined surfaces, their enhanced electrochemical surface passivation,
subdued accumulation of radiation damage, etcetera. Here, by focusing on
elucidating biological and corrosion properties as a function of
microstructures, a convenient manufacturing route is envisaged for endowing
multifunctional surfaces on biomedical implants that can be seamlessly
integrated with prevailing fabrication schema. Domestic and international
collaborations with cutting tool and discrete product manufacturers, as well as
with the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center will be leveraged to support
the research thrusts and to initiate new outreach initiatives. This award will
also support the development of new research-integrated undergraduate/graduate
educational initiatives and enhancing participation of underrepresented groups.