* 1233678
* Eutrophication Effects on Sediment Metabolism and Benthic Algal-bacterial Coupling: An Application of Novel Techniques in a LTER Estuary
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amanda Spivak, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 786,295.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries have enormous societal importance.
However, the functioning of these ecosystems is impaired by eutrophication (i.e.
excess nutrient loading), which reduces water quality, causes harmful algal
blooms, and increases the incidence of hypoxic events. Salt marshes act as
filters of inorganic nutrients passing from the land to estuaries and ultimately
to the open ocean, but coastal eutrophication may reduce the efficacy of this
filtering. Furthermore, human disturbances in salt marshes are causing
geomorphological change, which in turn can have cascading influences on primary
producers and consumers. At the interface of saltmarshes and estuaries are tidal
creeks, a potentially important link between the terrestrial ecosystem and the
open estuary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sediment microalgae and bacteria play pivotal
roles in coastal carbon dynamics. Benthic microalgae can strongly influence
nutrient cycling and carbon dynamics in shallow , well-lit estuaries. For
instance, benthic microalgae are estimated to contribute up to 95% of total
primary production in some estuarine habitats. However, few methods exist for
quantifying the rate of benthic microalgal production. Carbon fixed by benthic
microalgae can be rapidly assimilated by sediment bacteria. While this coupling
between sediment microalgae and bacteria has been documented in multiple
estuarine systems, it is largely unknown whether the importance of algal carbon
to bacteria varies with nutrient availability, primary productivity, and
allochthonous organic matter inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address how rates of benthic microalgal production respond to eutrophication and
geomorphological changes in human-impacted tidal creeks. Excess nutrient loading
increases benthic algal biomass and likely stimulates production rates but the
magnitude of nutrient and geomorphological effects on rates of production is
unknown. Will changes in benthic algal productivity affect algal-bacterial
coupling? Furthermore, how is algal-bacterial coupling affected by
geomorphological changes, which may be exacerbated by excess nutrient loading
but can also occur in pristine marshes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
take advantage of the infrastructure of the TIDE project, a long-term saltmarsh
eutrophication experiment at the Plum Island Ecosystem - Long Term Ecological
Research site in Northeastern Massachusetts. Specifically, the PIs will measure
benthic metabolism and examine algal- bacterial coupling in fertilized and
ambient nutrient tidal creeks in the first field season. The following field
season, they will compare sediment metabolism and carbon dynamics on slumped
tidal creek walls (i.e. areas where low marsh has collapsed into the tidal
creek) to that on the bottom of tidal creeks. In both years, gross and net
production will be determined using an innovative triple oxygen isotope
technique and traditional dissolved oxygen and inorganic carbon flux
measurements. Comparisons between these methods will be useful in informing
studies of sediment metabolism. Lipid biomarkers will be used to characterize
the sources of organic matter to creek sediments, and stable isotope analysis of
bacterial specific biomarkers to identify the sources of organic carbon utilized
by sediment bacteria. The biomarkers will reveal whether sediment bacteria use
organic matter substrates, such as benthic microalgal carbon, selectively or in
proportion to availability. Overall, results from the proposed study will
provide important information about how sediment carbon dynamics in shallow
tidal creeks respond to long term eutrophication. Furthermore, findings will
enhance understanding of the role of tidal creeks in coastal
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A significant
impact from this project will be better knowledge of how eutrophication - a
pressing societal problem - affects biological productivity and organic matter
cycling and burial. The scientists will work with local conservancy and
education groups to bring an understanding of results to the public.
Additionally, this project will promote education by including opportunities for
two graduate students and two undergraduate students.