* 1233118
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Enhanced functionalities in 5d transition-metal compounds from large spin-orbit coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Janice Musfeldt, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Eva Campo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** The physics and chemistry of 5d transition-metal
compounds is distinguished by strong spin-orbit coupling, which can have a
dramatic effect on materials properties. The focus of this DMREF project is to
improve our scientific understanding of materials containing 5d elements and
harness their unusual properties to develop new functional materials. The
project is a joint theoretical, computational, and experimental research effort
built upon a materials discovery paradigm in which first-principles calculations
will be used to scan through candidate materials, identifying promising
candidates for directed synthesis and in-depth experimental study. Comparisons
between theory and experiment will provide feedback to refocus the theoretical
and computational effort. We seek a transformative acceleration of progress in
our understanding of these materials, especially regarding the interplay between
competing interactions that give rise to functional behavior. Our goals include
(i) achieving large magnetocrystalline anisotropy in crystals with mixed 3d and
5d transition-metal ions; (ii) finding new topological insulators and materials
with other novel topological band structures; (iii) demonstrating unusual
superconducting pairing mechanisms or topological superconductivity; and (iv)
developing materials with giant magnetoelectric, multiferroic, or magneto-optic
effects.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** This DMREF project is directed toward a
transformative improvement in our understanding of materials containing
transition-metal ions from the 5d block of the periodic table. These elements
are distinguished by a strong spin-orbit effect that tends to twist the spin of
the electrons as they orbit around the nucleus, endowing these materials with
useful or unusual magnetic, optical, and electronic properties. The project is
built upon a materials discovery paradigm in which first-principles
computational methods will be used to scan through candidate materials,
identifying promising candidates for directed synthesis and in-depth
experimental study. The immediate goal is to improve our scientific
understanding of the competing interactions that give rise to functional
behavior in this class of materials. Longer-term goals include achieving large
magneto-crystalline anisotropy in crystals with mixed light and heavy
transition-metal ions, finding new topological insulators, demonstrating unusual
superconducting pairing mechanisms or topological superconductivity, and
developing materials with giant magnetoelectric, multiferroic, or magneto-optic
effects.