* 1233571
* Collaborative Research: A Statistics-Guided Framework for Synthesis and Characterization of Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Xinwei Deng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 123,192.00

The research goal of this collaborative research award is to develop a
statistics-guided framework for significantly enhancing the efficiency of nano-
synthesis and the accuracy of nano-characterization in nanomanufacturing. The
research seeks to produce transformative computational and analytic methods for
advancing the reproducibility, reliability, efficiency and precision of
nanomaterials. These new methods include a level-expansion experimental design
for sequential synthesis of nanomaterials, a sequential tapering method for
accurate characterization of nanomaterial surface potential with massive data
and a functional data analysis approach for identifying phase truncation in
nano-characterization. These methods can significantly enhance both the lab-
scale development of nanoparticles, nanowires and complex nanoarchitectures, and
industrial scale nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research are expected to accelerate the scale-up and
standardization of experiments in nanomanufacturing. These results will be
disseminated broadly to the nanotechnology community. Beyond nanomanufacturing,
the statistical and computational methods developed in this research will have
broad applications to other fields in manufacturing and enterprise systems such
as multi-stage manufacturing processes, logistics and health care. Undergraduate
and graduate students will benefit from this research through rigorous training
in statistics and nanotechnology. A dynamic platform will be established to
teach undergraduate minority students advanced applied sciences and provide
research experiences.