* 1233161
* Understanding the Mechanism of Simultaneous Oleophobic/Hydrophilic Behavior: When a Nanometer-Thick Polymer Coating meets a Solid Surface
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Lei Li, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 278,379.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the fundamental mechanism
that is responsible for simultaneous oleophobic/hydrophilic behavior observed on
the solid surface coated with a nanometer-thick polymer. Although surfaces more
wettable to water than to oil have many important applications, such surfaces
have been very rarely reported. Recent studies indicate that such anomalous
wetting behavior could be achieved by applying some nanometer-thick polymer
coating on some solid substrate. However, the mechanism responsible for the
interesting and puzzling result remains unclear to date. To understand the
mechanism, the PI will investigate how exactly the polymer-substrate interaction
affects the "static" and "dynamic" holes in the polymer nanofilms by x-ray
reflectometry (XRR) and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-
SIMS) to establish the kinetics of the wetting process of water and oil. The PI
also will identify the key parameters, including polymer structure, substrate
structure, and photochemical irradiation process, that govern simultaneous
oleophobicity/hydrophilicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the underlying
mechanism of simultaneous oleophobicity/hydrophilicity will be discovered, and
design criteria will be established. Simultaneous oleophobic/hydrophilic
surfaces are highly desirable in many important applications, including
detergent-free cleaning, anti-fogging, and oil-water separating. Understanding
how to fabricate such surfaces will greatly impact the field of environment and
energy. The research project also will promote the participation of the students
from underrepresented groups in science and engineering fields, including
providing research training to graduate and undergraduate students, developing a
new courses, and conducting outreach activities, such as the ENGAGE program that
recently was established at the University of Pittsburgh under the PI's
direction. Through multi-faceted activities, the PI will promote interest and
participation in science and engineering disciplines on the part of students of
all ages.