* 1233617
* "PESO: Microfabricated surfaces for analysis of exosome-based paracrine signaling in hepatocellular carcinomas"
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Yohei Yokobayashi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 540,000.00

1233617/ Revzin

This award is supported through a joint program between the National Science
Foundation and the National Cancer Institute. Cancers originate in micrometere
scale regions of tissues and organs called cancer microenvironment. This
microenvironment consists of healthy as well as cancerous cells that are present
in close proximity and signal to each other via soluble molecules. The study of
cell signaling or communication is important as it may reveal why some cancers
remain dormant while others become aggressive, metastasizing from the primary
site. The goal of this grant is to investigate a new mechanism of intercellular
communication in cancers. This mechanism is based on lipid particles called
exosomes, secreted by cancer cells and carrying within them the payload of
nucleic acids and proteins. The researchers hypothesize that uptake of exosomes
by neighboring non-cancerous cells may facilitate cancer progression and
metastasis. The goal of the work will be to develop novel sensing techonologies
for detection of exosome production and novel cell culture approaches for
assessing the impact of exosome-producing cancer cells on neighboring non-cancer
cells. The research efforts will focus on the study of liver cancer.