* 1233028
* GEOTRACES Pacific Section:  Resolving Silicon Isotope Anomalies in the Eastern Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2017
* USD 349,538.00

A scientist from the University of California, Santa Barbara will obtain water
column samples collected during the 2013 GEOTRACES cruise from Peru to Tahiti.
The samples will be analyzed for silicon (Si) isotopes to obtain the first major
section of Si isotope distributions in the Pacific Ocean basin. Because the
transect covers a large gradient in primary productivity from the upwelling zone
off Peru to the oligotrophic subtropical gyre near Tahiti the researcher will
determine how Si behaves within high productivity waters relative to
oligotrophic waters. Specifically, the hypothesis to be tested is that Si
isotope distributions are controlled by fractionation of Si isotopes during
silica production and silica dissolution coupled to movement of Si by the
biological pump and the meridional overturning circulation. In addition, the
scientist plans to collaborate with researchers from Stanford University, the
University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, and Brown University who will measure
the stable isotopic composition of nitrate on the same section, to ascertain
whether Si and nitrogen isotopes can be used to predict nutrient depletion
patterns within the gradient in productivity observed between Peru and Tahiti.
The role of Fe in Si dynamics will be evaluated in collaboration with a
University of California, Santa Cruz researcher who will measure total [Fe] in
surface waters collected during the cruise. Lastly, with the data, the scientist
plans to test the prediction capabilities of the PANDORA model, as well as
improve the model by incorporating a benthic source of Si in the North Pacific
to simulate the inputs of the Northeast Pacific Silicic Acid Plume.

As regards broader impacts, one undergraduate student would be supported and
trained as part of this project.