* 1233057
* Collaborative Research: Identification of nitrogen sources for toxic Alexandrium blooms using a novel species-specific tracer, d15N-saxitoxin
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2015
* USD 453,829.00

The US and other countries throughout the world are affected by harmful algal
blooms (HABs) that negatively impact human health, marine ecosystems, fisheries
resources, and local economies. Anthropogenic nutrient loadings have been linked
to expanding HAB incidence, but the relationship is site- and organism-specific,
and is still poorly understood. The main challenge in this regard is to
determine the relative importance of natural versus anthropogenic nutrient
sources in the development of an individual HAB species. Given the diverse
nature of the planktonic assemblage in which HABs occur, and the lack of
appropriate measurement techniques, this is exceedingly difficult to
accomplish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, research teams at the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution and University of Texas at Austin will take a
novel approach to this challenge: They use use the nitrogen isotopic signature
(del15N) of a species-specific HAB toxin to identify the nitrogen source and
chemical form that promotes cell growth and toxin production. The bloom-forming
dinoflagellate Alexandrium fundyense and its class of bioactive compounds,
saxitoxins (STXs), are an ideal model system as STXs are nitrogen-rich and are
typically only produced by a single species in mixed plankton assemblages. The
guiding overall hypothesis is that the isotopic signature of a HAB-specific
toxin can be used to discriminate between anthropogenic and natural sources of N
and provide more details than bulk material del15N on the source, chemical form,
and processing of N that lead to blooms of a particular toxic species. This
hypothesis is based on the principle that human and animal waste in groundwater
and sewage become 15N-enriched and inorganic fertilizers 15N-depleted, relative
to natural sources of N in catchment waters. While the use of the isotopic ratio
del15N of bulk biomass to identify nitrogen sources to coastal waters is a
widely accepted practice, this use of a toxin as a species-specific tracer or
marker is new and will provide details on the explicit source, chemical form,
and processing of nitrogen that results in blooms of a particular HAB species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project addresses fundamental issues
underlying the most widespread of all HAB poisoning syndromes, paralytic
shellfish poisoning (PSP), a major form of shellfish poisoning that affects
countries throughout the world. Project results can also assist in policy
decisions about pollution control and other bloom mitigation strategies, and can
be applied to a range of HAB species - those that produce saxitoxins, as well as
those that produce other toxins that are nitrogen rich. Project results will be
broadly disseminated through scientific papers, presentations at workshops,
domestic and international conferences, and departmental seminars, and
discussions with the media.