* 1233648
* The quality control of oceanic carbon dioxide measurements: preparation and distribution of reference materials
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Andrew Dickson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2018
* USD 412,074.00

The goal of this project is to provide a mechanism for the quality control of
the oceanic carbon dioxide measurements, in particular those that are made as
part of international global programs. This will help to ensure that such
measurements are comparable and accurate although made in different laboratories
at different times; and will be an important factor in the design of a Global
Ocean Observing System, as well as playing a significant role in the quality
control of ocean acidification measurements.

To achieve this, a research team at the Scripps Institute of Oceanography of the
University of California at San Diego will prepare and certify reference
materials for the parameters of the oceanic carbon dioxide system: total
dissolved inorganic carbon, total alkalinity, and hydrogen ion concentration,
pH, for a sample of sea water. The reference materials for total dissolved
inorganic carbon and for total alkalinity will be based on natural seawater,
sterilized, bottled, and analyzed using appropriate reference methods for these
parameters. Reference materials for pH will be based on Tris buffers in
synthetic seawater and analyzed using classical Harned cells. In addition, they
will distribute calibrated acid titrant for alkalinity measurements. These
reference materials will be distributed to US and to international investigators
to assist in the quality control of oceanic CO2 measurements. During the three
years of this project, the team expects to distribute at least 25,000 bottles of
reference material. These materials will also be used to provide test samples
for use in collaborative studies of the analytical methods used to determine
these various parameters.

An important part of the project involves planning for the future. The team will
work to improve the packaging currently used for the reference materials so as
to make it significantly more convenient. The principal investigator will also
interact with the US National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) to
ensure that the current process for preparing and certifying reference materials
is appropriately documented. It is essential to assure a long-term supply of
reference materials for future ocean science research, and it will be necessary
to identify an agency or company that will take on this responsibility. The
principal investigator will work with NIST to recommend a plan for the future
and will also work to investigate possibilities outside the US, in Europe or
Japan.

Broader Impacts: The provision of reference materials to the international
community helps to improve the overall quality of oceanic carbon data around the
world both for field studies of the distribution of oceanic carbon, as well as
for studies related to ocean acidification. Thus it is a significant US
contribution to research infrastructure in this field. Education: The existence
of such a laboratory at a major US oceanographic institution ensures that
undergraduate students and graduate students that work in the lab alongside this
reference material program benefit from the education in high-quality analytical
techniques that is part and parcel of such a program, and also from the
ancillary discussions associated with quality control and quality assurance. It
also provides a resource for other students in the institution who are
interested in making high-quality carbon measurements as part of their research.
The principal investigator is also called on to instruct others in CO2
measurements, both by telephone or e-mail conversations, and also in more formal
courses. Outreach: The principal investigator will be involved in a number of
public outreach efforts related to his research studies on the ocean carbon
system. In particular, he expects to continue to make a number of public
presentations in the area of ocean acidification, as well as to work with
various groups such as the State of California and the California Current
Acidification Network to improve the capacity of such groups to make high-
quality CO2 measurements.