* 1233673
* Systems-Level Mass Fatality Preparedness
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Robyn Gershon, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2014
* USD 440,000.00

This study will identify the preparedness and response capabilities of the U.S.
mass fatality management infrastructure, and in particular, the death care
sector (i.e., the funeral industry and associated services). Within the death
care sector, this includes medical examiners/coroners, funeral directors,
embalmers, funeral services and suppliers, cemeteries, cremation services,
mortuary schools, certifying agencies and associations, etc. Their external
response partners include: public health, healthcare, voluntary organizations,
and local, state, and federal emergency response agencies. We know little about
how this key sector will manage a very large number of deaths within our
country. In other countries that were not well prepared, this led to civil
unrest and poor recovery. Mass fatalities may result from any number of events,
such as terrorism, earthquakes, hurricanes, or other catastrophic disasters. A
widespread and large scale event, such as a highly lethal pandemic, might
challenge the death care system in ways far greater than any other recent
history event in the U.S., including the 2005 hurricanes and the September 11th
World Trade Center terrorist attack. We will assess the preparedness of this
sector using the Ready, Willing, and Able (RWA) conceptual framework. Using a
web-based survey platform, data will be collected from individuals representing
a wide range of death care organizations, stratified by FEMA region. These data
will be analyzed using two different strategies. First, univariate and
multivariate techniques will assess RWA preparedness outcomes. Second, special
organizational network and simulation modeling analyses will be conducted using
the data set.

This study will find any gaps in the ability of the key response groups in terms
of their ability to manage a high number of fatalities By identifying gaps, we
can improve our preparedness for mass fatalities. This approach is less costly
than large scale drills and exercises and can also be used by other key sectors
in the U.S., including transportation, commerce, and health care. The best
possible response to such an event is through preparedness. Better management of
mass fatalities can help the U.S. to maintain order and speed our recovery from
a catastrophic event.