* 1233143
* Collaborative Research: Process Monitoring and Control in Autocorrelated Multistage Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jianjun Shi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

As modern manufacturing industries become more sophisticated, it is common to
find a production process involving multiple stages of production such as those
found in pharmaceutical manufacturing, the chemical industry and in
semiconductor and auto manufacturing. Three types of correlations in the data
streams (among stages, among quality characteristics, and over time) in a
multistage manufacturing process introduce significant challenges in variation
modeling, analysis, and control. This project aims at developing efficient
methodologies for the monitoring, control and optimization of autocorrelated
multistage processes in order to improve the quality of the process output. This
is a challenging problem due to the complexity of multistage processes and
autocorrelations of observations that make the relationship between the output
and input variables extremely complicated. This will be investigated through
novel models of the propagation of variable means and variances to subsequent
stages, using dynamic state space models that enable the identification of the
variation source propagation and monitoring/diagnosis of the processes. The
methodologies will be developed and validated in collaboration with industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to the science base of
methods and algorithms to minimize the propagation of variations and quickly
detect change points in autocorrelated multistage manufacturing processes.
Successful completion of this project will provide online monitoring and
diagnosis methods for detecting abnormal behaviors of multistage processes. The
results will be broadly applicable in a variety of industries to improve the
overall quality and productivity of production systems. Broader impacts will be
also generated through new curriculum modules, online software toolkits for
implementation, and involving underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
students in research experience programs to enhance the human resource talent
for U.S. industry.