* 1233694
* Forecasting Risk in Rapidly Changing Urban Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anne Kiremidjian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,857.00

In the year 2008 urban dwellers for the first time ever outnumbered rural ones.
By 2030 twice as many people will live in cities than in 1970. This shift in
population has also led to a shift in the landscape of risk, with cities
becoming the major source of global risk. Current risk assessment models fall
short in characterizing the spatial and temporal dynamics of the urban
environments in terms of rapidly changing local exposure and vulnerability. We
propose to develop a quantitative approach for forecasting risk in rapidly
changing urban environments. The two main components of the proposed approach
are (a) dynamic time-dependent exposure models and (b) time dependent
vulnerability model that consider the main processes influencing the
vulnerability of the built environment over time: structural deterioration,
incremental expansion of buildings, and evolving building practices. The models
and advanced technologies to be developed through this research include
stochastic spatial and temporal exposure methods, novel remote-sensing based
techniques for urban analysis, statistical pattern recognition methods and
probabilistic analysis of incremental building expansion and vulnerability to
enable risk forecast over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
enable risk forecasts that are consistent with the population and urban building
growth patterns of regions exposed to extreme events. The tools developed will
enable policy-makers, municipal governments and planners to take steps towards
reducing future risk. Research results will be integrated into current risk
assessment models, such HAZUS, the software used by FEMA and the Department of
Homeland Security for planning and managing disasters, and the Global Earthquake
Model (GEM is a worldwide nonprofit earthquake consortium developing open source
tools for earthquake hazard and risk assessment) that will enable them to better
model and forecast the complex dynamics of urban risk. Numerous components of
the research will further be part of a new Stanford interdisciplinary
undergraduate class on urban risk, taught by research team members. The project
team has a strong record in working with underrepresented groups and actively
participates in Stanford's Engineering Diversity Program that provides teaching,
research and mentoring opportunities for students from underrepresented groups.
Undergraduates will be included in the project through NSF's REU program and
Stanford's research to undergraduate students program supported by the Vice
Provost on Undergraduate Education (VPUE).