* 1233842
* Turbulent sediment suspension absent mean flow-induced shear
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* James Jenkins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

1233842 Cowen

The study of sediment suspension and transport has a long history, due to the
importance of scour processes in rivers. In the case of rivers and wind-blown
sand or snow, the suspension processes are controlled by the turbulence induced
by the fluid flow over the boundary - that is, the flow over the bed. However,
sediment-suspending flows are often subject to turbulence that was generated
away from the boundary, and this type of sediment suspension process has seen
very little research. Examples are widely found in environmental and industrial
flows. Consider the specific example of the swash zone, the region of the beach
that is alternately covered and uncovered by wave run-up and the principal
location of coastal erosion. During wave up-rush, turbulence levels are
dominated by turbulence advected from breaking waves and generated by bore
collapse, while boundary-generated turbulence is relatively small.

A great advantage of laboratory research is the ability to isolate distinct
physical processes from the more complex multi-physics reality. It is proposed
to carry out a fundamental experimental research program using a unique
turbulence facility, developed on a previous NSF project, which generates
turbulence by randomly firing an array of jets assembled in an eight-by-eight
grid. These jets generate strong turbulence, with very little mean flow. The
turbulence propagates away from the array and towards a bed of sand, where
suspension due solely to the turbulence occurs. This facilitates the careful
study of sediment suspension purely by turbulence. Quantitative imaging (QI)
techniques will be used to characterize the details of the turbulence and the
sediment grain motions that lead to suspension and ripple formation. The QI
measurements will be used to determine the instantaneous turbulence structures
responsible for sediment suspension and to specifically investigate the role of
both the fluid on the sediment motions and the sediment on the fluid motions. An
ensemble mean picture of the turbulent stresses, in space and time, will be
constructed, allowing the development of parameterizations of the sediment
suspension process appropriate for inclusion in computational models of sediment
suspension and transport.

Coastal areas in the United States are heavily populated, vital to local
economies, and of strategic importance. Surveys reveal that nearly 90% of U.S.
sandy coasts are eroding - on the East Coast at rates on the order of one meter
per year. Field measurements of swash zone sediment transport rates as large as
10 kilograms per second per meter of shoreline have been observed; these are
significantly higher than those observed farther seawards in the surf zone. The
elevated levels are due to a complex interaction of boundary-generated
turbulence, mean currents, and strong ambient turbulence levels advected with
the wave breaking processes. Swash zone sediment transport represents just one
of a range of important flows in which turbulence generated away from the
boundary dominates sediment suspension and dynamics. An understanding of
turbulent suspension in the absence of mean flows is a critical building block
on which better models of sediment suspension can be developed. These will
significantly improve our ability to model industrial and environmental erosive
and depositional processes. The project will lead to a Ph.D. for a talented
woman interested in a faculty career who, along with the PIs, will host an
inquiry-based project on environmental transport processes for high-school women
considering careers in science and engineering.