* 1233339
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Peru-Tahiti Nitrogen Isotope Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Karen Casciotti, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2017
* USD 388,147.00

Nitrogen (N) is an essential macronutrient whose availability can limit primary
production and the capacity of the biological pump to export carbon from the
surface ocean on seasonal, annual, decadal, and millennial timescales. The
inventory of fixed (bioavailable) N in the ocean is driven by biological
processes such as nitrogen fixation, denitrification, and anaerobic ammonia
oxidation (anammox). Water column oxygen deficient zones (ODZs) are important
sites for fixed N loss, as well as N2O production, and they are projected to
expand and intensify in the coming years as global warming increases ocean
stratification and decreases ventilation. It is important to understand the
distribution of nitrate, nitrite, and N2O isotopes in relation to current ocean
conditions of oxygen and trace element availability order to interpret past and
future changes in nitrate Ã¤15N signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a
team of researchers from Stanford University, University of Massachusetts at
Dartmouth, and Brown University will measure the nitrogen- and oxygen-isotopic
composition (del15N and del18O) of nitrate, nitrite, and nitrous oxide in
seawater samples collected along the GEOTRACES Pacific Peru-Tahiti Section.
Values of del15N and del18O will also be measured in nitrate from aerosol and
rain samples to inform our interpretation of the N isotope budget and isotopic
gradients within the tropical South Pacific. Finally, N2/Ar and N2 del15N will
be determined to close the N mass and isotope budgets. Nitrate del15N is a
GEOTRACES "core parameter" that will complement other measurements, such as
bioactive trace element concentrations and speciation, Si isotope variations, as
well as redox and productivity proxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEOTRACES
Peru-Tahiti section provides a rare opportunity to track the fate of the
isotopic signals of N loss from one of the largest water column ODZs.
Furthermore, little is known about the effect of N recycling through
hydrothermal vents on nitrate isotopes in the deep ocean, and this section will
allow quantitative tracking of this input. Together, these measurements will
yield insight into the relative rates of modern N cycle processes and will
provide background information for paleoceanographic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will provide a
high-quality nitrate isotope data set from undersampled parts of the South
Pacific for use by the broader oceanographic community via BCO-DMO. Educational
impacts include the mentoring of a graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students at Stanford, and the inclusion of undergraduates in state-of-the-art
collaborative research at Brown and UMass-Dartmouth. The project will also
support development and implementation of an oceans component for the annual 6th
grade teacher workshop offered by Stanford University's School of Earth. This
program includes both instruction for the teachers on cutting-edge research in
Earth Science and Oceanography, and support for them to include the material
into their classroom activities.