* 1233413
* Mechanochemical Sensation of Damage in the Pericellular Niche
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ozan Akkus, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2016
* USD 405,002.00

The objective of this award is to understand the mechanisms by which cells
target the damaged regions of bone for repair. The skeleton sustains microscopic
damage as part of daily activities and cells curb microcrack accumulation by a
continual repair process. Recent studies demonstrated that calcium is released
from damaged regions of bone and such a release may initiate bone-repair
cascade. This project will build on this insight and will characterize the
response of bone cells to calcium release from bone. In combination, the studies
will draw a more complete picture which unifies calcium release from the matrix,
identify the route via which calcium enters the cells and the types of molecules
which are activated upon calcium transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
attainment of the aims of this award will improve our understanding of the
mechanisms which drive skeletal repair. Insight on skeletal repair creates the
potential to mitigate various conditions of skeletal fragility, including
osteoporosis. Another merit of award-related activities is the creation of the
foundation for designing intelligent biomaterials which can repair themselves by
regulating cell response. If observed calcium release from damaged substrate
triggers matrix-repair by cells, the proposed activities would cultivate efforts
to design bone like materials which induce resident cells to repair critically
loaded regions. Female participation in engineering careers has been increasing;
however, this engagement needs to be sustained into the future. On the outreach
front, high-school female students will participate in research activities to
foster their interests in pursuing careers in engineering.