* 1233788
* Collaborative Research:   Seasonal bloom dynamics:  Synechococcus-grazer interactions as a model system
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Nicole Poulton, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 756,173.00

Cyanobacteria in the genus Synechococcus are minute, but ubiquitous
phytoplankton of temperate oceans that contribute a large amount of the biomass
produced at the base of marine food webs. Seasonal blooms of Synechococcus are a
remarkably consistent feature of coastal water of both the Atlantic and Pacific
oceans. However, new molecular techniques have revealed that underlying the
consistency of these blooms is a wealth of genetic variation that exhibits rapid
dynamical turnover. This has led to a hypothesis that genetic diversity within
Synechococcus is ecologically important to sustaining seasonal blooms, and to
predicting marine ecosystem response to longer term environmental change. This
project will combine ecological and genomic approaches to understand how genetic
diversity interacts with the physical and food web processes that drive seasonal
cycles of Synechococcus blooms. The genetic diversity of Synechococcus and co-
occurring microbes will be quantified on a weekly basis during bloom periods in
Booth Bay, Gulf of Maine and Scripps Pier, Southern California. Flow cytometric
cell sorting in combination with molecular approaches will be utilized to
investigate the diversity of bloom assemblages using a three-tiered approach
including: DNA and RNA analysis of the whole unsorted community, DNA analysis of
flow-sorted communities, and single cell genomics of Synechococcus and their
protist grazers. Ecological processes that cause Synechococcus blooms to end
will be investigated through experiments designed to measure the relative
importance of mortality from protist grazers versus from viruses on various
Synechococcus ecotypes. These results will yield insights into bloom dynamics
and how genetic diversity interacts with ecosystem
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop methods and resources
that will be generally useful for quantifying variability of the seasonal bloom
of phytoplankton, which is likely to be an early indicator of ecosystem
responses to longer term climate change. Quantitative PCR methods will be
designed for rapid quantification of diversity in Synechococcus and in
Synechococcus grazers in marine waters. Numerous protist and Synechococcus
single amplified genomes will be produced and cryo-preserved to enable future
studies. This project will also support the research training of a graduate
student and several undergraduate students, who will be intimately involved with
individual projects. Results will be translated to formal courses held at
Bigelow Laboratory and to the public through presentations at a successful
weekly Caf√© Scientifique series held in Boothbay Harbor each summer.