* 1233769
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Cognitive Aspects of Satellite Image Interpretation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Alan MacEachren, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,699.00

Remotely sensed imagery is a critical input to a wide range of research
activities in environmental science, environmental management, and related
domains. For example, analysts use multi-spectral imagery to detect and monitor
forest disturbances, analyze habitat loss and fragmentation, and assess species
diversity. A large proportion of recent research in remote sensing has been
directed to automation of image analysis. The role of the human analysts is
equally important to consider, however, because no fully automatic image
analysis system currently exists. Through application of a visual analytics
approach that couples human expertise with computer processing speed and
consistency, it may be possible to improve accuracy, precision, and task-
relevance of image-derived information. This coupling requires a more
comprehensive understanding of the human analysts' perceptual and reasoning
processes when they use the imagery. This doctoral dissertation research project
will investigate cognitive tasks and fundamental visual stimuli used in the
interpretation of aerial imagery within the application domain of forest
management. To create an awareness of both high-level thought processes as well
as low-level visual cues that are used by forest analysts, the doctoral student
will use two cognitive methods. First, she will use applied cognitive task
analysis, a method based on semi-structured interviews and diagramming
activities, to uncover the knowledge structures and cognitive skills analysts
use during the image analysis task. Second, she will conduct controlled
cognitive experiments to identify visual cues deemed most important for visual
interpretation of remotely sensed imagery. Using the knowledge gained during
these two phases of research, a set of visual analytics tools will be developed
to support semi-automated analysis of remotely sensed images for forest
disturbances.

The current trend in remote sensing research focuses on the development and
improvement of automated processes for addressing the increasing volumes of
imagery data. These research efforts often fail to consider the importance of
human operators in the process, and they do not consider the benefits that
human-guided analytic processes can provide. This project will illuminate the
cognitive processes that underlie image analysis, including both high-level
thought processes as well as the low-level visual perception of imagery.
Considering both facets of the image-interpretation process will provide an
opportunity to clarify the links between these two aspects of image analysis and
will provide direct input to development of visual analytic methods that connect
human expertise with computational methods in productive ways. The project
therefore will be useful for a range of activities, including forest science and
management practices, geospatial intelligence analysis, and image analyst
training. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.