* 1233944
* Collaborative Research: An Atomization-Based Cutting Fluid and CO2 Spray System for Machining Titanium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Shiv Kapoor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2016
* USD 307,999.00

The collaborative research to be conducted under this award is directed toward a
more fundamental understanding of an atomized-based cutting fluid and carbon
dioxide spray cooling and lubrication application system for machining of
titanium alloys. The specific objectives are to: (i) establish an understanding
of the film formation behavior on a stationary surface from the atomized cutting
fluids, and its penetration characteristics at the cutting interface during
titanium machining; (ii) better understand the temperature distribution and the
heat removal characteristics throughout the cutting interface; (iii) study the
effects of spray parameters, spray unit orientation angle, and fluid properties
(for example, surface tension and viscosity) and the application of carbon
dioxide as a droplet carrier gas on the machining performances including tool
wear, cutting temperature, and chip formation. These objectives will be realized
through the execution of three principal tasks: (1) model the film formation
behavior of the atomized cutting fluid droplets and their penetration to the
tool-chip interface; (2) predict the temperature distribution at the cutting
interface under the atomized cutting fluid spray conditions; and (3) develop a
process plan for an effective lubrication and cooling application during
machining of titanium alloys. The validation of model predictions of the fluid
film characteristics including film thickness and film pressure will be
accomplished by employing the probe pressure sensors, and a high resolution
camera. A hardware testbed will be developed at the site of collaborative
partner, TechSolve, Inc., for the technology capability testing and evaluation.

The enhanced understanding of the tribological behavior of the atomized droplets
at the tool/chip/work-piece interfaces will drive advances in tool design and
manufacturing and improvement in other processes such as "minimum quantity
lubricant" in grinding, machining and rolling. As the atomized-based cutting
fluid spray system uses significantly small amount of electrical energy, this
cooling system will help in saving electrical energy for those existing cooling
techniques that operate a large fluid pump. Further, the use of carbon dioxide
in this cutting fluid spray system can lead to developing many environmentally-
friendly manufacturing processes. Efforts will be made to boost the
participation of members from under-represented groups in this research by
proactively participating in several on-campus/off-campus programs, including
Women in Engineering Program and Minority Engineering Program.