* 1233160
* Large eddy simulation methods for accurate predictions of separated flows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Julian Domaradzki, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 294,316.00

1233160&lt;br/&gt;Domaradzki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is concerned with
numerical predictions of turbulent flows around unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV),
micro air vehicles (MAV), wind turbines, propellers, and flows in rotating
machinery such as turbines, compressors, and pumps. Such flows are often
dominated by the effects of flow separation, i.e., fluid particles that
initially move parallel to the surface of a body suddenly "separate" from the
surface and follow a path inclined at a large angle to the surface. This
phenomenon greatly influences lift and drag, and thus flight stability of UAVs,
efficiency of wind turbines, and unsteadiness in turbine flows which is
instrumental in predicting high cycle fatigue for turbomachinery components. In
order to produce efficient wing and blade designs or control schemes to reduce
separation effects, accurate numerical prediction tools for such flows are
needed. This is an acknowledged hard computational problem, where laminar
boundary layer stability and separation, free-shear layer stability and
transition to turbulence, the possible re-attachment, and nonequilibrium
attached turbulent boundary layer have complicated and significant dynamic
interplay. Currently, only direct numerical simulation (DNS) of fluid dynamics
equations are capable of predicting all important features of such flows,
especially the separation region. However, this capability comes at a
considerable computational cost, making DNS not feasible in industrial practice.
&lt;br/&gt;The general goal is to develop and investigate a large eddy
simulation (LES) technique that will allow accurate numerical predictions of
separated flows of interest at a computational cost by at least a factor of 100
less than in DNS. The distinct feature of the proposed technique is that it does
not employ the eddy viscosity concept, common to most turbulence models
currently in use. Its non-eddy viscosity character make it a superior candidate
for an efficient computational tool for predicting the separated flows as well
as other flows involving mixture of laminar, transitional, and turbulent
regions. The developed numerical tool will help to understand some of the
notorious characteristics of airfoils and wings at moderate Reynolds numbers:
the sensitivity to small disturbances, the intrinsic three-dimensional character
of nominally a two-dimensional flow geometry, and the hysteresis of marginally
stable flow states, and how to control them. The numerical work will be
coordinated with and guided by the experimental work of our collaborators who
have already gathered data for a number of specific geometries: a flat plate, a
5% cambered plate, and a smooth airfoil. &lt;br/&gt;The broader scientific
impact of the proposed research is related to a potential paradigm shift in
numerical simulations of turbulent flows offered by the proposed non-eddy
viscosity approach to large eddy simulations. This is important because many
fluid flows in engineering and nature are turbulent, e.g. flows around airplanes
and ground vehicles; flows in the internal combustion engines, turbo machinery,
and in rockets; atmospheric and oceanic flows responsible for weather, climate,
and spreading of pollutants. The proposed method is attractive because it allows
accurate numerical simulations within the unified framework based on a physical
modeling principle applicable universally to incompressible, compressible,
convective, and stratified turbulence.