* 1233528
* EAGER: Development of Visible Light Driven Photocatalytic Nanocomposites for the Reduction of CO2 to Hydrocarbon Fuel
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Prakash Sharma, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2018
* USD 110,352.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Sequestering carbon dioxide by conversion into synthetic
fuels can be an immensely attractive approach if the conversion process is
coupled with a renewable resource such as solar energy. Photoinduced carbon
dioxide reduction leading to the formation of energy rich fuels, such as
conversion of CO2 to CH4 or higher hydrocarbons has not been adequately studied
as compared with the Fischer-Tropsch synthesis for hydrocarbons. In this
context, use of photocatalytic semi-conducting materials such as titania is
promising due to the ease of photogeneration of charge carriers that facilitate
surface reactions involving CO2 and water vapor. At the present time, the
efficiency of such photocatalytic processes is very low.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is widely used in many
photocatalytic, water splitting applications. However, it can only utilize the
ultraviolet portion of the solar spectrum (less than 4% of the total sunlight
energy), which results in low total efficiency of such catalyst in the sunlight
energy utilization. Apparently, a critical challenge in using TiO2 for
photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbon fuels such as methane, ethane or
methanol has been the enhancement of CO2 conversion rates using the visible
spectrum of sunlight. Low conversion rates due to the high band gap of native
titania is one limitation, which gets improved by developing novel visible light
activated photocatalysts having higher photo-reductive sites for the hydrocarbon
fuel formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this EAGER grant, PIs will design and
develop novel visible light activated photocatalysts by anion doping,
encapsulation, nanoshell/core formulation, and band gap tailoring procedures.
Preliminary results have shown that both anion doping and band gap tailoring of
TiO2 via thermochemical and mechanochemical processes thus enhances the optical
absorption characteristics in the visible light region in addition to the large
active surface area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of clean liquid fuel from
sunlight and water will help reduce the greenhouse gas emissions and petroleum
imports. Additionally, this project will also have a substantial educational
impact, as it will be used to start a new area of renewable energy research
training at Tuskegee University, an HBCU.