* 1233935
* DynSyst_Special_Topics/Collaborative Research: A New Braid Theoretic Approach To Uncovering Transport Barriers In Complex Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jean-Luc Thiffeault, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 258,355.00

The research objective of this collaborative award is the advancement and
application of a novel approach for identifying transport barriers in complex
fluid flows based on the mathematical discipline of Braid Theory. This approach
has the potential to enable a complex flow field to be decomposed into the key
domains that organize material transport, using only sparse trajectory data. To
investigate the utility and robustness of the approach, this collaborative
research project will combine fundamental mathematical research with testing via
laboratory experiments, numerical simulations, and field data sets. Deliverables
include the development, validation and assessment of a new technique for
identifying transport barriers in fluid flows, the creation of new fluid
dynamics analysis tools, the training of a graduate student and a postdoc,
research experience for undergraduate and high school students, and the
organization of a major international workshop. Transport barriers organize
material transport in the Earth's oceans, lakes and rivers. It is a longstanding
challenge to identify these dynamical structures, however, since a principal
source of data is the trajectories of Lagrangian drifters, which are inevitably
sparsely distributed due to the large physical scales involved. The Braid Theory
approach has the potential to extract valuable information on the shape and
location of transport barriers from sparse drifter data sets. The resulting
methodology also supports efficient, real-time implementation; a potentially
transformative application is to improve time-sensitive decision-making
strategies for man-made and naturally occurring environmental scenarios,
including oil spills, radioactive leaks and algal blooms. The results will be
disseminated to researchers in academia, government and industry, in particular
via a week-long international workshop at the Banff Center, and the academic and
personal careers of a high-school student, an undergraduate student, a graduate
student and a postdoc will benefit from training in this field.