* 1233783
* Synthesis of Gradient Biomaterials for Implants by Laser Direct Deposition and Sintering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gary Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 479,367.00

This grant provides funding to establish a methodology and to understand its
fundamental mechanisms for manufacturing functionally and structurally gradient
nanocomposites using three dimensional direct laser deposition and sintering.
The resulting material will be designed to closely match the characteristics of
natural bone. Biocompatible, osteoconductive, advanced compositionally and
structurally gradient implant biomaterials will be constructed with nitinol and
titanium-based nanocomposites. A multi-layer laser coating process will form
functionally gradient nanoscale nanocomposite coatings on metal substrates.
Multi-scale, multi-physics modeling will be developed to simulate the laser
direct deposition and laser sintering processes. The synthesized gradient
biomaterials will be characterized for their mechanical characteristics,
physical and biological properties. Influences of different processing
parameters on the coating properties will be studied to understand and find a
processing window for good interfacial property and cell-materials interaction.

If successful, this project will result in a key enabling technology for
integrating advances in biomaterials into manufacturing that lead to
significantly improved implants for the orthopedic industry. The proposed one-
step process has the potential to drastically reduce manufacturing time and
cost. This project will bring about an improved understanding of this bio-
composite material behavior in the performance of implants. The computer
modeling will build a deeper understanding of laser deposition on the
interaction between multi-component powders and the laser beam, their behavior
in a molten pool and solidification. The experiments and multiphysics modeling
will combine to provide a critical scientific basis for low temperature
processing of smart materials and nanocomposite powders.