* 1233197
* An Agent-Based Modeling Approach to Integrate Social Dimensions and Infrastructure Management for Urban Water Reuse
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Emily Berglund, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2015
* USD 320,000.00

This grant explores the interplay between social and technical aspects of
reclaimed, or recycled, water and will discover new ways for planning municipal
water infrastructure and policy. A simulation approach, employing computer based
agent-based modeling, will be formulated to examine the interactions among
consumers, utility operators, existing water infrastructure, and new water
reclamation infrastructure. The results of the project will inform two broad
areas of research: (1) public opinion of unfamiliar technologies, and (2) civil
engineering design approaches for water supply systems. Moreover, the project
will bridge engineering with the social and behavioral sciences by introducing
the Acceptance-Resistance Agent-Based Model (ARAM), based on existing
engineering models and new empirical assessments of public opinion. Going beyond
a purely economic perspective of consumer behaviors, the ARAM approach simulates
transitions in public attitudes toward accepting or resisting water reuse.
Comparing results of the ARAM with results of a typical economic modeling
approach will identify the social factors that significantly impact system
performance. Modeling will be demonstrated for a water utility in North
Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will provide a
computational approach to assist municipal water utilities seeking to augment
their water supply with water reclamation. Integrating new technologies in an
existing water supply infrastructure is a dynamic process that involves the
transition of both social relationships and engineering infrastructures.
Typically, policy development is predominantly informed through engineering
analysis alone. However this project overcomes this limitation by linking
consumer perceptions of risk with engineering models to explicitly incorporate
dynamic behavior. As a pedagogical tool, the model will be used to train the
next generation of civil engineers and social scientists of informing policy in
collaborative ways. The research will improve the current understanding of
relationships between consumers and infrastructure performance and will provide
solutions for water utilities across the United States.