* 1233885
* Understanding the Load Transfer Mechanisms between Parallel Wires in Suspension Bridge Cables using Neutron Difraction Measurements and Numerical Modelling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Raimondo Betti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 349,924.00

In suspension bridges the main cables, with many thousands of steel wires
compacted together, are crucial for the overall safety; they transfer the entire
load--more than several thousand tons-- including the weight of the bridge deck
and of any traffic that might be on it, the wind induced forces, etc. to the
towers and to the anchorage blocks. If the cable fails, the entire bridge is
lost. Full inspection of cables during service is not feasible; assessing the
strength of a main cable is accomplished through partial inspections and
numerical models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to provide
bridge engineers with experimental and numerical tools to assess the remaining
strength of suspension bridge cables. The experimental part of the study will
use deeply-penetrating, non-destructive, neutron beams to measure position-
specific stress/strain data from model bridge cable strands under realistic
boundary conditions. &lt;br/&gt;These data will, then, be used to develop
numerical and theoretical models for predicting the load carrying capacity,
safety factors and reliability, as well as service life, of parallel-wire
suspension bridge cables, both under design and currently in service.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In neutron diffraction the lattice parameter of the steel
is utilized as an internal strain gage. The change in this parameter as a
function of applied load yields the elastic strain. In the experimental phase
focussed neutron beams will be used to measure the strain partitioning within
individual wires of model cables while they are loaded past failure. Thermal
neutrons can easily penetrate 45 mm of steel and, thus, measurement of the local
strains within the inner wires is possible. The experiments will be carried out
for various bundle configurations with selected lubricant/corrosion preventative
treatments. The data obtained from the experiments will then be utilized in an
extended 3-D finite element model being developed on the supercomputing
facilities available at Columbia University. Once finished, this model is
expected to yield accurate predictions on the load carrying capabilities of
parallel wires and can be extendable to the assessment of the ultimate strength
of the overall main cable in a suspension bridge.