* 1233780
* Investigating the System-Level Dynamics of Fully-Integrated CMOS-SOI Nanoresonators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Rhoads, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,053.00

Following the scaling of CMOS transistors, electromechanical systems are
undergoing a rapid and remarkable miniaturization into the sub-micron regime.
Resonant nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) are eliciting particular interest
because they allow access to microwave frequencies and nanosecond response
times, amongst other pertinent metrics. These unprecedented properties are
fueling the potentially ground-breaking application of NEMS in signal
processing, electrometry, and chemical and biological sensing. Despite their
significant potential in these applications, the widespread implementation of
resonant NEMS is currently impeded by: (i) a limited, system-level understanding
of their complex dynamic behaviors, (ii) device-to-device performance
irregularity, and (iii) a general incompatibility with existing CMOS fabrication
technologies. This effort seeks to address these deficiencies through the
modeling, design, fabrication, and characterization of highly-tunable, top-down
fabricated, resonant nanosystems, which can be integrated with existing CMOS
technologies. Specifically, the work seeks to develop fully-integrated,
electrostatically-actuated devices, which can be repeatedly reproduced using
commercial semiconductor process flows. To this end, single- and dual-gate
nanoresonators will be designed and fabricated using a silicon-on-insulator
process and subsequently integrated with CMOS circuits capable of providing on-
chip actuation, signal conditioning, response characterization, and device
tuning. Two nanoscale hardware platforms, a channel-select RF receiver and a
gas-phase chemical sensor, which advantageously leverage the systems' inherently
nonlinear behaviors, will then be developed to evaluate the merits of the
proposed system-level modeling, analysis, design, and development approach.

Overall, this effort should not only provide insight into the complex dynamical
behaviors associated with a fully-integrated nanoresonator system, including
attendant electronics, operating in a noisy, multi-physics environment, but also
push forward the status of current nanofabrication technology. In addition, the
effort should have broader impact through hierarchical integration with new
educational efforts founded upon the existing cyber-infrastructure of the NSF
Network for Computational Nanotechnology's nanoHUB and Purdue's Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program. Specifically, the effort's PIs
will (i) develop and deploy a comprehensive software tool for the simulation of
integrated SOI-CMOS resonant nanosystems; and (ii) develop and distribute new
course materials and streaming video lectures associated with integrated
nanosystems, which will be included in the PI's course on the Mechanics of
Micro- and Nanosystems. The PIs anticipate that hundreds of students and
scientists worldwide will utilize these resources to further their system-level
understanding of nanoresonators. It is important to note that the educational
effort will also incorporate three undergraduate research experiences arranged
through the SURF program. These summer-long, intensive experiences will
specifically target under-represented students.