* 1233255
* Collaborative Research: Using ocean data assimilation to explore Arctic/subarctic climate variability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Michael Steele, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 109,250.00

Intellectual merit: Recent decades have seen profound changes in higher latitude
climate. This project addresses two goals responding to these changes. The first
goal is to develop improved understanding of what past oceanic changes have
occurred at high latitude during the past century through application of data
assimilation to the sparse historical record of meteorological and oceanic
measurements. The first task associated with this goal will be to improve the
Simple Ocean Data Assimilation (SODA) data assimilation ocean reanalysis as a
tool for high latitude research. This task builds directly on work funded by the
predecessor to this grant. This special high latitude effort is required because
of the complexities of the region?s topography, water masses and currents, the
sparse, inhomogeneous oceanic and meteorological observational network, and the
important role of sea ice and haline processes. The second task will be to
explore the limits the historical data sampling and surface meteorology place on
what can be learned about past climate variability through experiments testing
the credibility of long ocean reanalyses.

The second goal is to examine these results to explore the processes governing
interaction between the high latitude ocean, the lower latitude ocean, and the
overlying atmosphere, and how these interactions may contribute to climate
variability. The remarkable warming the Nordic Seas and Arctic has experienced
in the last decade bears similarity to a warm period in the 1920s-1930s. How
similar are these two periods, both in magnitude and in impact on the subpolar
North Atlantic and on the overlying atmosphere? On shorter decadal timescales
the Atlantic Water flowing into the Nordic Seas shows substantial variability
partially related to large-scale patterns in meteorology. Related to this are
the anomalies of surface salinity such as the Great Salinity Anomaly. What is
the origin of this variability, its relationship to the atmosphere, and what is
its climate significance? Addressing this second goal will require exploring
these mechanisms in coupled atmosphere/ocean/ice models, and in particular the
new IPCC-class model runs, using the results of the assimilation studies as
guidance. Coupled climate models have complete physics that allow the tracking
of the movement of properties such as freshwater and heat through the climate
system, while the comparisons to SODA and the historical observations provides
information about the realism of the models.

Broader impacts: This project will provide the scientific community with an
improved analysis of past changes in the upper ocean temperature, salinity, and
circulation at high latitude through development and dissemination of an
improved SODA ocean reanalysis and improved understanding of its uncertainties.
The project?s involvement in the Arctic Ocean Model Intercomparison Project and
other venues will help promote the greater knowledge and use of ocean reanalyses
generally, and SODA in particular. The second part of this research project,
improving understanding of the role of oceanic basin exchanges is a process that
needs to be understood in order to develop predictive models. The project will
have a substantial educational component by making the data sets, analyses, and
computer resources developed as part of this work freely available to the
graduate students in the department.