* 1233014
* Collaborative Research: Linking geochemistry and proteomics to reveal the impact of bacteria on protein cycling in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* David Goodlett, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Although proteins represent the primary source of new organic nitrogen in the
ocean, the identification of individual proteins and mechanisms modulating their
preservation has faced analytical and computational challenges in deciphering
the vast suite of possible sequences and degradation by-products. Recent efforts
to link geochemical cycling, biomedical proteomics and bioinformatics has
demonstrated that only a small subset of the suite of proteins produced by
marine diatoms appear to survive the degradation process, and those that do are
largely protected by physical and enthalpic barriers to microbial attack.
Although these discoveries help to explain the survival of individual proteins,
they also generate multiple questions regarding bacteria as the dominant
recyclers of organic nitrogen and carbon and needs for specific approaches to
characterize modified protein products. Bacteria dominate the water column and
sedimentary systems in both numbers and diversity, yet their relative
contribution to the preserved proteomic pool appears low.

In this project, researchers at Old Dominion Universityand the University of
Washington will join forces to decipher the bacterial role in protein recycling
and their potential contribution. By integrating high mass accuracy tandem mass
spectrometry-based proteomics with stable isotope-based geochemical analysis,
they hope to identify those bacterial proteins initially synthesized during
organic matter recycling. Three research objectives drive this investigation:
(1) to determine the potential contribution of bacteria proteins to marine
organic matter; (2) to identify those protein(s) synthesized by heterotrophic
marine bacteria during initial stages of organic matter degradation; (3) to
determine if glycan (carbohydrate) modifications represent an important
component of preserved, yet unidentified, peptides seen in our analysis of
oceanic particles and sediments.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide multiple opportunities for
interdisciplinary student training in marine chemistry and proteomics as well as
address the goal of disseminating results and tools to a broad audience. In the
more traditional role, this project will expand the career for a female
principal investigator in marine proteomics, support both graduate and
undergraduate students at ODU which include opportunities for minority
enrichment and provide training for a postdoctoral fellow at UW. On the broader
level, the ODU PI participates in high school outreach programs for high
achieving students in the local school which provides for summer internships and
enrichment programs.