* 1233882
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES Pacific Section: Measurement of the organic complexation of dissolved iron, copper and cobalt, and total dissolved cobalt
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kristen Buck, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 05/31/2014
* USD 237,269.00

Dissolved iron (Fe), copper (Cu), and cobalt (Co) are essential elements for
phytoplankton growth, which in turn influences the marine carbon cycle; however,
despite this important role, the cycling, distribution, and bioavailability of
these bioactive elements remains poorly understood. For example, strong organic
ligands influence bioavailability and solubility, but it is unclear how
interactions change throughout the water column under variable conditions.
Recognizing a need for these data, researchers from the Bermuda Institute of
Ocean Sciences, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and Scripps Institute of
Oceanography will measure the organic complexation of dissolved Fe, Cu, and Co
as well as total dissolved Co concentrations during the 2013 GEOTRACES cruise
which will transect the coastal upwelling zone off Peru, an intense oxygen
minimum zone, the East Pacific Rise hydrothermal plume, and the oligotrophic
waters near Tahiti. This study will result in a significant dataset on the
speciation of these bioactive elements throughout the water column which will
help assess the relationships between dissolved Fe, Cu, and Co distributions and
ligand concentration gradients and will likely reveal large chemical gradients
over this dynamic oceanographic region. As regards dissolved Co concentrations,
these measurements should provide new insights on the marine biogeochemistry of
the element, especially in relation to oxygen minimum zones and hydrothermal
plumes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader impacts, for the outreach
efforts, the researchers plan to disseminate results from their work to the
public via the web, during tours at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences
(BIOS), and at the annual BIOS Marine Science Service Day open house, as well as
through a five-part webinar series produced in collaboration with the Center for
Ocean Sciences Education Excellence-Ocean Systems at the University of Maine and
classroom curricula. One graduate student from Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and one graduate student from Scripps Institute of Oceanography
would be trained and supported as part of this project.