* 1233903
* Collaborative Research: U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Section: Analysis of 230Th, 232Th and 231Pa
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Hai Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2015
* USD 410,000.00

The International GEOTRACES program is a multi-national effort to survey (by a
series of cross-ocean sections) and understand the global-ocean distribution of
trace elements and isotopes in seawater. The GEOTRACES Science Plan has
designated the natural radioisotopes 231Pa and 230Th to be key parameters
inasmuch as their measurement on all sections is deemed to be critical to the
success of entire international ocean science program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, a research team from the Lamont- Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University and the University of Minnesota - Twin Cities will undertake
measurement of the dissolved and particulate concentrations of 230Th and 231Pa
on the US GEOTRACES Peru-Tahiti section, one of the American contributions to
the global GEOTRACES effort. Additionally, they will measure dissolved and
particulate 232Th concentrations and analyze a limited number of aerosol
samples, aerosol leachates, and surface sediments for these radionuclides. These
data will be used to: 1) Quantify the rates of boundary scavenging of 231Pa and
230Th associated with the biologically productive Peru upwelling system, 2)
Quantify the rates of bottom scavenging of 231Pa and 230Th thought to be
associated with resuspended sediments in nepheloid layers, 3) Quantify the
uptake of dissolved Th and Pa by metalliferous particles associated with the
hydrothermal plume emanating from the East Pacific Rise as well as by authigenic
particles formed within the oxygen minimum zone, 4) Quantify the supply of
lithogenic 232Th from margin sediments by the combined study of 232Th and 230Th,
and 5) Quantify the supply of lithogenic 232Th from aerosols by the combined
study of 232Th and 230Th. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through collaboration with other
US GEOTRACES investigators, the team expects that this work will provide
unprecedented constraints on the processes that supply trace elements to the
ocean as well as the processes that remove them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The project will provide for the training and support of a postdoctoral
research associate and one graduate student.