* 1233964
* Intracellular DOM: Fate and flux at the microbial nodes of C and N cycles in the ocean, with a focus on the primary producer Prochlorococcus
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Erik Zinser, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Microbes are key components of the marine particulate
organic matter pool; they serve as nodes of inter-conversion between inorganic
and organic materials, and between dissolved and particulate organic matter.
While bulk rates of primary and secondary production have been reported, the
oceanographic community currently lacks an understanding of the transformative
metabolic processes that occur within microbial cells and ultimately dictate
their roles in carbon and nitrogen cycling. This study will bring the power of
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry based metabolomics and
transcriptomics to bear on the fate and flux of carbon and nitrogen within the
unicellular marine cyanobacterium, Prochlorococcus. This organism is the most
abundant photosynthetic marine phytoplankter, accounting for >50% of primary
production in the open ocean. This study will therefore improve understanding of
carbon and nitrogen cycling in the open ocean and provide metabolomics and
transcriptomics data on Prochlorococcus physiology.

Broader Impacts: With regard to the broader impacts of this study, graduate and
undergraduate students will be given the opportunity to participate in this
multidisciplinary project. Beyond these educational activities, outreach to P-12
school audiences as well as underrepresented and disadvantaged groups will be
conducted by hosting students in the laboratory, giving public seminars, and
further developing educational supplements.