* 1233628
* IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC). The conference will be held in Maui, Hawaii on December 10-13, 2012.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jay Farrell, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal requests support for student travel to the 51st IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC), which will be held in Maui, Hawaii, December 10-13,
2012. The IEEE CDC is the annual flagship conference of the IEEE Control Systems
Society and one of the premier international conferences in the field of systems
and control, featuring both theory and applications. The funds will provide
partial support for up to twenty students from US colleges and universities to
attend the conference and present their research results.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: &lt;br/&gt;Systems and control theory is
ubiquitous in modern, complex, technological systems, from automotive to
aerospace systems, biomedical systems, industrial automation systems, robotics,
and a host of other systems. It is increasingly evident that current research on
many technological frontiers is heavily influenced by foundational ideas from
control and system theory. The recent 50th IEEE CDC received over 2300
submissions and accepted 1354 for presentation, many of which are co-authored by
students together with their faculty advisers. The intellectual merit of the
proposed use of funds is that graduate students will see first-hand how the
foundations of control and systems are evolving and shaping the frontiers of
research in many applications domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; BROADER IMPACT:
&lt;br/&gt;With over 1080 anticipated research presentations, including plenary
lectures, workshops and exhibits the CDC provides attendees with exposure to the
state-of-the-art in emerging areas of control research and technology. The
broader impact of this travel support is that it will help train the next
generation of system and control researchers and practitioners. The future
security and well-being of the United States relies on maintaining pools of
trained scientists and engineers in critical areas such as control technology.
The students to be supported under the proposed project represent the future
technological leaders of the IEEE Control Systems Society, which is the world's
leading professional organization in the discipline.