* 1233027
* Mechanisms and Consequences of Fish Biodiversity Loss on Atlantic Coral Reefs Caused by Invasive Pacific Lionfish
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Mark Hixon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2017
* USD 772,943.00

The Pacific red lionfish (Pterois volitans), a popular aquarium fish, was
introduced to the Atlantic Ocean in the vicinity of Florida in the late 20th
century. Voraciously consuming small native coral-reef fishes, including the
juveniles of fisheries and ecologically important species, the invader has
undergone a population explosion that now ranges from the U.S. southeastern
seaboard to the Gulf of Mexico and across the greater Caribbean region. The PI's
past research determined that invasive lionfish (1) have escaped their natural
enemies in the Pacific (lionfish are much less abundant in their native range);
(2) are not yet controlled by Atlantic predators, competitors, or parasites; (3)
have strong negative effects on populations of native Atlantic fishes; and (4)
locally reduce the diversity (number of species) of native fishes. The lionfish
invasion has been recognized as one of the major conservation threats worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bahamas support the highest abundances of invasive
lionfish globally. This system thus provides an unprecedented opportunity to
understand the direct and indirect effects of a major invader on a diverse
community, as well as the underlying causative mechanisms. The PI will focus on
five related questions: (1) How does long-term predation by lionfish alter the
structure of native reef-fish communities? (2) How does lionfish predation
destabilize native prey population dynamics, possibly causing local extinctions?
(3) Is there a lionfish-herbivore-seaweed trophic cascade on invaded reefs? (4)
How do lionfish modify cleaning mutualisms on invaded reefs? (5) Are lionfish
reaching densities where natural population limits are evident? The study will
fund the PhD research of 4 NSF Graduate Research Fellows, and will involve
participation by a broad variety of undergraduates and reef/fisheries managers.