* 1233283
* Collaborative Research: The effect of inbreeding on metapopulation dynamics of the giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Daniel Reed, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 264,575.00

Understanding the causes for populations to fluctuate in space and time is of
great interest to ecologists and knowledge on this topic has widespread
application for conservation and environmental management. The recognition that
many species live in highly fragmented landscapes led to the development of
metapopulation theory, which is widely applicable to both terrestrial and marine
systems. In its simplest form the concept of a metapopulation represents the
idea that habitat patches suitable for local populations are either occupied or
not and that connectivity among patches acts to "rescue" extinct local
populations. Several recent studies on inbreeding have challenged the
traditional belief that ecological factors are the primary causes of local
population reduction and eventual extinction. However, to date there have been
few investigations of the extent to which inbreeding depression drives local
population dynamics in a metapopulation. The giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera,
is an ideal system for testing metapopulation theory because it occurs in
discrete patches that undergo frequent local extinctions and recolonizations on
time scales of a few years. The investigators will test five related hypotheses
aimed at determining whether the metapopulation of the giant kelp in the
Southern California Bight is regulated at least in part by repeated and
asynchronous episodes of inbreeding depression. This research is motivated by
previous findings of the investigators on patterns of local population
extinction and recolonization with respect to patch size and degree of
isolation, patterns of spore dispersal and genetic connectivity, and the adverse
consequences of inbreeding depression to kelp reproduction. This project will:
(1) Assess the extent and pattern of inbreeding in populations of giant kelp in
the Southern California Bight, and (2) Determine the extent that inbreeding
depression via decreased reproduction contributes to the pattern of
metapopulation patch dynamics of giant kelp in the Southern California Bight.
The research will be greatly facilitated by recent developments of: (1) highly
polymorphic microsatellite markers for characterizing the population genetics of
giant kelp, (2) a high resolution oceanographic model for estimating
connectivity among local populations of giant kelp, and (3) a novel method for
estimating effective population size for all discrete patches of giant kelp in
the Southern California Bight using Landsat satellite imagery. Broader Impacts:
Giant kelp forests are prominent features on shallow reefs in temperate seas
worldwide and are among the most productive ecosystems on Earth. Giant kelp
itself provides food and habitat for a diverse assemblage of consumers many of
which are commercially and recreationally important. Consequently, giant kelp
forests are targeted by conservationists, resources managers and policy makers
as habitats of special concern due to the high value ascribed to the ecosystems
services that they provide. The principal investigators have a history of
working with government agencies in developing management plans aimed at
protecting these systems and findings from this research will contribute to
these ongoing efforts. The proposed research will also contribute to student
training and mentoring in interdisciplinary research at the undergraduate,
graduate, and post doc levels spread across 3 different institutions. The
principal investigators will partner with existing outreach programs at UCSC and
UCSB to deliver the results of their research to k-12 and post-secondary
institutions, educators, community groups and the general public.