* 1233397
* Understanding the Dynamics of Stochastic Disease Spread in Metapopulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lora Billings, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 339,076.00

Determining the conditions for the outbreak, spread, and extinction of an
infectious disease is an important public health problem. Global eradication of
an infectious disease has rarely been achieved, but it continues to be a public
health goal for many diseases. More commonly, one can observe local disease
extinction, or fade out, followed by a reintroduction of the disease from other
regions through a migratory effect. In general, extinction occurs in populations
undergoing stochastic effects owing to random transitions. The origins of
stochasticity may be internal to the system or may arise from the external
environment. Small population size, low contact frequency for frequency-
dependent transmission, competition for resources and evolutionary pressure, as
well as heterogeneity in populations and transmission, may all be determining
factors for extinction to occur. The possibility of an extinction event is
affected by the nature and strength of the stochastic noise, as well as other
factors, including outbreak amplitude and seasonal phase occurrence. For large
populations, the intensity of internal population noise is generally small.
However, a rare, large fluctuation can occur with non-zero probability and the
system may be able to reach the extinct state. The research objective is to
study the dynamics of disease spread and extinction using stochastic
metapopulation models that consist of coupled regions or patches. A master
equation formalism will be used to understand the disease dynamics and to find
the path that maximizes the probability of disease extinction. The results will
enable one to speed up disease extinction through the use of control methods
including vaccination and quarantine programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is highly multidisciplinary, and involves dynamical systems, stochastic
processes, statistical mechanics, and control theory. The mathematical tools
that will be developed will provide new ways of analyzing and confirming
numerical results. In addition, the analysis will lead to the prediction of
novel information and system behavior, and will provide for improved
understanding of infectious disease outbreak, spread, and extinction processes.
In particular, this new understanding of disease dynamics will enable the
development of optimal control methods to lessen disease outbreak and spread.
The proposal includes carefully planned projects that will involve and support
undergraduate and graduate students in leading-edge research. Significantly, the
student population at Montclair State University, and in particular, the
Department of Mathematical Sciences, includes a substantial proportion who are
members of groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines (including women and
minorities) and the research program will leverage existing programs directed to
these students. The outcome of the research will be disseminated through
seminars, presentations at meetings, and publications in peer-reviewed journals.