* 1233587
* IODP Expeditions 334/344 Objective Research: Geochemical investigation of fluid/rock reactions and the nature of fluid flow at the erosive Costa Rica subduction zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Evan Solomon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 226,778.00

This proposal seeks to characterize fluid chemistry at several sites across the
Costa Rica subduction zone. Fluids will be analyzed for Si, B, Br, F, 18O,
deuterium, 11B and 7Li. This information will be used to determine the
temperatures of the fluid sources and constrain the low-grade
metamorphic/diagenetic reactions that produce the fluids. These reactions may
have implications for stick-slip behavior along the plate boundary fault. This
work represents part of an effort to characterize the fluid flow and faulting
behavior along an erosive subduction zone and is complementary to work currently
being done on an accretionary subduction zone off of Japan. The work is critical
to the completion of the objectives of IODP expeditions 334 and
344.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include a better understanding of
fault with the potential to produce large earthquakes and, possibly, tsunamis. A
graduate student will be taking part in an international collaboration,
including travel to and work in a laboratory in Taiwan. The project also
involves undergraduate students, including a senior thesis, incorporation of
results into undergraduate classes, and presentation of results to a conference
specifically designed to attract persons from under-represented groups to
science.