* 1233808
* Collaborative Research:   DNS and high resolution measurements of scalar transfer across an air-water interface during inception and growth of Langmuir circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Fabrice Veron, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 354,016.00

The overarching goal of this study is to characterize the effect of small scale
Langmuir turbulence on the temperature of the commonly occurring cool thermal
molecular boundary layer (i.e. the cool skin) beneath the air-sea interface and
on slightly soluble gas exchange rate across the interface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When wind blows over an initially quiescent air-sea
interface, it first generates short capillary waves which in time coexist with
longer waves as part of a broad spectrum of waves. The interaction between the
wind-driven waves and shear current leads to Langmuir turbulence characterized
by Langmuir circulation (LC) consisting of counter rotating vortices roughly
aligned in the direction of the wind. The typical length scale of the vortices
ranges from several centimeters when short capillary waves first appear up to
tens of meters when the spectrum of waves broadens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
centimeter-scale LC are generated very quickly with the gustiness in the wind
field (and disappear very quickly as well), thereby providing, over intermittent
and repeated gust events, very intense turbulent bursts at the surface which may
very well dominate the average surface renewal processes. These renewal events
are critical to our understanding of air-sea scalar fluxes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, direct numerical simulations (DNS) of small scale
LC and its evolution has not been made and measurements of surface renewal time
scales and other parameters influenced by these coherent structures have not
been performed. Accordingly, this study, based on fine-scale DNS computations
along with high resolution laboratory experiments, will capture the growth
stages of LC and transition to Langmuir turbulence during the wave aging
process. Simulations validated with the experiments will address the following
major questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. What is the influence of small scale LC on scalar
air-sea fluxes during the early stages of LC development when wind shear is
dominant over wave orbital velocities? &lt;br/&gt;2. What is the impact of
micro-breaking waves on the structure of small scale LC? &lt;br/&gt;3. What is
the cumulative effect of small scale LC and micro-breakers on sea surface
molecular layers? &lt;br/&gt;4. What is the structure of LC and the effect of LC
on molecular layers during later stages of LC development as LC and surface wave
spectra broaden? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will focus on the
generation and evolution of small scale LC. They will aim at &lt;br/&gt;1.
Assessing the structure, evolution, and stability of small scale Langmuir
circulations. &lt;br/&gt;2. Evaluating the impact of these structures on the
cool skin with potential influence on the air-sea heat and gas flux.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Collecting high quality dynamics measurements within the water
column for comparison with the computations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that the LC will impact the cool skin temperature and gas
concentration molecular layer by enhancing the surface renewal mechanism, often
invoked in parameterizations of the cool skin and gas transfer velocity (a
measure of gas transfer efficiency across the air-sea interface). Accordingly,
the DNS solver to be used is equipped with an interface capturing technique
yielding resolved surface molecular layers, and accurate resolution of violent
free-surface motions. The experiments will include PIV and active infrared
radiometry yielding direct estimates of sub-surface and surface kinematics. This
combined numerical/experimental approach will likely lead to new physical
insights into the fine scale processes which control the air-sea molecular
fluxes of heat and gas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Broad impacts
will be made through enhanced fundamental understanding of the fine-scale
physics characterizing the ocean cool skin and gas transfer across the air-sea
interface in the presence of LC. LC is known to appear and disappear quickly at
the ocean surface and plays an important role in global air-sea scalar fluxes.
Understanding the influence of LC would allow scientists to develop improved
parameterizations of global ocean flux uptake of greenhouse gases such as CO2.
Furthermore, results obtained would benefit scientists making estimates of bulk
ocean temperatures based on satellite infrared measurements while having to
account for the cool skin. Results from this research will be disseminated in
journal publications and conferences, and, where appropriate, more popular
avenues of publication. At a local level, knowledge gained through this research
effort will be incorporated into the education and training of students. The PIs
will continue their efforts to promote science and research to a broader
audience (K-12 and public) through laboratory visits and informational
scientific talks to the public.