* 1233067
* Comparative Ecodynamics in the Aleutian and Kuril Islands:   A GHEA synthesis workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Ben Fitzhugh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2013
* USD 49,942.00

This project will provide funding to the University of Washington to hold a
three-day workshop that will bring together a diverse group of expert scholars
and students to explore long-term human-environmental dynamics through the
Holocene in the North Pacific with a focus on the Kuril and Aleutian islands.
The reason for focusing on these island regions is that these archipelagos
constitute model ecosystems for tracking migration, human-environmental
interactions and adaptations. Over the past decade, in both areas of the North
Pacific, interdisciplinary teams of archaeologists, biologists, geologists,
chemists, and modelers have worked to better understand environmental and human
dynamics. These teams have developed innovative methods for exploring the
intersection of geological, paleoenvironmental, biological, and cultural
histories of these island environments. However, as the PI states, substantial
research questions, methodologies, and data sets for both regions remain
disparate and nonintegrated and are subsequently underutilized. The purpose of
this workshop is to bring these diverse groups of scholars and their students
together to compare data, methods, and analyses in order to start a synthesis of
the North Pacific human-environmental ecodynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be hosted by the University of Washington in early November, 2012
and will attended by approximately 35 participants, including scholars from the
Unitied States, Canada, Russia, and Japan. In addition, the organizers envision
a robust role for students; the proposal includes funds for up 10 students
(graduate/undergraduate) to participate in the workshop from around the U.S. In
return for travel, boarding and per diem, the students will be expected to play
active roles in the management and intellectual activities of the workshop. A
dedicated component of the workshop will be periodic student discussant
presentations, in which students will be encouraged to reflect on the
proceedings. Finally, careful planning and follow-up with the broader team of
synthesis leaders will ensure the prompt preparation and publication of workshop
results, preparation of the workshop report and white paper.