* 1233542
* Understanding the Central-Pacific El Nino-Southern Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Soon-Il An, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2016
* USD 642,609.00

This project considers El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) which occur in the
Central Equatorial Pacific (CP). CP ENSO events are distinct from the canonical
ENSO events which occur in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific (EP) and appear as a
narrow tongue of sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies extending along the
equatorial cold tongue from the South American coast. In contrast, SST anomalies
for CP ENSO events extend poleward and eastward from the CP to the subtropical
coasts of North and South America, with stronger extension in the Northern
Hemisphere. Furthermore, the evolution of EP ENSO events is associated with
propagation or basin-wide fluctuation of subsurface ocean temperature anomalies
at thermocline depth, while CP ENSO events have subsurface temperature anomalies
which develop in situ, without propagation. The PIs note that CP ENSO events
have become more common since the 1990s, and recent studies suggest that global
warming may lead to further enhancement in CP over EP ENSO activity. They also
note that the CP ENSO has received less attention in the literature than the EP
ENSO, and studies of ENSO and its connections to the extratropics, including
both extratropical precursors and extratropical impacts, have not considered the
two ENSO types separately. The project addresses three scientific issues related
to CP ENSO events. First, research addresses the underlying dynamics of CP
events, and the relationship between CP and EP ENSO dynamics, through the use of
idealized models and models of intermediate complexity. Second, the project
addresses the role of extratropical forcing in generating CP ENSO events, based
on earlier research which identified precursor patterns in sea surface
temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere subtropics. Third, the research
considers differences in the global impacts of CP and EP ENSO events, based in
part on prevous work suggesting that EP events produce a north-south pattern of
winter temperature anomalies over the US, while CP events produce an east-west
oriented pattern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its scientific merit, the project
has broader impacts due to the societal impacts of ENSO events. ENSO is the
leading mode of short-term climate variability over the globe, and research to
understand the dynamics and consequences of ENSO events could be instrumental in
improving ENSO predictions. In addition, the work will support and train
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as a postdoctoral researcher,
thereby developing the scientific workforce in this area.