* 1233654
* Developing an In-situ Sensor for Continuous Measurements of Total CO2 on Mobile Platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2021
* Zhaohui 'Aleck' Wang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 04/30/2021
* USD 746,820.00

The PIs request funding to develop, groundtruth, and deploy an in-situ sensor
for continuous seawater DIC measurements on mobile observing platforms. The
system will be capable of continuous, submersible measurements in-situ up to a
depth of 3000m in the ocean. It will be designed and built primarily for
deployment on AUVs and CTD-Rosette packages where fast response sensors are
preferred. Because of the micro-flow characteristic, the sensor will have low
power and reagent consumption tailored to the size and power requirements for
underwater vehicles. The proposed sensor will be capable of measuring DIC
accurately with high-resolution on mobile platforms. With nominal calibrations
and testing, the new sensor will also be able to make continuous measurements of
seawater pCO2 using a similar method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will promote teaching through the
supervision of one female doctoral student and the training of at least one
summer student through an educational program targeted for underrepresented
groups in science. The development of a fast-response in-situ DIC sensor is
certainly of interest for a broader community, and there is potentially a large
enough market for the commercialization of this sensor. This instrumentation has
the potential to provide high-resolution total CO2 measurements for several
ocean research fields, ranging from ocean acidification to climate change. The
sensor is proposed to be deployed in Buzzard Bay, MA in cooperation with the
Buzzards Bay Coalition. The technology will be presented through the "Science
Made Public" summer series.