* 1233566
* Collaborative Research: Enhancement of Vertical Elements for Foundation Support by Ureolytic Carbonate Precipitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Derick Brown, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 190,018.00

The objective of this collaborative project is to explore the potential of
ureolytic calcite precipitation as a practical means of improving the capacity
of vertical support elements for foundations in sands and silts. Enhancement of
vertical elements for foundation support holds promise as the first practical
application of biologically induced carbonate precipitation in geotechnical
engineering. A key element of the work is exploring the use of agriculturally-
derived urease enzyme as the catalyst for calcite precipitation rather than
microbially-derived urease employed in all calcite precipitation studies
reported to date. The limited extent of the improvement zone required to enhance
vertical foundation support elements mitigates problems associated with mass
stabilization of soil by induced carbonate precipitation. The use of
agriculturally-derived urease can further mitigate some of the problems
encountered in mass stabilization and extend the range of soils that can be
stabilized by induced carbonate precipitation into the silt-sized particle
range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact of this project is
associated with the development of a practical application of bio-mediated
ground improvement. Developing a practical application for this technology (bio-
mediated carbonate precipitation) is a potentially transformative
accomplishment, accelerating the development of biogeochemical ground
improvement techniques and motivating further innovative developments in the
emerging field of biogeotechnical engineering. Extending the applicability of
bio-mediated carbonate precipitation into the silt-sized particle range would
also have, in and of itself, a broad impact on both the broad field of
geotechnical engineering and the emerging sub-discipline of biogeotechnical
engineering. The project will also make contributions to training and education
of geotechnical professional through support of graduate student research
assistants and, in particular, through training and education of new researchers
knowledgeable and competent in the techniques and procedures employed in
biogeotechnical engineering that are not usually employed in traditional
geotechnical research.