* 1233352
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Federal Disaster Relief and the Stafford Act: Analyzing Recovery Outcomes in Disaster Declared and Denied Areas of the U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Richard Salkowe, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,618.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines disaster recovery outcomes
with respect to individual and community physiological and psychosocial well-
being in federal disaster declared and denied counties of the U.S. Federal
disaster declarations are authorized by the president under the provisions of
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
(known as the 'the Stafford Act'). This act created a mechanism for the
distribution of various forms of individual and household assistance after
disasters. Evidence of recurring problems associated with disparities in the
recovery from disasters has led to a call for Stafford Act policy reformulation.
This research project will provide clarity regarding questions pertaining to
sufficient and equitable health-related recovery outcomes in communities that
have differential access to the array of federal resources that are available
under the provisions of a presidential disaster declaration. The theoretical
context of the investigation utilizes Hobfoll's "conservation of resources"
model as a framework for understanding the relationship between physiological
and psychosocial well-being and the capacity to retain, protect, and rebuild
individual and community resources in presidential disaster declared and denied
areas. The project utilizes encrypted empirical data, obtained from the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services, to support a multilevel longitudinal
retrospective cohort study of individual and community health-related well-being
in disaster declared and denied counties in the state of Illinois. A mixed
methods approach, utilizing quantitative archival analyses and qualitative open-
ended interviews, will be employed to address the following fundamental
question: Is there a significant difference in post-event disaster recovery
between disaster declared or denied places that experienced similar types of
natural disasters, as measured by changes in indicators of individual and
community biopsychosocial well-being?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The analysis of the
health geography of disaster affected regions of Illinois will provide an
increased understanding of the consequences of resource loss in times of
disaster and the comparative coping mechanisms that are utilized to support
community recovery. Analytical results will be disseminated in a timely manner
through research articles in peer-reviewed journals. A summary policy report
will be produced to communicate key findings in a manner useful for public
policy formulation by government agencies, public health departments, and will
be understandable to non-scientist audiences. Visual presentations will be
produced and made available at conferences and policy meetings. Through these
channels, the project will share data with public stakeholders and extend
societal impacts beyond the research community. The research will assist in
focusing attention on Stafford Act policy reformulation that is attentive to the
risks and potential inequities that exist in the implementation of this critical
disaster legislation. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Award,
this project will support a promising graduate student in establishing an
independent research career.