* 1233376
* Stochastic Simulation Optimization: An Optimized Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Chun-Hung Chen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 260,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop efficient simulation-based
optimization methodologies to enable fast-time simulation-based decision making
under uncertainty. Simulation and Optimization are two most popular tools in
operations research. However, the combination of simulation and optimization is
still facing huge efficiency concerns. A decision maker is forced to compromise
on simulation accuracy, modeling accuracy, and the optimality of the selected
solution. The research in this award intends to seek for a seamless integration
of simulation evaluation and optimization search with focus on efficiency. A key
contribution involves a trade-off between allocating computational resources for
searching the solution space versus conducting additional simulation
replications for better estimating the performance of current promising
solutions. This research will develop a new Optimized Simulation Optimization
(OSO) method which intends to maximize the overall efficiency of simulation
optimization.

If successful, the results of this research will provide a set of fast
simulation-based optimization methodologies. With such methodologies, a decision
maker will be able to model complex, stochastic systems, while obtaining the
optimal design very efficiently. The benefit of developing an efficient
simulation-based methodology is that it offers unprecedented flexibility to
address a wide variety of problems in different application contexts. Example
applications include revenue management systems, transportation systems, and
manufacturing systems. An open-source simulation optimization software package
based on the new methodologies will be developed and be available at a dedicated
web site for dissemination purpose. The software will be easily accessible and
beneficial to industry practitioners and academic researchers. It will also be
usable in several different courses to educate students about simulation-based
decision making.