* 1233038
* Fate and transformation of diesel emissions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Heejung Jung, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 335,415.00

1233038&lt;br/&gt;Jung&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organics are major contributors to
particulate pollution in the atmosphere at many locations around the world.
Organic aerosols are either directly emitted from a multitude of sources or are
formed in the atmosphere through chemical reactions of gas phase organics
forming secondary organic aerosol. Recent research has shown that formation of
organic aerosol is much more dynamic than previously understood with organic
aerosols evaporating in the atmosphere with dilution, reacting in the gas phase
to produce lower volatility products and recondensing back to particle phase.
Organic aerosol changes both physically and chemically in the atmosphere due to
physical processes such as dilution, condensation of other organic species on
existing particles, and chemical reactions. These physical and chemical changes
cause the particles to have different health and climate consequences as
compared to fresh emissions. Recent smog chamber studies have found primary
emissions such as diesel emissions generate secondary organic aerosol, greatly
exceeding the contribution from known secondary organic-aerosol
precursors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the fate and
transformation of diesel exhaust emissions in terms of air quality. Diesel
engines are in widespread use throughout the world, and the United States is
leading the way in requiring new diesel fuel formulations and emission control
technologies. While there new requirements clearly reduce tailpipe emissions,
their full impacts on air quality such as secondary organic aerosol forming
potential of diesel emissions are not well understood. This project will
establish a method to generate, characterize, and quantify secondary organic
aerosol formation by diesel emissions to evaluate the effectiveness of vehicle
exhaust after-treatment systems. A significant change in chemical composition of
diesel fuels is underway in many sectors especially in terms of fuel sulfur
level. This project will investigate the influence of fuel change on water
uptake of diesel particles. The water uptake impairs visibility and radiative
forcing of diesel particles therefore impacting both environment and climate
change. The project will use a smog chamber and state-of-art aerosol
instrumentation to investigate chemical and physical transformation of diesel
emissions under well-controlled conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide important insights into the fate and transformation of diesel
exhaust emissions in the atmosphere in terms of air quality. Diesel engines
contribute significantly to air pollution. It is necessary to understand how
incorporation of new technologies, such as wider use of alternative fuels and
after-treatment systems, affect air pollution. The results of this study will
inform government technology policy-making. The investigator will also
disseminate his air pollution research to the public through exhibitions at
museums to increase scientific literacy and serve as the basis for education
modules in math and science aimed at diverse group of middle and high school
students.