* 1233612
* Fundamental Coral-Microbial Associations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Amy Apprill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 566,018.00

Reef-building corals are in decline worldwide due in part to climate change and
other human activities, and it is becoming increasingly important to understand
what aspects of coral biology are degraded by environmental stress which then
leads to coral mortality. It is now widely known that corals harbor communities
of bacteria and archaea that are believed to play important roles in maintaining
the health of their hosts, but we lack any appreciable understanding about the
identity of the microbial associates regularly residing within healthy, reef-
building corals. This project asks the central question; do reef-building corals
harbor fundamental or persistent microbial associates that are symbiotic within
their tissues? In order to address this hypothesis, the investigator will assess
the identity of the bacterial and archaeal microbes using a variety of molecular
and microscopy approaches that includes the identification and localization of a
widespread group of coral bacterial associates belonging to the genus
Endozoicomonas. The results of this study will then be used to develop
additional questions about the role of these microbial associates in nutrient
cycling and how they contribute to the health and survival of corals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a significant impact on our
understanding of microbial associations in healthy, reef-building corals and
support the development of a coral microbe database for the broader scientific
community including coral scientists in countries with limited financial
resources. Both undergraduate students as well as local high school students
will be trained in research techniques and mentored by the investigator and
discoveries resulting from this project will be communicated to scientists and
the public through open-access publications and news releases. The principal
investigator will also engage with the public and K-12 students during outreach
efforts on the importance of coral reefs to society.