* 1233272
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Pacific Section: The Geochemistry of Size-fractionated Suspended Particles Collected by In-situ Filtration
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Phoebe Lam, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2015
* USD 550,681.00

Particles play essential roles in the cycling and distribution of trace elements
and isotopes (TEI). For instance scavenging onto particles and removal by
particle export is a major sink for many TEIs. However the driving factors
affecting the spatial extent and temporal variability of TEI scavenging remain
largely unknown. The U.S. GEOTRACES East Pacific Zonal Transect between Peru and
Tahiti will cross three biogeochemically important areas, setting the stage for
researchers to constrain unknowns surrounding particle scavenging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities will address fundamental questions on the
location of particle formation, particle-dissolved species interactions,
dominant particle phases, and the evolution of particle phases during transport.
As regards particle phases, the researchers will measure particulate organic
carbon (POC), calcium carbonate, opal, lithogenics, and oxyhydroxides, as well
as the trace element compositions of size fractionated particles covering three
distinct zones: large lateral productivity gradients, a major oxygen deficient
zone off the coast of Peru, and a world renowned hydrothermal plume emanating
from the southern East Pacific Rise. Furthermore, since previous results suggest
particle type affects scavenging, investigators will specifically measure acid-
leachable trace metals, particle concentration, and major particle composition.
These combined measurements will allow them to disentangle the relative
importance of hydrothermal particles, benthic nepheloid layers, and high
productivity margins for scavenging of TEIs. The cruise transect will also offer
unique opportunities to examine the speciation of Fe and POC in hydrothermal
particles away from the vent field and the effects of aggregation and POC
coatings on TEI partitioning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts,
the researchers plan to create an educational module on particulate trace metals
in the ocean which would become part of a five part GEOTRACES webinar series
developed by Dr. Benjamin Twining at the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
in collaboration with the Center for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence-Ocean
Systems at the University of Maine. One graduate student from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and one graduate student from the University of
Minnesota, Twin Cities, would be supported and trained as part of this project.
In addition, an undergraduate student would participate in the research during
the summer month as part of the Woods Hole Diversity Initiative Partnership in
Education program.