* 1233827
* PESO: In vitro Models of Metastatic Collagen Microtracks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Cynthia Reinhart-King, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 400,002.00

The primary objective of this NSF-NCI Physical and Engineering Sciences in
Oncology (PESO) joint research project is to elucidate the mechanism that is
responsible for metastasis and the leader-follower cell dynamics that emerge
during metastatic invasion. Of the 7.9 million cancer-related fatalities
reported every year worldwide, over 90 percent are believed to be the result of
metastatic disease, in which a subset of cells from the original tumor spread
throughout the body. The physical mechanisms employed by metastatic cancer cells
to invade remain poorly understood. During metastasis, cells from the primary
tumor acquire characteristics that enable them to escape and migrate through a
mechanically and chemically heterogeneous stromal environment to establish
secondary tumors. As cells migrate, they remodel the matrix by both degrading it
and by using mechanical force to physically move fibers from their path. Data
suggest that degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix by "leader"
cells enables the escape of additional cells from the primary tumor, termed
"follower" cells. In this project, the PI and collaborators will use tailored
materials, microfabricated structures and approaches from cell and molecular
biology to re-create the leader-follower dynamics found in vivo and probe the
underlying mechanisms guiding leader-follower migration. The two major
educational goals in this project are to bring tissue engineering to the
elementary and middle school classroom, and to incorporate undergraduate
students from primarily 4-year, undergraduate schools in research. The work will
integrate the major research themes in this project into an inquiry-based,
hands-on module that builds off of the PI's previous work with the Ithaca
Sciencenter, a local "please-touch" children's science museum.

The intellectual merits of this project are the creation of a novel,
microfabricated platform to study cell invasion and the identification of the
molecular mechanisms guiding the metastatic migration of cells. The broader
impacts of this prject are the design and implementation of a workshop for grade
school children on cell migration that will involve graduate and undergraduate
students in the design and implementation of the workshop.