* 1233795
* Surface-Plasmon Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Metal/Semiconductor Composites for Solar Fuel Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Nianqiang Wu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2016
* USD 388,561.00

PI: Wu, Nianqiang&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1233795&lt;br/&gt;Institution: West
Virginia University Research Corporation&lt;br/&gt;Title: Surface-Plasmon
Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Metal/Semiconductor Composites for Solar
Fuel Production&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar energy can convert water and carbon
dioxide into fuel using semiconductor photocatalysts. Current photocatalysts
have a very low solar-to-chemical energy efficiency due to insufficient charge
separation and high recombination rates, which has hindered their
commercialization. Incorporating plasmonic metal nanostructures with
semiconductor photocatalysts offers a new route to enhance the photocatalytic
activity toward efficient solar-to-chemical energy conversion by using localized
surface plasmon resonances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objective is to
understand the mechanisms of surface-plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis in
metal/semiconductor composite nanostructures. In particular, it is hypothesized
that resonant energy transfer from the plasmonic metal (i.e., energy donor) to
the semiconductor (i.e., energy acceptor) can induce electron-hole pairs in the
semiconductor, leading to enhancement in photocatalysis. In the proposed work,
different metal/semiconductor composite nanostructures will be designed and
synthesized to (i) separate localized surface plasmon resonance effects from
surface catalysis effect of metals, and (ii) distinguish resonant energy
transfer and direct electron transfer processes. The correlation of
photocatalytic water-splitting activity with the composition and geometry of
metal/semiconductor nanoparticles will be studied. In particular, the
photocatalytic water-splitting activity of metal/semiconductor composites will
be measured as a function of illumination wavelength. Effects of localized
surface plasmon resonances on charge separation, migration and recombination
will be studied by combining photocatalysis and transient absorption
spectroscopy with finite-difference time-domain
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the project have potential to
improve solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency of photocatalysts for
solar fuel production, and to develop new materials and architectures for
photovoltaic and sensing devices. The proposed research will facilitate the
utilization of solar energy for a sustainable energy future. The project will
train graduate and undergraduate students, including those from the
underrepresented group, during the research program. Students will receive a
well-rounded training in an interdisciplinary research environment at the
intersection of energy science, nanomaterials, physical chemistry and optical
physics. The proposed research will also offer an opportunity for high school
teachers to work on cutting-edge research technology and to transfer knowledge
back to their classrooms. In addition, the results obtained will be used as the
modules of higher education courses in energy science and engineering.