* 1233091
* RUI: The production and degradation of oxygenated hydrocarbons in seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Catherine Clark, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,698.00

Oxygenated hydrocarbons are ubiquitous in the atmosphere with levels ranging
from low ppt (acetaldehyde) to low ppb (methanol). They react rapidly with
hydroxyl radicals to produce ozone, carbon monoxide, and a variety of other
secondary products, and they also contribute to particle formation in the
atmosphere. Over the last decade, attempts have been made to inventory sources
and analyze atmospheric budgets. Although estimates have improved, significant
discrepancies remain. In particular, the role of the oceans as a source or sink
for oxygenated hydrocarbons is one of the largest sources of uncertainty in
global models. Budget estimates are limited by the very small database of ocean
mixed layer measurements and a limited understanding of processes controlling
levels in seawater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, faculty and
undergraduate students at Chapman University will continue their earlier NSF-
sponsored efforts to measure the photochemical and biological production and
destruction rates of 4 atmospherically-relevant oxygenated hydrocarbons
(acetone, acetaldehyde, methanol and ethanol) in coastal waters. These studies
will provide process level data that will better constrain the role of the
oceans in cycling these species into or out of the troposphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will have significant
broader impacts on the research experience of undergraduate students at Chapman
University, a private, liberal arts-based university with 4,500 undergraduate
students located in a diverse community in Southern California with a strong
commitment to undergraduate research in environmental chemistry. The PIs
currently supervise the research projects of 5 undergraduates, and anticipate
working with 4-6 students in summer research on this project. Students will
present their research at national meetings. In addition to providing
significant research opportunities to a large group of undergraduate students,
findings and methods from this study will be incorporated into undergraduate
courses taught by the PIs in Atmospheric, Instrumental and Physical Chemistry,
expanding project impacts to a larger audience.