* 1233154
* Collaborative Research:  Stable Isotope-Based Differentiation of Vinyl Chloride Assimilators from Cometabolizers in Contaminated Groundwater
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alison Cupples, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 202,318.00

1233087/1233154&lt;br/&gt;Mattes/Cupples&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vinyl chloride
(VC) is a known human carcinogen and a common groundwater contaminant. This
research project focuses on identifying and characterizing the key
microorganisms involved in VC bioremediation at field sites. VC plumes are
generated under anaerobic conditions via reductive dechlorination of chlorinated
solvents, but often escape into downgradient aerobic groundwater zones. Aerobic,
growth-coupled VC-oxidizing (i.e. VC assimilating) bacteria are readily isolated
from VC-contaminated sites, supporting the idea that they play a role in the
degradation. However, direct evidence that VC-assimilating bacteria are present
and active in situ remains elusive. Further, it is unclear if VC-assimilating
isolates are the dominant microbes in the subsurface or if their cultivation is
a result of enrichment bias. Also, VC-assimilators cannot be distinguished from
the larger related group of ethene-oxidizers, which are fortuitous VC oxidizers.
To address these knowledge gaps, this research will use stable isotope probing
(SIP) to differentiate VC-assimilating bacteria from bacteria that fortuitously
oxidize VC (i.e. the cometabolizers). SIP involves microbial assimilation of 13C
labeled substrates into nucleic acids during growth-coupled biodegradation.
Following this, 13C labeled nucleic acids are analyzed to identify the organisms
responsible for contaminant degradation. The central hypothesis is that SIP
techniques, when used in conjunction with existing molecular tools, will
differentiate between etheneotrophs and VC-assimilators in both laboratory and
field-based applications. The research involves the following specific aims: i)
to use soil and/or groundwater samples from VC-contaminated sites andapply DNA-
SIP to reveal the presence, identity, and activity of VC-assimilating
microorganisms, ii) to use both VC-assimilating and cometabolizing laboratory
cultures to develop a SIP-based assay that differentiates between these closely
related microbial groups and iii) to provide direct evidence that VC-
assimilating bacteria are present and active in situ.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groundwater contamination by toxic pollutants is a major
societal problem that threatens human health and the environment. In situ
bioremediation practice hold promise for restoring groundwater to pre-
contamination levels. Studies aimed at better understanding the presence,
abundance and activity of biodegrading microbial communities will serve to
bridge fundamental science and the practice of bioremediation. The long-term
goal of this research is to advance the bioremediation field by developing
molecular tools to characterize pollutant-degrading microorganisms in the
environment. The research will involve the training of undergraduate and
graduate environmental engineering students to apply molecular biology tools to
environmental problems. The work will increase the number of underrepresented
minority students and will also involve the development of K-12 outreach
activities. The research will benefit society by addressing anthropogenic
deterioration of water quality by groundwater pollutants.