* 1233727
* Reaction of carbon nanotubes with free chlorine and monochloramine disinfectants:  Byproduct formation and implications for nanotube environmental fate and toxicity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Timothy Mattes, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,993.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1233727&lt;br/&gt;Valentine, Richard
L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotubes may enter drinking water either through their
use in novel treatment technologies or by release from nanomaterials. This
project addresses their chemical processing by free chlorine and chloramine
disinfectants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Converging lines of
evidence suggest that chlorine-based oxidants will react with CNTs via an
electron transfer reaction that may also result in chlorine addition (i.e., C-Cl
bond formation) to the CNT surface as well as other reactions with surface
functional groups. However, these processes have not been investigated at
environmentally relevant conditions, and soluble products of this reaction,
especially disinfectant by-products remain unknown. Changes in CNT behavior
resulting from chlorination have not previously been considered. Studies will
focus on the identification of material properties of a variety of
functionalized CNTs that promote reactivity toward chlorine-based disinfectants.
Changes in surface properties and the potential formation of known disinfection
by-products will be characterized. The investigators will also assess the impact
of these disinfectants on the aqueous stability and cytotoxicity of
CNTs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Outcomes: Collectively, results of this work
will improve the ability of engineers and scientists to predict the fate and
effects of CNTs in the environment. Cytotoxicity data for chlorinated CNTs, in
combination with established toxicities of identified disinfectant by-products
should help regulators develop sound policy that limits the human and ecological
health risks posed by CNTs during their life cycle. The project outcomes will
help catalyze the responsible design and application of CNTs, providing
manufacturers with guidelines about CNT properties that should be avoided so as
to minimize adverse environmental impacts. In addition to moving society toward
more sustainable development and applications of nanotechnology, broader impacts
of this work will address the need for nanotechnology education at the
undergraduate, graduate and professional level in environmental engineering. As
the signature outreach effort for this project, the investigators will work with
several agencies and organizations in Iowa that are responsible for drinking
water supply, treatment, distribution, regulation, and finance to provide this
target audience with important information about the future roles that
nanotechnology may play in the delivery of safe and acceptable drinking water as
well as potential regulatory implications.