* 1233691
* Collaborative Research: Management of Transitional Care Units to Improve Hospital Outcomes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Gabriel Escobar, Kaiser Foundation Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2015
* USD 88,562.00

This project is a joint research effort between Health Services Researchers and
Operations Researchers. The aim of this project is to study the use of hospital
Transitional Care Units (TCUs) and fuse evidence-based medicine with the
mathematical rigor of operations research in developing guidelines on patient
care in the TCU. Utilizing datasets from 21 Kaiser Permanente Northern
California hospitals, the study will involve a combination of empirical and
analytical modeling and analysis. Quantitative models and dynamic optimization
algorithms will be developed to identify when a patient should be cared for in
the TCU and when he should not be. High fidelity, yet parsimonious, models will
be developed based on empirical analysis. Exact analysis of the complex hospital
network is likely intractable; hence, dynamic programming tools and
approximation techniques will be utilized to develop simple, effective policies.
Deliverables include the development of modeling and analytical tools,
demonstration and validation via simulation and theoretical analysis,
documentation of research results, practitioner education, and research
experiences for graduate students.

If successful, the results of this research will provide a framework to analyze
and identify best practices for the use of partially flexible resources,
hospital Transitional Care Units. This research is of direct interest to
healthcare management and physicians. This work will provide insight into the
use of TCUs, which is currently very limited. As a joint research agenda between
Operations Researchers and Health Services Researchers, this project enables a
path from mathematical modeling and analysis to the deployment of the proposed
policies and the improvement in medical care. By developing an understanding of
how to use a TCU, the care pathways of the hospitals most critical patients can
be tailored and optimized. This has important implications for improvement of
healthcare provision and is of direct impact to patient themselves and the wider
community. Additionally, via seminar outreach and participation in the
continuing education programs of physicians and nurses, the medical community
will be educated to the benefits of utilizing operations research tools to
improve patient care.