* 1233277
* WIS2DOM, Weaving Indigenous and Sustainbility Sciences: Diversifying our Methods
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Andrew Kliskey, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,040.00

This award provides funding for a 3 1/2 day workshop, the goal of which is to
uncover new information and/or understandings that can be gained by bringing
together Indigenous and sustainability science and ultimately used to inform
sustainable practices. The proposed workshop will challenge key thinkers in
these areas to cultivate mutually conducive and appropriate principles,
protocols, and practices that address the global need to sustain resilient
landscapes.

This workshop is a direct response to a previous weeklong workshop held in 2010,
"Indigenous Ecological Knowledges and Geographic Information Systems: Exploring
ontologically Compatible Techniques and Technologies." The workshop was an
international interdisciplinary group of Indigenous scholars, cultural
practitioners, students and non-Indigenous scholars working with or for
Indigenous communities to discuss the development of spatial data infrastructure
(SDI) capable of representing Indigenous perspectives of modeling environmental
phenomena. The organizer of the workshop, the late Dr. Deanna Kingston of Oregon
State University, concluded at the completion of the workshop, "We learned two
things: 1. Each Indigenous community as well as each academic discipline is at a
different developmental stage of understanding, the who, what, when, where, and
why of SDI representation, which means we needed to collectively identify the
starting point and path for this kind of project. 2. One of the points of
collective agreement was the necessity of relating to our environments through
sustainable principles, protocols, and practices (Hi'iaka Working Group, 2011)."

The WIS2DOM workshop will build on the lessons learned from the first workshop,
by facilitating the concluding perspective that indigenous peoples who maintain
a strong connection with their territory through subsistence or sustainable
agriculture have a deep spatial knowledge that fully integrates humans into the
natural world, a knowledge that is not fundamentally different from the
developing transdisciplinary science of sustainability. The PIs maintain that
despite holding a similar vision of sustaining resilient landscapes, Indigenous
and sustainability sciences have not entered into dialogue on how to accomplish
this common goal.

The research team and organizers of this workshop recognize the value of
ontological pluralism with regard to advancing scientific research and through
this proposed workshop, will bring Indigenous and sustainability scientists into
dialogue in order to diversify methods toward meeting common goals. The PIs
recognize that dialogue across ontological boundaries poses significant
challenges, but believe that the relationship between Indigenous and
sustainability science is not dichotomous but is instead significantly
complimentary. This project proposes to create a welcoming space for the
exchange of ideas and concepts between what have previously been conceptualized
as very divergent knowledge systems.