* 1233141
* Collaborative Research: Effective Sequential Procedures for Risk and Error Estimation in Steady-state Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Goldsman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 234,237.00

This award provides funding for the development, implementation, and evaluation
of a comprehensive methodology for steady-state simulation output analysis in a
framework called Effective Sequential Procedures for Risk and Error Estimation
in Steady-state Simulation (ESPRESS). Specifically, sequential methods for
computing point estimators and confidence intervals for the steady-state mean
and selected steady-state quantiles of an output process generated by a
probabilistic simulation model will be developed. The confidence intervals will
meet prespecified accuracy criteria and achieve a user-specified level of
reliability in large samples. The steady-state mean describes long-run average
performance, e.g., the average number of vehicles produced per month by an
automotive assembly plant operating under a fixed capacity. Steady-state
quantiles are used to measure the responsiveness of many service facilities and
to characterize the risk associated with financial assets,e.g., the 90th
percentile of call-waiting time is often used to evaluate the performance of a
call center and the 5th percentile of the Value at Risk for a portfolio of
financial assets is frequently used to describe the risk of loss on that
portfolio. The implementation phase of ESPRESS will lead to computationally
efficient statistical-estimation procedures that users can access and apply
easily and quickly, which will be tested in the evaluation phase. The ultimate
objective of this work is to provide practitioners and researchers with new
techniques and public-domain software for the analysis of steady-state
simulations that are completely automated, robust, and reliable as well as
computationally and statistically efficient.

If successful, the research will lead to fully automated sequential steady-state
mean- and quantile-estimation procedures which are lacking in virtually all
widely used commercial simulation packages. ESPRESS will be directly applicable
to large-scale simulation studies in the governmental and military sectors as
well as in a variety of industries, including aerospace, distribution, finance,
healthcare, manufacturing, telecommunications, and transportation. Educational
outreach will be a key component of this project, because all three
investigators share a deep commitment to engineering education at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Results of this project will be used in
developing instructional modules for Project MINDSET (www.mindsetproject.org)
and for new courses on Monte Carlo methods and their applications that will be
developed at both the master's and doctoral levels at the two participating
institutions.