* 1233430
* Collaborative Research: Regional Variability in Future Temperature Stress to Coral Reefs in the Coral Triangle
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Joan Kleypas, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2014
* USD 354,290.00

The primary aim of this project is to test the oceanographic conditions that
lead to regional differences in coral bleaching across the Coral Triangle, and
to determine how changes in these conditions will influence coral bleaching
patterns in the 21st Century. Degradation of coral reef ecosystems has
accelerated over the past few decades due to increases in coral bleaching. Many
uncertainties remain, however, regarding coral reef vulnerability to future
bleaching conditions. This research will incorporate a high-resolution
oceanographic model to simulate circulation and temperature patterns that
promote coral bleaching, taking into account both the exposure of coral reefs to
temperature stress as well as the sensitivity of those reefs to bleaching and
their capacity to adapt to the temperature changes. The focus on the Coral
Triangle is important because 1) it supports high marine biodiversity; 2) the
complex bathymetry and oceanographic circulation are likely to provide
significant insights into present and future conditions that affect coral reef
vulnerability to increasing temperature; and 3) recent developments linking
climate and regional circulation models can now resolve the complex oceanography
in this area.

A Regional Ocean Modeling System developed for the Coral Triangle (CT-ROMS) will
be used to examine climate change effects on temperature and circulation
patterns in the Coral Triangle. The modeling will include several 21st Century
runs forced by climate model projections using scenarios developed for the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Report. Multiple
bleaching algorithms that take into account different measures of heat stress
and coral sensitivity to that stress will be evaluated for their ability to
simulate observed bleaching patterns. The algorithms that best capture observed
bleaching patterns will then be used to project bleaching in the 21st Century
integrations. This will be the first project to undertake a comprehensive use of
high resolution modeling to evaluate 1) the oceanographic conditions that
determine regional variability in coral bleaching, and 2) how oceanographic
changes will influence coral bleaching patterns in the future. We will be able
to evaluate vulnerability to bleaching not only for reefs at the surface but
also at depth, thus identifying whether deeper-water reefs should be considered
sites for future conservation efforts.

This project will also provide a more complete picture of coral reef
vulnerability in the Coral Triangle, and improve our ability to identify refugia
for coral reefs, which is a cornerstone for Marine Protected Area (MPA) design
and management. In collaboration with The Nature Conservancy, this work will
contribute to efforts of the Coral Triangle Initiative Program Support Team to
both maximize the application of the scientific results in MPA design, and
improve the capacity of local fisheries and their communities to adapt to
climate change impacts on their marine resources.