* 1233704
* DMREF: GOALI - Discovery, Development, and Deployment of High Temperature Coating/Substrate Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Anton Van der Ven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,200,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The convergence of new computational
capabilities, advanced characterization techniques and the ability to generate
and harness large-scale data enables new pathways for the discovery, development
and deployment of advanced materials systems. This program engages a
multidisciplinary team to develop a fundamental framework for design of a new
class of multilayered systems for deployment in new, energy efficient power
generation and propulsion systems. Novel complementary computational and
experimental tools developed will be integrated with existing tools and applied
to a promising new class of intermetallic-strengthened cobalt-base alloys. The
unique high-temperature properties of these alloys, when combined with thermal
barrier coatings, promise very substantial improvements in powerplant
efficiency, motivating GE Energy and GE Global Research as partners in this
DMREF-GOALI program. The program will take a systems approach, developing tools
and models that permit simultaneous design of the metallic substrate and
intermetallic bond coat for compatibility with the ceramic top coat, going
beyond the linear, experiment-driven approach historically employed for
independent development of these three critical system
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
convergence of new computational capabilities, advanced characterization
techniques and the ability to generate and harness large-scale data enables new
pathways for the discovery, development and deployment of advanced materials
systems. This program engages an engineering and computer science team to
develop a fundamental framework for design of new multilayered materials systems
for energy efficient power generation and aircraft propulsion. Novel
complementary computational and experimental tools will be developed and
integrated with existing tools to accelerate development of a newly discovered
cobalt-base substrate material along with compatible environmental protection
layers. The program will take a systems approach, developing tools and models
that permit simultaneous design of the layered system, going beyond the linear,
experiment-driven approach historically employed for independent development of
these critical system elements.