* 1233403
* Enhancing Identifiability of Computer Simulation Models via Design for Calibration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Wei Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 07/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a Design for Calibration
(DfC) methodology for enhancing identifiability in simulation models.
Identifiability refers to the difficulty in separating two general sources of
uncertainty - parameter uncertainty and model uncertainty - in predictive
modeling. Parameter uncertainty results from imperfect knowledge of the
underlying physical parameters, and model uncertainty results from
approximations and other inaccuracies in a simulation model. To ensure proper
identifiability of these uncertainties when combining abundant simulation data
with limited physical experimental data, the research takes advantage of two key
enabling factors, the first being the inherently multi-response nature of
computer simulations, and the second being the availability of extensive
simulation results prior to designing the physical experiment. Using spatial
random field modeling within a Bayesian framework, the methodology will
determine the best subset of response variables to measure experimentally and
the most efficient combination of input settings to use over the experiments,
with the objective of optimally enhancing identifiability of the uncertainties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will help
ensure identifiability of predictive uncertainties in a manner that allows
limited experimental resources to be used most efficiently. This is critically
important in simulation-based engineering and science across all engineering
disciplines for many reasons that extend beyond achieving good myopic
prediction. Learning and distinguishing the true physical parameters and
simulation model inaccuracies has broad-reaching implications for i) new
product/process designs that are much more complex than the experimental
testbed, ii) improving future generations of simulation code, and iii) providing
more accurate prediction over a wider set of input regions. Because the
methodology is not tied to a particular type of simulation code or application
domain, it is expected to be widely applicable. This work will leverage the
broad-based constituency of the interdisciplinary doctoral Predictive Science
and Engineering Design cluster at Northwestern, through which multidisciplinary
testbed applications will be drawn and the results disseminated throughout
different engineering domains.