* 1233728
* GOALI: Probing Dense Sprays with Gated, Picosecond, Digital Particle Field Holography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* James Trolinger, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 326,998.00

This project develops and demonstrates a unique, gated, picosecond, digital
holography system for imaging the detailed structure of dense sprays of liquid
droplets. Dense sprays are commonly found in diesel and gas turbine engines, and
in spray drying processes for food and pharmaceutical production. Understanding
the governing behaviors in spray systems depends heavily on identifying the
processes occurring at the core of the spray where the bulk liquid is breaking
up into ligaments and droplets. Dense sprays make identifying those processes
tremendously challenging because they are optically thick making it difficult to
obtain any image information from deep within the spray. The innovation in this
project is to employ a combination of digital holography and picosecond gating
to limit the amount of optical noise sufficiently to enable high resolution, 3D
imaging through an optically dense medium. The approach effectively generalizes
existing pseudo-ballistic imaging systems, where photons that pass through the
spray with relatively few near-forward scattering interactions are selectively
collected while those scattered multiple times at wide angles are rejected.
Digital holography further enhances the photon selection by coherence filtering.
To combine ballistic photon and holographic imaging we utilize a laser pulse
short enough to enhance the ballistic photon detection and long enough to allow
holographic recording with acceptable spatial resolution. The laser output is
split into three different beams: 1) a beam that controls a Kerr-cell optical
switch, 2) an object beam, and 3) a reference beam for the hologram. The Kerr
cell provides the photon timing selectivity. It is adjusted to open just before
the holography pulse arrives. The overlap time of these two pulses determines
the effective gating time. When the Kerr gate is open, the object and reference
waves pass through and are recorded on the digital camera. An imaging approach
of this form can provide a detailed look at the structure of all of the
particles in a three-dimensional sample volume. Results will aid in
identification of the diagnostic limitations and will produce data useful for
comparisons to spray modeling. The remainder of the effort will be dedicated to
system refinement via the application of design rules to quantify tradeoffs and
optimization for future field measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
diagnostic will allow three-dimensional imaging of dense sprays unachievable
with existing techniques. This new measurement capability has the potential to
produce much needed data on spray formation and ligament breakup essential for
understanding and modeling of spray physics. For example, spray behavior of
heavy fuels is a controlling process determining combustion efficiencies of many
devices. While spray physics has been researched for decades, significant
limitations still exist in accurate modeling of spray breakup and fuel
distribution near the nozzle. Very little near field imaging data exists. This
work combines the noise rejection aspects of ballistic imaging with digital
holography to produce a demonstrated instrument capable of addressing the need
for near field, three-dimensional imaging data in dense sprays. The
university?industry collaboration with Metrolaser, Inc. that is included in this
project will greatly enhance the research by refining its focus while
simultaneously broadening it beyond a purely academic exercise. The result will
be useful for leveraging towards the development of a commercially viable
diagnostic instrument that is desired and needed by the spray and combustion
communities.