* 1233095
* Stochastic Modeling and Optimization of Longitudinal Health Care Coordination
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Blake Roessler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

This research targets lupus, a prototypic complex disease, and supports care
delivery in other contexts. To achieve care based on best practices, lupus
requires sophisticated operational planning and scheduling capabilities and
sometimes requires infusion-based treatments. A key innovation is to model
capacity and provide planning decision support so as to effectively integrate
clinical research activities into the clinical care delivery site. Lacking
effective planning and appointment scheduling, the inconsistent capture of key
disease activity tools degrades the ability to manage a disease like lupus and
results in unnecessarily frequent visits to already scarce physicians. Novel
operations decision support methodology will be developed to (1) improve access
to care (reduced waiting), (2) reduce costly overtime and staff turnover while
better utilizing physicians and staff, (3) better support evidence-based
medicine, and (4) provide useful decision support for the administration of
clinical research studies with clinical care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, key fundamental science and technology innovations will provide
longitudinally coordinated health care and better health services research. For
lupus, targeted operational systems improvements are known to improve patient
health outcomes. The methodology will integrate delivery site planning and
appointment scheduling. The former includes decision support for setting the mix
of clinical care and clinical research services to be provided and setting the
staff size (and composition) and number of rooms. Stochastic process models with
integrated optimization algorithms will be created. The research will generate
freely available teaching resources for engineers, physicians, researchers, and
administrative delivery personnel. The dissemination will also facilitate
commercialization. Conduct of the research will support the education and
research development of graduate and undergraduate students with attention to
underrepresented students.