* 1233760
* Understanding the Effects of Complex Phage-Bacteria Infection Networks on Marine Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Joshua Weitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2017
* USD 471,076.00

Bacteria and their viruses (phages) make up two of the most abundant and
genetically diverse groups of organisms in the oceans. The extent of this
diversity has become increasingly apparent with the advent of environmental
sequencing. However, the ongoing discovery of new taxonomic diversity has, thus
far, out-paced gains in quantifying the function of and interactions among
phages and bacteria. Improved quantitative understanding of how diverse groups
of phages exploit bacterial hosts will improve predictions of microbial
population dynamics, ecosystem functioning, and the large-scale dynamics of
global biogeochemical cycles. This project will develop a theoretical framework
for characterizing the effect of complex phage-bacteria interactions on marine
ecosystem structure and function. The theoretical framework is grounded in the
analysis of cross-infection assays of bacteriophages with their bacterial hosts,
termed phage-bacteria infection networks (PBINs). Recent discoveries concerning
the structure of PBINs will be combined with a novel eco-evolutionary dynamics
modeling framework in the service of the following aims: Aim 1. Develop
theoretical methods to analyze PBINs that include quantitative infection data to
characterize complex patterns of cross-infection found in marine ecosystems. Aim
2. Establish eco-evolutionary multi-strain models that incorporate complex PBIN
data to evaluate hypotheses regarding how cross-infection within PBINs affects
community stability. Aim 3. Utilize the multi-strain model to predict how PBINs
influence: (i) the ratio of viral to bacterial population abundances; and (ii)
the flux of carbon and nutrients at the ecosystem level.

The theory developed in this project will improve characterizations of phage-
bacteria interactions in marine ecosystems and establish a framework to link
phage-bacteria in- teractions with ecosystem function. First, the project will
generalize preliminary findings of multi-scale structure within empirical PBINs
by developing novel network theories that can be applied to quantitative
infection data. Properties of marine PBINs will be analyzed to assess whether
they are hierarchically organized, organized into modules, and/or possess multi-
scale structure. The statistical structure of PBINs will be integrated with
multi-scale coevolutionary models. These co- evolutionary models will be
utilized to evaluate hypotheses regarding how cross-infection structure affects
community stability. Finally, these coevolutionary models will be used to
consider carbon and nutrient regeneration via viral lysis of bacterial hosts.
PBIN structure will be varied to establish a link between cross-infection and
key indices of ecosystem structure and function, with specific applications to
Roseobacter and Synechococcus hosts. Analytical methods and large-scale
simulations will be utilized to achieve these goals, closely linked to empirical
datasets.

Broader impacts: Educational objectives will be centered around the theme of
fostering the next generation of quantitative biologists interested in microbial
systems (Aim 4). In doing so, the PI will: (i) provide a training program for
quantitative biologists that enables them to have direct interactions with
students of different backgrounds; (ii) introduce a new course focusing on
quantitative viral ecology; (iii) develop and disseminate software tools that
enable biologists to apply rigorous quantitative methods to viral-host
interaction data and to the study of viral-host communities. Two graduate
students and eight undergraduates will be directly supported on this project.
These students will have academic backgrounds spanning physics to biology and
work in collaborative teams. The graduate students will travel for extended
visits to the viral ecology laboratories at the U of Arizona and U of Tennessee-
Knoxville. A new graduate course will be developed on quantitative viral ecology
to serve trainees on this grant and the growing number of students interested in
environmental microbiology at Georgia Tech. The theories developed in this
project will be implemented and disseminated as open-source software tools.