* 1233484
* Engineering of termite-derived biocatalysts for use in sustainable energy production
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Amit Sethi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 298,977.00

PI: Scharf, Michael Proposal Number: 1233484 Institution: Purdue University
Title: Engineering of termite-derived biocatalysts for use in sustainable energy
production

This project aims to engineer novel processes for breakdown of 2nd generation
(i.e., non-food) bioenergy feedstocks that are modeled after metabolic processes
occurring in the gut of the termite Reticulitermes flavipes.

Termites are well known for their abilities feed upon, digest, and receive
nourishment from diets comprised exclusively of lignocellulose. This ability to
digest lignocellulose is made possible by specialized termite gut physiology as
well as enzymes produced by termites and their gut symbionts. Termites of the
genus Reticulitermes (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae) are the most common termites in
North America. The PI and co-PI?s recently completed efforts to sequence from
the R. flavipes gut transcriptome and gut symbiont meta-transcriptome (>360,000
sequence reads) have revealed an abundance of previously unknown genes related
not only to lignocellulose digestion, but also to a number of important energy-
related processes. However, a functional understanding of the entire process of
termite lignocellulose digestion and more specifically, how these metabolic
processes can be engineered for industrial biofuels production, remain largely
unrealized. This lack of understanding hinders the development of potentially
important biocatalysts and processes for use in sustainable bioenergy
production. The overall goals of this research are to utilize termite gut
sequence (transcriptome and proteome) information to engineer sustainable
strategies for 2nd-generation biofuel production from non-food agricultural
feedstocks that are economical, sustainable and non-invasive.

This project has three specific aims: Aim 1 is to identify host and symbiont
genes that are differentially expressed after feeding on different agricultural
feedstocks; Aim 2 is to identify dominant proteins and enzyme activities that
correspond to feedstock-responsive genes identified from aim 1; and Aim 3 is to
use information obtained in aims 1 and 2 to develop and engineer optimally-
active recombinant enzyme cocktails.

The proposed research will advance scientific enquiry while promoting teaching
and learning. In particular, this research will have broad impacts on society
at-large, as well as through its integration of research and education, and
impacts on underrepresented groups. The broad societal impacts of the proposed
research include (1) development of biofuels technology, (2) enhancement of U.S.
agriculture, (3) developing a deeper understanding of microbial ecology and
symbioses, (4) education of the general public and fellow scientists on termite
biology, and (5) developing a deeper understanding of physiological
characteristics of termites that make them pests. In terms of integrating
research and education, the proposed research will engage scientists at multiple
levels of education and professional development ranging from the K-12 level, to
undergraduate and graduate-level college students, post-doctoral associates, and
young faculty.