* 1233249
* Ocean Carbon Biogeochemistry Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Heather Benway, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,326,173.00

The Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry (OCB) Program was created by NSF, NASA, and
NOAA in 2006 to promote, plan, and coordinate collaborative, multidisciplinary
research opportunities on marine biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem processes
within the U.S. and with international partners. OCB leadership consists of a
scientific steering committee (SSC); topical subcommittees on ocean
acidification, ocean time-series, and ocean fertilization; and the OCB Project
Office located at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. The primary
activities of the OCB Project Office include: 1) scientific and logistical
support of the OCB SSC and its subcommittees; 2) organization of OCB workshops
and activities; 3) scientific coordination within the OCB community and with
other U.S. and international programs; 4) communication via OCB websites,
newsletters, and email lists; and 5) development and dissemination of education
and public outreach materials. Over the 6-year program life, OCB has hosted
annual summer workshops, 7 scoping workshops, a short course, a synthesis
workshop, and a PI meeting. Achieving a unique balance of stimulating scientific
discussions and community planning, these activities have resulted in new
collaborations, proposals and funded projects, manuscripts and special journal
volumes, synergistic field opportunities, OCB community input to scientific
planning initiatives and ocean observing campaigns, and scientific training
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With support from this renewal award, over
the next three years the OCB Project Office will coordinate a range of
activities, including the historically well-attended summer and scoping
workshops, a short course for early career scientists, and topical working
groups to address focused research questions. Given its experience in community
building and planning ocean acidification activities, it will convene the next
large, interdisciplinary meeting of funded U.S. ocean acidification
investigators. It will also continue to facilitate timely scientific synthesis
activities and strengthen partnerships with U.S. and international partner
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In the face of changes in
atmospheric composition and associated climate change and evolving ocean
chemistry, a more comprehensive understanding of ocean biogeochemistry and
ecosystem processes is critically needed to improve our predictive capabilities
and provide the framework for the development of sound adaptation strategies.
OCB essentially is a broader impacts organization, playing a coordination role
that ultimately benefits the entire scientific community, as well as policy
makers and educators. Using an integrated, community-driven approach, OCB will
continue to advance high-priority research and observational objectives related
to ocean biogeochemistry and ecosystem processes. Relative to the investment,
the momentum and collaborations developed in association with OCB activities
over the past six years have yielded great benefits to the community, including
scientific and planning reports, improved research coordination, and new
research programs and opportunities. These activities cannot be replicated in a
traditional scientific meeting format, which serves the primary purpose of
showcasing new and exciting science from individual PIs. OCB goes a step beyond
to convene the appropriate balance of expertise in a timely and strategic way to
ensure positive outcomes for the community as a whole. The OCB Project Office
also serves as a focal point for topical science-policy discussions related to
the ocean carbon cycle (e.g., ocean acidification, carbon sequestration, iron
fertilization). OCB Project Office staff members have routinely responded to
requests for information from journalists, federal agency representatives,
congressional staffers, and NGOs, and will continue these activities as
opportunities arise.