* 1233991
* Collaborative Research: Progressive Failure Studies of Residential Houses towards Performance Based Hurricane Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Steve C.S. Cai, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 217,947.00

Hurricane-induced wind and rain can cause catastrophic damages to homes. This
collaborative proposal pursues research in progressive damage to single family
residential structures under hurricane winds. The research will focus on
propagation of internal pressures, influence of wind-driven rain on pressures,
and development of nonlinear analysis for the complex structures of wood
residential buildings. For analytical work proper orthogonal decomposition and
database-assisted-damage-prediction techniques will be used. The wind
pressure/load data will be obtained from wind tunnel tests conducted at
Louisiana State University at the scale of 1:50; tests conducted at Harbin
Institute of Technology (China) at the scale of 1:10, and nearly full-scale
tests conducted at Florida International University's 12-fan Wall of Wind
facility. The tests will provide opportunity to study impact of wind loads on
damage causing mechanism and development of fragility curves. The research will
allow understanding of progressive damage propagation and component failure
mechanism. New knowledge gained will have the potential of developing
retrofitting procedures to reduce the damage. Collaboration with foreign partner
will enhance research capability. Students working on the project will gain
experience in wind effects on structures and in hurricane
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses hurricane
effects on residential buildings that are one of the most vulnerable and complex
structures. While a database-assisted-damage-prediction that directly uses time
variant wind pressures as loading inputs will make the progressive failure
analysis possible, using the proper orthogonal decomposition will greatly reduce
the computational cost. The analytical procedure will follow the procedures
developed for earthquake engineering. Nonlinear procedures will be developed for
response of residential structures to wind loads. The research outcomes are (1)
knowledge advancement on hurricane impacts on and interactions with residential
constructions, leading to more realistic and accurate loading inputs for damage
predictions and structural designs/mitigations, (2) enhancement of hurricane
resiliency of new and existing structures by understanding the load paths and
failure modes, and (3) development of mitigation guidelines to retrofit the
existing housing stock. Following the path of earthquake engineering, the
research methodology will help establish a rational performance-based design and
mitigation approach for wind engineering. This will eventually reduce losses due
to hurricane and strong wind-related events.