* 1233793
* Hydrodynamic instabilities and flow modification caused by preferential concentration of inertial particles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 339,070.00

1233793 Koch

Experimental studies reveal that gas flows can be greatly altered by the
presence of suspended particles with diameters of 10 microns to 1 mm even when
the concentration of particles by volume is relatively small. Such particle-
laden gas flows arise in many industrial processes such as circulating fluidized
beds and processes that use gas to convey solid particles. Despite the
importance of these flows and the documented influence of solid particles, there
remains a lack of understanding of the physical mechanisms by which particles
influence gas flows. This research project will elucidate one such mechanism.
Centrifugal forces tend to expel particles from regions of a flow that are
strongly rotating; the particles then accumulate in intermediate regions
dominated by straining flows. The researchers postulate that the gravitational
forces acting on the more concentrated regions can reinforce the original gas
flow leading to a strongly fluctuating gas flow with an inhomogeneous particle
distribution. The physical mechanism will be revealed through a linear stability
analysis, a study of the growth of small perturbations in the particle
concentration and gas velocity from a simple base state condition where the
particle concentration is uniform and the gas is undergoing a shearing flow
where the gas velocity is a linear function of spatial position. The analytical
study will be complemented by a numerical simulation of the nonlinear dynamics
of the gas velocity under the influence of many interacting solid particles. The
simulations will provide a test of the analytical theory while also revealing
the complex flows that develop when the perturbations grow beyond the scope of
the linear stability analysis. Building upon the insight obtained these studies,
a model will be developed for the effect of gravitational-inertial particles on
turbulent flows. This model will be based on rapid distortion theory wherein a
small eddy and its associated particle density fluctuations are influenced
primarily by a local linear flow produced by larger eddies. The large scale
flows will be modeled as consisting of alternating periods of straining and
rotational flows. The resulting statistical theory will be tested and refined
using full numerical simulations of a gas-particle mixture subject to random
isotropic forces that produce the turbulence.

The project will reveal a new physical mechanism by which gas phase turbulence
is produced by the gravitational forces acting on particles that concentrate in
non-rotating regions of a gas flow. This new qualitative understanding of
particle-laden turbulent flows will aid engineers designing many industrial
processes such as automotive, aircraft, and rocket engines; industrial furnaces;
and fluidized beds used in fossil and biorenewable energy conversion and in
chemical plants. To help students understand the complexities of particle-laden
flows, the simulations developed in the project will be incorporated in an
educational module teaching how the nature of gas-particle flows is influenced
by particle size. This lesson will be disseminated using SimCafe, a Wiki-based
online resource for teaching and simulation being developed at Cornell.