* 1233749
* Collaborative Research:  GEOTRACES Pacific section:  Spatial variability of lead concentrations and isotopic compositions in the Eastern Tropical South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2015
* USD 378,738.00

Scientists from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the University of
California, Santa Cruz, plan to measure lead (Pb) concentrations and Pb isotopes
(204Pb, 206Pb, 207Pb and 208Pb) in seawater profiles, aerosols, and hydrothermal
plume samples collected during the 2013 GEOTRACES cruise from Peru to Tahiti.
Not only will the data significantly add to the limited data set existing for
the South Pacific Ocean, results will be used to further our knowledge on the
cycling of this element in the marine environment, as well as improve our
understanding of anthropogenic inputs of Pb to the region of interest which is
important given increases in lead emissions from mining, smelting, and fossil
fuel combustion. In addition, data from the East Pacific Rise plume will
document whether hydrothermal vent systems contribute to the oceanic Pb budget.

In terms of the broader impacts, for outreach activities, the proponents plan to
expand the Chemical Oceanography educational unit at the Seymour Marine
Discovery Center of the University of California, Santa Cruz. The project is a
collaborative effort between scientists in the United States and Chile. One
graduate student from Massachusetts Institute of Technology would be supported
and trained as part of this project. Undergraduate students, especially under-
represented Science, Technology Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) students,
would also have the opportunity to participate in this study as part of their
thesis research.