* 1233792
* Collaborative Research: Deformation and Damage Mechanisms in Ternary Carbides and Nitrides under Dynamic Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Miladin Radovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,911.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the mechanical response
of a new class of nanolayered ceramics (MAX phases) and their solid solutions in
extreme dynamic loading conditions through a combination of experimental
approaches. MAX phases have attracted considerable attention as potential
multifunctional materials for extreme environments since they combine some of
the best attributes of ceramics and metals. Preliminary work on MAX phases
suggests that new underlying physical mechanisms that can make ceramic materials
resistant to dynamic loadings are yet to be discovered and fully explored.
Studies conducted under this award will elucidate the physical mechanisms of
deformation and damage in the MAX phases, and address fundamental questions
regarding the constitutive behavior of the MAX phases under dynamic loading
conditions as a function of temperature and to what extent our understanding of
deformation and failure mechanisms of the MAX phases in quasi-static conditions
can be extended to the extremely high deformation rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the technological point of view, successful
completion of this project will result in a deeper understanding of the
connections between composition, structure and mechanical properties in this
novel class of materials for extreme service conditions, enabling further
developments in power generation, hypersonic and orbital re-entry flights,
ballistic protection, etc. The educational and outreach plan focus on a series
of activities, including: building a strong integrated research, educational and
outreach collaboration between Texas A&amp;M and University of Rhode Island
focused on mechanical behavior of novel ceramics under extreme loading
conditions; mentoring and training the next generation of experts in the areas
of experimental mechanics and materials science of ceramics materials; and
linking undergraduate and graduate students? research experiences to their
education through their close involvement in research during coursework,
research projects, and thesis research.