* 1233318
* Structure of Incipiently Sooting Counterflow Diffusion Flames at High Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mitchell Smooke, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 352,000.00

A fundamental understanding of soot formation in practical systems is still a
daunting challenge and laboratory flames remain a better setting to make
progress in the field. The research has the realistic objective of examining the
structure of laminar counterflow flames in the pressure range 1-40 atm under
conditions of incipient sooting. It entails the characterization of temperature,
stable gas species, including soot precursors and growth species, and soot in
flames as a function of pressure. The selected pressure range is of relevance to
gas turbines and engine applications. The project represents an ambitious,
comprehensive and unprecedented effort with potentially transformative impact in
the context of the environmental footprint of combustion. The counterflow
diffusion flame is selected as an optimal environment because of the
unparalleled level of control that it provides on the soot formation process.
The flames are treated essentially as ?flow reactors? with well defined
temperature time-histories. Furthermore, this flame configuration is very
convenient for modeling purposes since the system is one-dimensional, which is
advantageous for fuels with a very large chemical mechanism. Fuels to be
considered include liquid fuels, such as heptane and toluene, that would be
prevaporized at modest concentrations and introduced in such environments either
individually or in combination as a perturbation of baseline gaseous flames. The
approach is both experimental and computational in nature. Deliverables of the
program include: 1) a test-bed experimental system to study the structure of
high-pressure laminar diffusion flames of gaseous and liquid fuels of different
sooting propensity and their sooting behavior under well-defined and well-
controlled conditions; 2) a validated code with a comprehensive model of soot
formation/oxidation, allowing for detailed transport and a semi-detailed
chemical kinetic mechanism; and 3) a comprehensive database that will be made
available to other modelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion-generated soot
particulates from land-based sources are now acknowledged to pose a significant
health risk and have been the subject of stringent new EPA regulations.
Moreover, the contributions of aircraft flights to atmospheric aerosol levels
via high altitude soot emissions and their impact on the mechanisms of long term
global climate change and ozone depletion are also receiving great attention and
face the likelihood of tightened regulation. All these issues are exacerbated by
the high pressures at which new combustors are operated, because soot production
is very sensitive to the pressure. If soot and the problems associated with it
are to be controlled, quantitative understanding of the soot growth and
oxidation mechanisms in the form of experimental measurements supported by
computational models is essential and is the primary goal of the project.