* 1233697
* PESO: Regulation of Mammary Epithelial Signaling by Local Matrix Stiffness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Thea Tlsty, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 545,000.00

The primary research objective of this NSF-NCI Physical and Engineering Sciences
in Oncology (PESO) joint research grant is to test the hypothesis that stiff
stoma sensitizes mammary epithelial cells (MECs) to tensile forces, where
tensile forces lead to integrin oligomerization and activation of downstream
signaling pathways known to promote invasive cancer. The hypothesis will be
tested on both isolated MECs and acini formed within a 3-D extracellular matrix
(ECM). This research combines a powerful set of methods to investigate this
hypothesis including: 3-D traction force microscopy for the estimation of
adhesion forces, optical tweezers active microrheology for the in situ
measurement of stiffness, a shear gradient device for establishing gradients of
stretch and stiffness within naturally derived ECMs, and real-time imaging of
cellular signals to determine how mammary acini respond to instantaneous changes
in ECM-coupled tension. Correlations will be sought between ECM stiffness and
the degree of signaling in response to tensile
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the research activities
will have a far-reaching impact on cancer research. A better understanding of
MECs' response to stretch in both a 2-D and 3-D context will help us understand
how they may respond to forces while confined to an acinus, persisting in a
hyperplastic mass or invading the stroma. Importantly, findings will provide a
critical puzzle piece linking mammographic density, stromal stiffness, forces,
integrin-mediated signaling, and the progression of metastatic breast cancer.
The methodologies to be developed will be useful in the study of other forms of
cancer and in many other areas of research in need of a mechanical perspective
including regenerative medicine, stem cell biology, developmental biology,
cardiovascular biology and tissue engineering. The educational components of
this proposal include the integration of research into a multidisciplinary
course, the involvement of undergraduate students through short-term summer
projects, and the participation of underrepresented engineering students with
the support of the NSF funded California Alliance for Minority Participation in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (CAMP). Findings will be broadly
disseminated to the public through outreach programs, lectures and a museum
exhibit.