* 1233108
* Modeling and Inferring of Multichannel Sensing Data in Complex Manufacturing Procsses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jionghua (Judy) Jin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 336,000.00

The objective of this award is to develop general methodologies for modeling and
making inferences from multichannel nonlinear sensing signals, to support
quality improvement in complex manufacturing processes. Specifically, a new
variable selection method using hierarchical regularization will be developed to
extract informative sensing signals and signal features in modeling of the
relationship between product quality and massive process sensing signals.
Process variations will be analyzed by nonparametric mixed-effect models to
consider the underlying cross-correlation among heterogeneous sensing signals
and the inevitable between-profile variations within each sensing signal. When
validated, the models will be incorporated in the development of new process
monitoring and diagnosis methods. This will permit variation reduction and
quality improvement in complex manufacturing processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide an effective means to
enhance an online monitoring and diagnosis system with the advanced capability
of automatically analyzing and assessing massive online sensing signals to
improve manufacturing process operations. Implementation of the methodologies in
manufacturing is expected to provide significant cost reduction as an outcome of
improving product quality and reducing production downtime. Consequently the
research has the potential to generate broad economic impacts by improving the
competitiveness of the U.S. manufacturing industry. Moreover, multidisciplinary
academic training, outreach, and broad dissemination through publications and
industrial collaboration will lead to wide application of the developed
methodologies to many other sensor data fusion applications that are of vital
importance to the nation's economic growth.