* 1233106
* A Deeper Understanding of Small-Scale Phenomena in Heat Pipes through a Higher Order Lattice Boltzmann Method
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Laura Schaefer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

CBET-1233106&lt;br/&gt;PI: Schaefer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat pipes are compact,
reliable devices used for transporting heat, but there is a lack of
understanding of their microscale fluid flow behavior. In order to gain deeper
insights into the nature of these types of flows, which also often occur in
complicated geometries, we will model the flows using a technique known as the
lattice Boltzmann method. While that method is very useful in analyzing
complicated flows, it still suffers from inadequate development on the inclusion
of thermal effects. Therefore, we propose the development of advanced, higher
order (more accurate) lattice Boltzmann-based numerical simulations that can
further our knowledge of micro thermal-fluid phenomena in heat pipes. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work comes both from developing a more
rigorous, realistic, and versatile computational tool, and from the deeper
understanding of complex flows that can be gained as a result. The fundamental
underpinning of all lattice Boltzmann models are particle distribution functions
that describe the density and momentum (and sometimes temperature) of the fluid
elements. To develop a higher-order thermal lattice Boltzmann model, we will
expand the equilibrium particle distribution function to the fourth order. In
order to model multiple phases, we will incorporate fluid particle interactions
using a better description of the effective mass. Combining these approaches
means that the forces acting on the particles will need to be discretized over a
large number of velocities, which is numerically complicated. However, while
this is quite challenging, it will likely lead to additional insights into the
contribution of the various aspects of the lattice Boltzmann formulation to
instabilities and inaccuracies in the numerical simulations, thereby expanding
the applicability of the lattice Boltzmann method. The model will be validated
using the vast range of experimental data available in the literature. The
resulting model will then be able to explore the effect of variations in
geometry, fluid properties, etc., on heat pipe efficiency, and will lead to a
better understanding of the underlying physics of the micro fluid phenomena that
drive heat pipe systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More accurate simulations of
multiphase, multicomponent, thermal flows, particularly in small-scale and/or
complicated geometries have many applications. Improving heat pipe performance
can lead to increases in the overall energy efficiency of computer cooling
systems, which currently consume huge amounts of power (a typical data center
uses 1/3 of its energy consumption for cooling). The same is true for many other
more conventional heat exchangers in the power generating and HVAC&amp;R
industries; it may be possible to design more efficient condensers, evaporators,
generators, etc., by combining micromanufacturing processes with accurate
simulations of the phase transitions that occur in those channels and surfaces.
Improving the energy efficiency can directly lead to both economic and
environmental savings. There are also educational benefits from the study of
heat pipes. The devices will be used as demonstration units for undergraduate
classes, in order to provide an impetus for discussion of phase change and heat
transfer phenomena. Design teams of upper-level undergraduates will also help to
translate heat pipe concepts (and their underlying principles) to the high-
school and middle-school level, through designing and building demonstration
units that examine different materials, working fluids, and configurations, as
well as applications for heat pipes, such as cooling devices for overclocking
processors and the creation of heat pipe boats.