* 1233706
* Collaborative Research: Seawater Inorganic and Organic Carbon Measurements for the US GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific Zonal Transect
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2017
* USD 272,076.00

Scientists from Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences and the University of
California, Santa Barbara, plan to collect samples during the 2013 GEOTRACES
Eastern Pacific Zonal Transect cruise and analyze them for dissolved inorganic
carbon, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and total alkalinity. The resultant data
will be highly precise and accurate to allow calculation of pH and seawater
carbonate chemistry (e.g., hydroxide, carbonate ion, saturation sate for calcium
carbonate minerals). Given the influence of pH on redox chemistry, speciation,
and ligand-particle-trace metal/isotope interactions, the transect from Peru to
Tahiti with its range of marine seawater carbonate chemistry will provide an
opportunity to test the hypotheses that (1) pH is a critical constraint for
controlling distributions of trace elements and their isotopes (TEIs) and their
dynamics within the water column, and; (2) DOC interacts with TEIs providing a
spectrum of binding ligands that influence trace element solubility,
complexation, and speciation. Also, because the cruise track will pass over the
East Pacific Rise, the scientists plan to evaluate DOC variability within the
hydrothermal plume and determine the partitioning of organic matter between DOC
and particulate organic carbon. In collaboration with other GEOTRACES
researchers, the data will be used to assess the speciation of iron, copper,
cobalt and mercury, as well as determine the removal rate of DOC from the
surface ocean with the help of chlorofluorocarbon data obtained by a
collaborator from the University of Miami, Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, this
project would result in a high quality data set that would benefit not only the
GEOTRACES community to help them interpret their trace metal and isotope
measurements but other scientists involved in organic/inorganic carbon cycle
research as well. One graduate student from the University of California, Santa
Barbara would be supported and trained as part of this project.