* 1233176
* Ultrasonic Vibration Assisted NanoMachining for High-rate Tunable 2D and 3D Nanofabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Cohen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 358,017.00

The objective of this research is to investigate a low cost, high speed, tunable
NanoMachining approach using sharp cantilever tips with the help of ultrasonic
vibration. The controllable ultrasonic vibration between the tip and the sample
enables tunable fabrication of features across a wide dimensional range in one
pass with high efficiency. This research incorporates process innovation and
process modeling (empirical models for analysis of the nanomachining process
with respect to material, geometric and process parameters) to create a novel
manufacturing process for high rate nanofabrication. A high speed, high
precision nanopositioning stage will be explored to fully utilize the high rate
capabilities of the ultrasonic vibration assisted nanomachining process to
create a novel manufacturing system, capable of high-throughput fabrication of
2D and 3D nanoscale features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will advance the emerging nanomanufacturing industry by providing
a low-cost, high-throughput method for the fabrication of 2D and 3D
nanostructures. Considering the cost and high investment of other
nanofabrication approaches (e.g. e-beam lithography, EUV-lithography), the
results from this research will provide a transformative and efficient framework
for the fabrication of nanoscale features and devices with the potential to
contribute to many evolutionary products, such as nano-electronics, solar cells,
photonics, and biomedical devices. Moreover, this research will integrate broad
discoveries in nanotechnologies, nanofabrication, mechanics, process modeling,
and instrumentation into a high rate, cost effective nanomanufacturing system.
Meanwhile, the planned multidisciplinary research-based education program will
link the research outcomes and students? activities to the needs of contemporary
industry for nanotechnology, nanofabrication, and instrumentation. The research
results will be broadly disseminated through technical publications, workshops,
regular and short courses, and K-12 outreach program.