* 1233692
* Collaborative Research: Evolution Systems On Time-Dependent Domains: Study Of Dynamics, Stability, And Coarsening
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edgar Knobloch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 333,653.00

The goal of this collaborative research project is to understand and quantify
the key differences between structure formation and evolution in extended
systems on time-fixed and time-dependent spatial domains. Achieving these
objectives will require the development of new methods based on the synergy of
theoretical tools and experimental capabilities, and will lead to new advances
in dynamical bifurcation theory. The study will lead to new models describing
the nonlinear evolution of pattern wavelength on time-dependent domains for
comparison with those on fixed domains, including the generation of phase slips
via Eckhaus instability. Pattern coarsening on time-dependent domains will be
contrasted with that on fixed domains. To validate the theory and provide a
testbed for theoretical ideas and findings, an extensive experimental study of
Faraday waves on time-dependent domains will be performed.

There are many natural systems which evolve on time-dependent spatial domains
ranging from transport-reaction processes - crystal growth, metal casting, gas-
liquid and gas-solid reaction systems - to classical electromagnetic cavity
resonators with moving walls, quantum mechanical problems, fluid motion, fluid-
structure interaction, and formation of structure and morphology in biology, to
name but a few. Therefore, revealing the dynamics on time-dependent domains is
important both from fundamental and practical points of view. At the
technological level, the outcome of this program will provide fundamental
insights into the behavior of extended systems on time-dependent domains, which
in turn should lead to advances in structure prediction and control in the
above-mentioned applications. At the dissemination level, the studied phenomena
present a great opportunity to introduce people to science and technology at
varying degrees of complexity and to encourage scientific training. Graduate,
undergraduate, and regional high-school students will benefit not only through
classroom instruction, but will also be provided with firsthand research
experience.