* 1233492
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Youth Citizenship, Civic Education, and Spaces of Belonging in a Multicultural Nation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Caroline Nagel, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,794.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the citizenship in a
multi-cultural context. Modern citizenship denotes membership in a political
community and the rights and responsibilities attached to that membership. It
also denotes membership in a national community defined by cultural norms,
values, and ethnocultural markers. Those deemed unassimilable in the national
community often lack full, substantive access to the rights and privileges
enjoyed by dominant groups. Thus, universalistic conceptions of citizenship
exist in tension, to varying degrees, with the de facto marginalization or
exclusion of particular groups. Estonia has seen growing social and political
divisions between the ethnic Estonian majority and the large Russian minority
since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. With its accession to the European
Union in 2004, Estonia expressed its commitment to Europe's post-national
political project. In practice, however, the EU's directives regarding
multiculturalism and minority rights have coexisted uneasily with Estonia's
post-Soviet nation-building prerogatives. This project will study the politics
of citizenship in Estonia from the perspective of secondary school students in
Tallinn, Estonia's largest and most ethnically mixed city. Schools traditionally
are key sites of citizenship formation, and the doctoral student will explore
how educators and administrators as well as EU youth-policy makers articulate
and implement particular citizenship ideals and national narratives through
school curricula. She will explore how current secondary school students (part
of the first wholly post-Soviet generation in Estonia) interpret, respond to,
and act upon the citizenship narratives that they learn in school as well as how
their experiences within and outside of school inform their understandings of
citizenship and belonging in Estonia. To explore these issues, she will conduct
focus groups with students in seven secondary schools, including schools that
are predominantly Estonian, that are predominantly Russian, and that have mixed
ethnicity. Focus group participants will participate in mapping exercises and a
walking tour of Tallinn's controversial memorial sites and monuments, the
purpose of which is to explore how young people's understandings of citizenship
and their sense of belonging are informed by, and shaped within, material spaces
within and beyond the school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
will enhance basic understanding of citizenship as sets of political discourses,
policies, and practices that people encounter in their everyday lives. This
research will demonstrate how citizenship, while often conceived of in
universalistic terms, has uneven meanings or outcomes, both spatially and
socially. The project will shed new light on the role of young people as
political actors, illuminating the ways they engage in the politics of
citizenship even as they may be excluded from formal modes of political
participation. In doing so, the project will bring together the fields of youth
geography and civic education, and it will help focus attention on schools as
key sites of citizenship formation and negotiation. This project also will
contribute to current discussions about ethnonational politics in the former
Soviet Union and will help clarify tensions between EU norms and nation-building
projects in post-communist states. Project results will help inform discussions
about divided societies, providing important insights into the role of youth and
education policies in addressing ethnonational tensions in divided societies. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.