* 1233897
* The Ocean Nitrogen Imbalance Paradox: Environmental Controls on the Denitrification Isotope Effect
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Julie Granger, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2015
* USD 231,013.00

Intellectual Merit: This study will test the sensitivity of the amplitude of the
denitrification isotope effect to culture conditions pertinent to the ocean
environment. The isotope effect amplitude will be explored with respect to
electron donor, trace oxygenation, and temperature, in both batch and continuous
culture experiments of denitrifiers. The proposed work will also involve
measurements of the enzymatic isotope effect of the respiratory nitrate
reductase of denitrifiers, measurements of its enzymatic activity among
cultures, and examination of cellular nitrate transport kinetics of denitrifying
strains. The experiments are designed to reveal the physiological basis of the
modulation of the isotope effect amplitude, which will further resolve this
manifestation in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In
regards to the broader significance and importance of this study, these new
experimental data will provide a basis for integration of nitrogen isotope
dynamics in ocean models to test how key environmental parameters can affect the
global ocean distribution of nitrogen isotopes. Moreover, the proposal will
provide support for a graduate student, who will be introduced to a broad range
of techniques and sub-disciplines, from microbiology and enzymology, to
oceanography and stable isotope biogeochemistry. The project involves an early
career female PI, who will mentor one graduate student throughout the project.