* 1233022
* Out From the Shadows: The Lives of Immigrants Before, During, and After Legalization
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Ruth Gomberg-Munoz, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 125,118.00

Dr. Ruth Gomberg-Munoz, Loyola University of Chicago, will conduct qualitative
research to examine the experiences and outcomes of immigration legal status
change among Mexican immigrants to the U.S. Findings will complement macro-level
quantitative studies of new legal immigrants by contributing person-centered
qualitative data on legal stages of naturalization from the point of view of
immigrants themselves. The ethnographic participants of this study will be
selected from four groups: immigrants who anticipate changing their legal status
from undocumented to legal permanent resident, those who have recently changed
their status, those who adjusted their status ten or more years ago, and
naturalized U.S. citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will document
multiple effects of the legalization process on immigrants' goals, perceptions,
and activities as they move toward becoming citizens of the US. Research
questions will address experiences in the process of legal status adjustment,
the impact of social, demographic and labor variables on the process, the kinds
of support services available and used for assistance in the process, changes in
views of the process as immigrants move between stages, and shifts in attitudes
toward citizenship and the state that accompany modifications in immigrants'
legal status. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance research in an
area that is of critical importance to wider considerations of nationhood,
citizenship, transnational migration, and globalization. Furthermore, the
research will document the challenges that immigrants face during and post-
legalization, and how these challenges may be experienced with respect to
characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, and class. This study can provide
important information for organizations and agencies that provide support and
resources to legalizing immigrants. Finally, this study can offer a timely
contribution to local and national policy debates about immigration programs.