* 1233289
* Collaborative Research:   Flow, Turbulence and Mixing in Mid-Ocean Ridge Fracture Zone Canyons
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Scott Worrilow, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,464,664.00

Overview: In order to close the global overturning circulation, high-density
deep- and bottom waters produced at high latitudes must be made less dense and
upwell to shallower depths. Available observations from the subtropical South
Atlantic indicate that the bulk of the mixing in the deep ocean there takes
place over the topographically rough Mid-Atlantic Ridge, in particular in the
quasi-regularly spaced "fracture zone canyons" corrugating the ridge flanks.
There, dense water is advected toward the ridge crest (i.e. upwelled) by
persistent along-valley currents that flow down the unidirectional density
gradients, which are maintained by strong turbulence (diapycnal mixing). Most of
the data on which these inferences are based were collected during the Brazil
Basin Tracer Release Experiment (BBTRE) along a single ridge-flank canyon in the
western South Atlantic near 22S where previous analyses have shown that both
tidal mixing and overflow processes are important.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, it is likely that both processes must be
considered in order to understand and parameterize the effects of turbulence and
mixing in the canyons corrugating the flanks of all slow-spreading ridges, which
make up large fractions of the sea floor, in particular in the Atlantic, Indian
and Southern Oceans. The primary aim of this follow-on project is to improve our
understanding of the dynamics over the corrugated flanks of slow-spreading mid-
ocean ridges. Due to the coarse sampling resolution and choice of station
locations it is not possible to answer important questions, such as the relative
importance of tidal and sill mixing, from the BBTRE data. Therefore, high-
resolution surveys of hydrography, three-dimensional flow, turbulence and mixing
will be carried out in two neighboring canyons and over the intervening
topographic spur in the BBTRE region to determine the relative contributions of
tidal and sill-related mixing. Furthermore, profiling moorings deployed on two
nearby sill regions will be used to derive time series of spatially integrated
mixing related buoyancy fluxes and to investigate the strong but unexplained
sub-inertial variability of the along-canyon flow recorded previously.
Additionally, three small moorings will be deployed in saddles between the two
canyons to investigate inter-canyon exchange. The data analysis will include
available data from previous experiments, including a set of tracer profiles
that has not been analyzed before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
corrugated flanks of slow-spreading ridges cover large areas of the sea floor of
several major ocean basins. Therefore, understanding the dynamics in the ~100 km
of ridge-flank canyons and its effects on the buoyancy and upwelling budget of
the abyssal ocean is of global significance. In addition to determining the
relative importance of tidal mixing and cross-sill flows in two canyons, the
temporal variability of turbulence and mixing from tidal to yearly time scales
will be investigated to gain insights into the forcing of the along-canyon
flows, the exchange between neighboring canyons, and the eventual fate of the
canyon waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It is anticipated that
insights gained during this project will improve our understanding of abyssal
mixing in many different regions with similar bottom topography and provide the
basis for better parameterizations of the effects of turbulence and mixing in
large-scale circulation and climate models that cannot resolve these small-scale
processes. As part of the project, a graduate student and a post-doctoral
researcher will be trained in all aspects of observational physical
oceanography, from data acquisition to interpretation.