* 1233056
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Hierarchical Modeling Approach to Simulating the Geomorphic Response of River Systems to Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Patrick Bartlein, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 02/28/2014
* USD 13,726.00

This doctoral dissertation research investigates how future environmental change
may affect the fluvial geomorphology, or physical form, of rivers. Environmental
change, including climate variability, is acknowledged as a factor influencing
river flow, particularly in mountainous watersheds, in which snowmelt makes a
large contribution to annual discharge. Potential environmental changes in the
hydrology of such basins have been simulated by hydrologic models. Most notably,
these impacts include higher temperatures leading to an increase in the
proportion of winter precipitation falling as rain rather than snow, with
consequent increased winter discharge, a lower spring snowmelt peak, and
decreased summer discharge. Few of these modeling studies, however, have
projected how hydrologic changes associated with climate change may affect
geomorphic characteristics such as the width and depth of river channels, the
shape of the river course, and the transport of sediment. This is a gap in
understanding of climate-change impacts on river systems, because river
morphology responds dynamically to hydrology. This research will contribute to
better understanding of the geomorphic response of river systems to climate
change through development of a hierarchical series of linked models to
investigate how climate change influences hydrology, which in turn influences
fluvial geomorphology. This modeling framework will be applied to three
snowmelt-dominated watersheds in the interior Pacific Northwest, with the
following objectives: 1) development of downscaled basin-scale climate change
scenarios, which are projections of future changes in climate variables such as
temperature and precipitation that are locally specific to the study basins; 2)
application of a watershed-scale hydrologic model to project how the study
basins' hydrology, including the magnitude and timing of river flow, may change
in response to the downscaled climate change scenarios; 3) examination of the
impact of the modeled hydrologic changes on the study rivers' morphology,
channel form, river shape, and sediment transport, using a reach-scale
geomorphic model that can simulate an individual river segment in greater detail
than a watershed model; and 4) quantification of past rates of change in river
shape using historic aerial photos to compare with the geomorphic modeling
results. This hierarchical modeling process is an innovative approach to linking
physical processes that occur across multiple scales, from global and regional
climate to watershed hydrology to local geomorphology.

The results of this research will have implications for the management of river
systems. Geomorphic processes significantly affect the value of rivers,
including their suitability for threatened and endangered species and for human
uses of water. Knowledge of how climate change may affect these processes will
allow water resource managers to make more informed decisions about how to
respond to future changes. The results will be disseminated at national
scientific conferences and in peer-reviewed journals. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.