* 1233716
* Eighth International Nanotechnology Conference on Communication and Cooperation
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Kosmas Galatsis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2013
* USD 30,000.00

The 8th International Nanotechnology Conference on Communication and Cooperation
(INC8) will bring together some of the world?s most renowned and technologically
advanced thinkers to exchange information and ideas with regards to
nanotechnology, nano-optics and nanoelectronics. This arena will provide a
unique opportunity where academics and industry leaders can interact on issues
in nanotechnology. Current issues that will be discussed includes energy and
environmental challenges facing mankind in particular targeting to decrease CO2
emissions and increase the viability of renewable energy solutions - and the
associated societal implication and issues. Also, another major challenge that
will be discussed includes a look at logic switch replacement technologies for
CMOS and what alternate state variables are viable options. Semiconductor
industry related questions and topics that will be discussed include nanoscale
interconnects, thermal management, directed self-assembly, and fault tolerance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to further strengthen the continuous dialogue
between Europe, Japan and the United States, broad regional overviews will be
combined with detailed presentations from each of the regions. Senior
researchers from industry, academia, leaders and policy makers from North
America, Europe and Asia will hold discussions on a variety of efforts in
nanoscience, along with opportunities for collaboration. Young scientists will
also be invited to present posters highlighting their work. The meeting will
target groups at co-operating to implement strategic programs to progress human
development through nanotechnology.