* 1233598
* Collaborative Research: Diagnosing Eddy mixing in DIMES
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* W. Brechner Owens, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,939.00

Climate-scale ocean models unanimously stress the key regulatory function played
by the oceanic overturning circulation in the Earth's climate and biogeochemical
cycles over decadal and longer time scales. Yet in their quest to resolve many
topical climate problems, the models' credibility is challenged by their extreme
sensitivity to the representation of mixing processes in the Southern Ocean.
This peculiarity of model behavior reflects the unique role of mixing in
mediating the vertical and horizontal transports of water masses in the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), which shape the overturning circulation
through their respective impacts on the overturning rate and inter-ocean
exchange. The Diapycnal and Isopycnal Mixing Experiment in the Southern Ocean
(DIMES) has collected a wealth of data to quantify mixing, including the
spreading of a chemical tracer and of 150 floats at two different depths. The
goal of this proposal is to analyze the tracer and float data to estimate the
vertical and horizontal variations in lateral eddy mixing. The principal
investigators' previous work has shown that tracer and floats are, by
themselves, insufficient to accurately constrain these variations. Therefore the
data will be analyzed together with surrogate tracers and floats advected with a
numerical simulation of the regions under
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project tackles the
formidable problem of quantifying the role of small-scale eddies in the large-
scale circulation. Because these eddies are so challenging to observe and model,
it is difficult to quantify their large-scale effect. Indeed the ocean uptake of
heat and carbon over the next century in climate models can be very different in
models that parameterize mesoscale eddies compared to models that explicitly
resolve them. This implies that present parameterizations, which either ignore
or improperly represent the horizontal and vertical variations in mesoscale eddy
mixing, may not have the skill to make accurate climate projections. The goal of
this project is to ground new understanding of eddy mixing in data and use these
results to develop new parameterizations for climate models. The connection
between data and models is key to ensure that the DIMES experiment will have a
long term legacy in the climate community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project addresses the important problem of quantifying mixing by eddies in
the ocean and their role in the climate system. Furthermore the work should be
seen in the wider context of studies of eddy-mean flow interaction in turbulent
flows. The ideas have importance for the general circulation of the atmosphere
and of planetary atmospheres, particularly those of the gas giants such as
Jupiter. Indeed, parametrically, the ocean is closely akin to Jupiter, with an
eddy scale that is hundreds of times smaller than that of the large-scale
circulation. Finally, there is a strong educational component through the
training of three graduate students and two post-docs, and the development of
new curricula to introduce students in the MIT/WHOI Joint Program to the role of
the Southern Ocean in the climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DIMES project
is a process study sponsored by the U.S. CLIVAR (climate variability and
predictability) program.