* 1233504
* Collaborative Research: An Allocation Model with Dynamic Updates for Balanced Workload Distribution on Patient Centered Medical Homes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kai Yang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 220,009.00

The goal of this collaborative Advancing Health Services through System Modeling
Research project is to lay a scientific foundation for new business rules and
operation sciences useful for the patient centered medical home model (PCMH).
The PCMH model is an emerging team-based approach for primary care aimed at
improving timely access to care, continuity of care, care cost and
comprehensiveness for patient wellness. This three-year project has the
following tasks: 1) to develop a comprehensive health information technology
data preparation strategy to provide healthcare demand and supply portfolio data
2) to develop an adaptive discrete-cluster-based statistical estimation model
that can predict healthcare workload based on key patient attributes, such as
diagnosis and treatment characteristics, and 3) to create stochastic
optimization models to aid in managing patient panels and staffing levels for
all PCMH teams. Such models would provide dynamic updating rules for patient and
staffing allocation with a stochastically migrating patient population in
medical facilities; and would provide a real time appointment scheduling system
to improve daily operations through optimal patient allocation and staffing
under stochastic patient demand for service. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
development of a healthcare workload portfolio estimation model, patient
allocation model and dynamic scheduling strategy, this research will directly
support PCMH practices by assigning patients to provider team members so that
that providers? time can be fully utilized and patients receive prompt, adequate
and economical healthcare. The project will be in collaboration with the largest
healthcare system in U.S., the Veterans Health Administration. We expect the
results of this research to be adopted and implemented in hundreds of medical
facilities. The research will be brought into classrooms to inspire and engage
undergraduate and graduate students, especially underrepresented groups. This
research will contribute to and enhance our graduate level courses and seminars.
In addition workshops will be developed on campus and in various conferences.