* 1233864
* Determining Consumer Preference Through an Interactive Virtual Reality Experience
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jonathan Cagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

This research award investigates a formal and repeatable approach to uncovering
what customers prefer in terms of the aesthetic, ergonomic and ease of use
experience of a product through a Virtual Reality (VR) environment. The approach
will use a continuous, visual-based extension of conjoint analysis - a method
traditionally used in marketing - immersed within a VR environment. Consumer
preferences for aesthetics, ergonomics and ease of use will be derived through
interactive surveys within the VR environment. A series of cognitive and
interaction studies will be preformed to determine the best environment to
derive meaningful preference functions. The effect of constraints will also be
studied. The work can be applied to a variety of physical products; the design
of a long-haul truck instrument panel and cockpit will demonstrate its
effectiveness. The resulting technology and method is intended to be used early
and often throughout the design process, without the cost of physical
prototyping, thus increasing customer satisfaction and, hopefully, enthusiasm
for use of the product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will utilize and
expand the capabilities associated with Virtual Reality technology,
demonstrating a new use of VR in the design process. This research will further
the study and capabilities of the design process by determining utility
functions of aesthetic, ergonomic and ease of use preferences within a virtual
environment that is significantly closer to real life interaction than previous
capabilities, and include more emotional aspects of consumer preference in
decision modeling. This work will also contribute an interactive K-5 outreach
effort where these students will learn about VR and product design, and then
experience and manipulate their environment virtually; the goal is to excite
children about engineering at a young age.