* 1233373
* The Microbial Carbon Pump and Bacterial Carbon Sequestration in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Ronald Benner, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The Biological Pump has long been recognized as an important sink for
atmospheric CO2 concentrations through the sequestration of carbon in ocean
sediments. The contributions of bacteria to the sequestration of carbon in the
ocean reservoir of refractory dissolved organic carbon (RDOC) have only recently
been recognized. This process, conceptualized as the Microbial Carbon Pump
(MCP), also appears to play a significant role in carbon sequestration and the
regulation of atmospheric CO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the University of South Carolina at Columbia will build upon the
framework of the MCP to address the following hypotheses: 1) The production and
composition of bacterial DOC vary with biological (e.g. community structure) and
physicochemical (e.g. nutrients) parameters in the ocean, 2) Bacteria sequester
carbon in semi-labile DOC (SDOC) that persists for years to decades in
mesopelagic waters, 3) Microbial communities in mesopelagic and bathypelagic
waters have the metabolic potential to produce and degrade bacterial DOC.
Naturally-occurring bacterial DOC in these waters is very resistant to microbial
degradation, 4) Heterotrophic bacteria are the predominant source of bacterial
SDOC and RDOC. These hypotheses will be addressed using a combination of field
(NW Pacific Ocean and Sargasso Sea) and experimental approaches to investigate
spatial variability in the production and decomposition of bacterial DOC and to
relate these processes to community structure and environmental conditions. This
study will provide estimates of the reservoirs of bacterial SDOC and RDOC in the
ocean and critical insights about the ocean carbon cycle and the regulation of
atmospheric CO2 concentrations. It will also lay a foundation for addressing how
the MCP and bacterial carbon sequestration will respond to climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will strengthen
collaborations between the PI's laboratory and Dr. Hiroshi Ogawa's laboratory at
the Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute in Japan. This collaboration
includes participation on a Japanese-sponsored expedition to the North Pacific
Ocean aboard the R/V Hakuro maru. Additionally, it will support a postdoctoral
associate and a doctoral student who will participate on research expeditions to
the NW Pacific Ocean and Sargasso Sea. Their research will focus on the MCP, and
they will present their findings at national conferences in years 2 and 3.