* 1233005
* US GEOTRACES Pacific: Measuring the d13C-DIC distribution and quantifying the impact of organic matter export on d13C, nutrients and trace metals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 403,708.00

The international GEOTRACES program has two major goals: (1) to determine global
ocean distributions of selected trace elements and isotopes and evaluate the
sources, sinks, and internal cycling of these species to characterize more
completely the physical, chemical and biological processes regulating their
distributions; and (2) to understand the processes that control the
concentrations of geochemical species used for proxies of the past environment.
Because the cycling of trace elements and isotopes in the sea is intimately
connected with both the organic and the inorganic biogeochemical transformations
of carbon, the achievement of the goals of GEOTRACES would be very difficult if
not impossible unless synoptic measurements are also made on the organic and
inorganic marine carbon system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the University of Washington will participate in the
U.S.GEOTRACES Pacific campaign in 2013 to characterize the regional ocean carbon
system. They will use two approaches. First, they will measure the depth
distribution of the 13C/12C stable carbon isotopic ratio of the dissolved
inorganic carbon (del13C), which has been designated in the international
GEOTRACES Science Plan as a key parameter and has the highest measurement
priority. Second, they will estimate the rate of organic matter (OM) export from
the surface layer based on dissolved O2/Ar gas ratios. Measurements of del13C
will be made at about 22 stations for a total of ~525 samples. Additionally,
they will measure the dissolved O2/Ar gas ratio at ~5 km spatial resolution in
the surface layer using an underway measurement method that has been used
extensively in other oceanic regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cruise track
will cross a wide range of biological productivity regimes from the coastal
upwelling zone off Peru to the oligotrophic gyre surrounding Tahiti. The
proposed high resolution O2/Ar-based OM export rates should clearly detect the
expected offshore decrease in OM export and locate transition zones or fronts in
productivity. The expected large offshore productivity gradient will provide the
opportunity to determine the impact of OM export from the surface layer and OM
degradation at depth on upper ocean depth distribution of del13C, trace elements
(TEs), O2 and nutrients along the section.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The initial
del13C and TE measurements during GEOTRACES illustrate the potential to improve
our understanding of the processes that control del13C, TEs and nutrient
distributions in the modern ocean and, as a result, improve the utility of
del13C and TEs as tracers of past changes in the ocean circulation and carbon
cycling, which is a long term goal of this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The data and research results will be
broadly distributed to the international oceanographic and paleoclimate
communities and incorporated into the PI's graduate and undergraduate teaching
curricula. Additionally, there will be active undergraduate participation (5
students currently) in preparing samples for del13C analyses.