* 1233278
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interactions Among Forest Defoliator Outbreaks, Wildfires,  Climatic Variability, and Nitrogen Availability in the Interior Pacific Northwest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Aquila Flower, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,961.00

Logging, grazing, and the suppression of wildfires have led to widespread
changes in forest structure and disturbance regimes in the interior Pacific
Northwest, and these ecosystem-wide changes have altered nitrogen cycling
dynamics. In spite of the crucial role of nitrogen in determining ecosystem
health and productivity, the mechanisms controlling nitrogen availability are
not fully understood. In particular, the impact of altered disturbance regimes
on nitrogen availability remains uncertain. This doctoral dissertation research
project will use a combination of tree-ring records and statistical methods to
reconstruct multi-century records of disturbance events, forest demographics,
climatic variability, and nitrogen availability. Tree rings provide high
resolution records of growth rates, nitrogen isotopic composition, disturbance
impacts, and forest stand dynamics. Sampling will be conducted at two sites in
mixed-conifer forests in Idaho and Montana. The doctoral student will focus on
answering the following questions: (1) What changes in disturbance regimes and
forest composition have occurred over the last three centuries? (2) How does
climatic variability influence forest composition and disturbance dynamics? (3)
What are the relationship among nitrogen availability and climatic variability,
fires, and outbreaks of the western spruce budworm? (4) What long-term impacts
on nitrogen availability have resulted from changes in disturbance regimes and
forest composition? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help to answer
fundamental questions regarding the impacts of climatic variability,
disturbances, and human activities on nutrient cycling dynamics. Reconstructing
nitrogen availability from the isotopic composition of tree rings is a fairly
new field of inquiry, and the results of this project will help to advance this
emerging field. This project will provide new knowledge about the impacts of
insect defoliation on nitrogen availability in coniferous western forests and
about defoliation-nitrogen dynamics. Project results will include a long time
series of high-resolution nitrogen availability records for the western United
States. The multi-century tree-ring records produced through this research will
facilitate a detailed assessment of the relationships among forest management
policies, climatic conditions, disturbance events, forest composition, and
nutrient cycling, and it will provide insights into the long-term effects of
forest management practices on forest health. Such knowledge will help guide
forest management policies in the face of changing climatic conditions and land-
use goals. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.