* 1233863
* An integrated geochemical and geodynamical approach to the origin of off-axis melt production at a range of mid-ocean ridge settings
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Perfit, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2016
* USD 193,995.00

Understanding how ocean crust is created and its how melts of different
chemistry are created is an essential but presently poorly constrained aspect of
global geochemical cycling between the mantle and crust. This research
investigates the geochemical relationship between on- and off-axis volcanism at
a variety of mid-ocean ridge spreading center settings to try and develop an
integrated dynamic geochemical and geophysical modeling approach to better
understand the interaction of mantle heterogeneities with the mid-ocean ridge
system. A key component of this work will be to examine the geochemistry of four
well-studied mid-ocean ridges (East Pacific Rise, Iceland, Galapagos, and the
Juan de Fuca Ridge) to predict the degree and depth of melting required to
produce off-axis melts and relate these predictions to physically realistic
origins in the mantle. To create a more complete geochemical record of off-axis
geochemical variation, samples from 20 seamounts near the East Pacific Rise will
be analyzed for the radiogenis isotoes of Sr, Nd, and Pb, which are indicators
of magmatic and magma differentiation processes. A major reserach goal is to
develop robust one and two dimensional models to determine whether or not there
are globally consistent off-axis processes that underpin mantle melting beneath
mid-ocean ridges. The broader impacts of the work include developing the career
of a postdoc from a group under-represented in the sciences and public outreach
through a local Florida museum. Broader impacts also include international
collaboration with a UK scientist, with the postdoc spending time in the
collaborator's laboratory and being cross-trained in state-of the art
geochemical analytical techniques and geodynamical modeling.