* 1233282
* Collaborative Research: Repeat Observations by Gliders in the Equatorial Region (ROGER)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Kristopher Karnauskas, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,691,256.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to
quantify the variability in the position and strength of the Pacific Equatorial
Front and Equatorial Undercurrent (EUC), and the partitioning of flow around the
Galapagos Archipelago. The field work will consist of three sustained high-
resolution glider transects to assess variability of the Equatorial Current
System, including the obstruction of the EUC by the Galapagos Archipelago. A
section at 93W will be representative of the EUC and equatorial front to the
west of the Archipelago, and two sections connecting the northern and southern
ends of this section to the Archipelago will quantify how the EUC is partitioned
into pathways. Using four gliders, each section will be repeated every 10 days,
thus barely resolving tropical instability wave variability at a period of 20
days. Spray gliders equipped with CTD and ADPs will profile to 500 m every 3
hours, covering 3 km during the dive cycle. Scientific analyses, including the
interpretation of the observations using a new high-resolution model, will focus
on quantifying the temporal evolution on scales from seasons to weeks in the
Equatorial Current System down to horizontal scales of 10 km. Estimates will be
made of horizontal fluxes of mass, heat, and salt. The pathway of the EUC will
be determined. Observations will be compared and analyzed with a hierarchy of
extant numerical models of the Equatorial Current System and an ongoing data
assimilation analysis of the Equatorial Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available observations do not yet provide an
adequate description of the submesoscale structure and variability of the
Equatorial Current System or the EUC termination, which remains a major
limitation to constraining models and understanding one of the world's most
dynamic ecosystems. The proposed systematic and sustained observational program
will produce data to be used in a state estimate of the tropical Pacific
following recommended best practices for process studies by integrating models
with observations from the start, producing quality-controlled data sets
suitable for model validation, and encouraging broad use of the data. One
graduate student at each institution will work with these data to increase the
scientific expertise in eastern equatorial Pacific measurements and analyses.
Results will be broadly disseminated at national and international meetings and
in peer-reviewed journals. A Wikipedia page on the dynamics of the EUC suitable
for the general public and an observational history of the EUC for Oceanography
magazine will be prepared. Collaboration with Equadorian oceanographers will
train them in the glider operations and the analysis of the glider data.