* 1233054
* INSPIRE: Optogenetic Control of the Human Heart - Turning Light into Force
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ellen Kuhl, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE Research Award is co-funded by the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology
(BMMB) and the Mechanics of Materials (MoM) Programs in the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI), and the Biophotonics Program in
the Division of Chemical, Biological, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(CBET), both in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG). In the United States
alone, almost half a million people die each year as a result of heart rhythm
disorders. Despite its invasive nature, electrical stimulation remains the gold
standard treatment for rhythm disturbances in the heart. This project challenges
the conventional wisdom of how to manipulate electrical signals in the human
heart. The long-term goal is to establish a novel technology to control heart
rhythm disorders, safely, precisely, and remotely, simply by means of light
using a new concept known as optogenetics. The objective of this research is to
create a biological pacemaker of genetically engineered cells that will allow us
to decipher the basic mechanisms by which optogenetics can regulate the pump
function of the heart. The research approach is a systematic theoretical,
experimental, and computational characterization of photostimulation across four
biological scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is highly innovative, since it
adopts optogenetics, for the first time, to control human heart cells and
tissue. It combines concepts, methods, and recent developments in optics,
genetics, stem cell biology, electrophysiology, mechanobiology, biomechanics,
mathematical modeling, and computer simulation. Its unusual interdisciplinary
nature has the potential to reveal fundamental mechanisms of the
photoelectrochemistry and mechanics of living systems. This knowledge gain will
stimulate discovery in optogenetics and initiate new technologies to manipulate
excitable cells. The transformative potential of the work is that it may open
new avenues to support the design of novel therapies for various types of
neuronal, musculoskeletal, pancreatic, and cardiac disorders such as depression,
schizophrenia, paralysis, diabetes, pain syndromes, and cardiac arrhythmias.