* 1233425
* Ventilation and Timescales of Oxygen and Nutrient Cycling in the Oxygen Deficient Waters Of The Eastern Tropical South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Mark Warner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 424,715.00

Upward revision of global marine denitrification has led to speculation that
there may be a large imbalance in the marine nitrogen cycle. In addition, the
discovery of a new pathway (anaerobic ammonium oxidation, i.e., anammox) that
leads to the removal of fixed nitrogen from marine sediments and anoxic regions
of the water column has shaken long-held perceptions of the marine nitrogen
cycle. As with denitrification, anammox converts fixed nitrogen to nitrogen gas,
but does so without dissolved N2O as an intermediate stage. Large uncertainties
remain in our knowledge of the rates and magnitudes of these N-loss pathways in
oceanic oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) thus hampering efforts to constrain the
marine nitrogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at the
University of Washington will address this question: What is the in-situ rate
and magnitude of oxygen utilization, denitrification, and anammox in the oxygen
minimum zone of the Eastern Tropical South Pacific? They will approach this
problem by making three significant oceanographic measurements that can be
combined with an existing process study in the Eastern Tropical South Pacific
aimed at distinguishing and identifying controls on anammox and denitrification
in this region. First, they will measure water column distributions of dissolved
nutrients along the hydrographic sections to help characterize nutrient sources
and sinks in the oxygen minimum zone. Second, they will measure, to
unprecedented coverage, dissolved N2O along the hydrographic sections as a
diagnostic tracer for denitrification. Finally, they will measure transient
anthropogenic tracers (CFCs and SF6) to quantify ventilation and circulation
timescales within the OMZ. The tracer-derived timescales will be combined with
measurements of dissolved oxygen and nutrients to quantify in situ rates of
oxygen utilization and nutrient removal/regeneration. These rates will provide
benchmarks to the rates determined in-vitro during shipboard incubation studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will support an
undergraduate participant through the Joint Institute for Study of the
Atmosphere and Ocean (JISAO) summer internship program. JISAO typically supports
5-8 undergraduates to spend summer quarter in Seattle participating in
atmospheric and oceanic research;a project such as this would be attractive to
oceanography and chemistry majors in its technical aspects, and to journalism
students in its outreach activities. One of the principal investigators will
work with KUOW, the University of Washington public radio station, to design
brief public interest stories on ocean science. The intern's final project will
involve preparation of a brief radio segment for broadcast on KUOW on the
background, significance and findings of the first year's research efforts, and
participation in a scientific poster session with the other undergraduate
interns at JISAO.