* 1234589
* Motion Planning and Control for Shape Accelerated Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* George Kantor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop motion planners and
controllers that exploit the dynamics of balancing mobile robots to produce
fast, dynamic, graceful motions. The approach has two main components: the
development of elemental closed-loop motion policies and the development of a
hybrid control architecture that pieces the motion policies together to produce
more complex behaviors. Motion policies that respect the underlying dynamic
constraints of the system will be created by first planning trajectories in
shape space and then creating feedback controllers that track the resulting
trajectories. A planning layer that has an understanding of which motion
policies can be gracefully composed is used to determine motion sequences that
avoid obstacles and achieve some global navigation task. These sequences are
encoded in a graph, creating a hybrid control architecture that appropriately
switches between motion policies to achieve the desired global motion.
Deliverables include algorithm development, software, research documentation,
graduate student education, and demonstration of the resulting integrated system
on the human-sized ballbot balancing robot. The award will provide opportunities
for high- and middle-school girls to interact with balancing
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this award will increase the ability
of balancing robots to operate safely and agilely around humans. Balancing
robots have many properties that make them ideal candidates as human companions
and assistive robots. Unlike statically-stable mobile robots, balancing robots
can simultaneously be tall enough for eye-level interaction with humans and
narrow enough to negotiate cluttered environments. Balancing robots react
naturally when nudged and pushed around, making them unique platforms for
physical interaction with humans. The motion planning and control algorithms
developed in this project will provide a means for these robots to move in a
natural-looking manner through human environments. Results will be disseminated
promote further development of these technologies and to inspire the general
public. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit through direct
involvement in the research, and 7-12 grade girls will be engaged in activities
to explore the potential of balancing robots.