* 1234680
* Collaborative Research: Standards-Based Cyberinfrastructure for Hydrometeorological Modeling: US-European Research Partnership
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Richard Hooper, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 250,020.00

This project, Standards-based CyberInfrastructure for HydroMeteorology (SCIHM),
seeks to link two disciplines--hydrology and meteorology--each of which has a
sophisticated CI already developed within their respective disciplines. This
linkage will be accomplished with hydrometeorology use cases in Europe and
America that will be executed in both the European and American grid computing
environments using federated data and computing standards. With research and
development partners from several American and European institutions, the
project is designed to take advantage of standards-based CI for
hydrometeorological applications. In doing so, we will foster a unified
standards-based hydrometeorological infrastructure where researchers and
students from Europe and the US can rapidly simulate complex physical processes
and predict extreme weather events and their hydrological, environmental and
societal impacts, taking advantage of scalable on demand high-performance cloud-
based computational resources and shared data space. Computational and storage
layers will be seamlessly integrated with standards-based domain data services,
analysis tools and models, enabling researchers and practitioners to quickly
tune predictive models to their areas of interest, discover and access
distributed sources of information, and engage in a collaborative analysis and
interpretation of prediction results. This project will engage the broader
hydrologic and meteorologic research community through CUAHSI and UCAR, the
respective university consortia for these disciplines, as well as European
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to
identify current shortcomings in the workflow of existing community-based
hydrometeorological prediction systems and to remedy those shortcomings through
strategic cyberinfrastructure enhancements. There is presently a dire need for
earth system scientists to have at their disposal computational systems that are
accessible, extensible and scalable for a wide range of research and prediction
problems. This project will directly link high-performance computing that
supports standards- based management of advanced computing and storage
resources, with distributed service-oriented cyberinfrastructure designs.
Creating such a capability will permit better depiction of complex earth system
processes in models, allow for improved characterization of model and data
uncertainties and will greatly facilitate hypothesis testing, ultimately
resulting in improved predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One principle goal of
this project is to vastly expand data access and computational access through
standards-based cyberinfrastructure development. The broader impact of meeting
this goal is placing powerful environmental prediction tools into the hands of
researchers and decision makers around the world, in places where such
capabilities simply cannot presently exist. The cyberinfrastructure enhancements
delivered by this project will greatly streamline the hydrometeorological
modeling process and accelerate cloud computing in the earth sciences.
Development of this cyberinfrastructure within a rigorous standards-based
environment will also encourage its adoption by operational government agencies
which can directly benefit from it. Ultimately, the improved modeling capacity
should drive improved predictive capabilities for floods and droughts by
fostering a more accurate prediction system that captures the underlying
physical and biological processes controlling water transport.