* 1234228
* Multi-Criteria Disaster Vulnerability Assessment: Critical Infrastructure, Human Behavior, and Public Policy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Judith Mitrani-Reiser, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2016
* USD 380,001.00

Engineers often quantify disaster vulnerability solely based on the physical
integrity of the civil infrastructure in a community and the subsequent impact
of structural failures caused by disaster-related damage. However, the knowledge
of occupants about their built environment and its vulnerability to disasters as
well as the quality of institutional emergency planning will play significant
roles in measuring vulnerability. Additionally, safety policy implementation
that dictates risk mitigation measures, whether they are retrofits of buildings
or emergency training of staff, will also contribute to the overall
quantification of vulnerability. The purpose of this project is to develop the
tools necessary to model the risk of critical infrastructure to natural hazards
in terms of vulnerability of the physical infrastructure, the disaster
preparedness of building occupants, and the safety policies and implementation
that govern these areas. We will combine public health, social science, and
engineering disciplines to develop an agent-based model that captures the
performance of structures and the behavior of individuals in those buildings
during and immediately following a seismic event. Our computational framework
will also simulate the implementation of current safety legislation, and will be
used to compare the vulnerability of various critical infrastructure systems; we
will also test future preparedness intervention strategies and model guidelines
not yet in place. The assessment framework developed in the project will guide
other systems-level work in exploring new methods for quantifying community
vulnerability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative framework for assessing
disaster vulnerability proposed here will serve as a vehicle to bring together
cutting-edge research and education from various disciplines: disaster
infrastructure risk assessment, emergency preparedness of health workers, and
public health law and policy. The incorporation of the agent-based model
developed in this project into a visualization tool to redesign existing
training exercises ensures transparency in the methodology as well as broad
dissemination of the work to other researchers and the healthcare community.
Additionally, this project will also target education and mentoring of students
from the K-12 level to the post-graduate level: the Sensor Technology and
Infrastructure Risk Mitigation (STIRM) Laboratory will host earthquake-
engineering clinics for K-12 students; the PI will teach her undergraduate
course in the new experimental learning facility at Johns Hopkins University,
the "eStudio," designed to promote an active teaching and learning environment;
the principal investigators will guest lecture in each other's graduate courses
to ensure the education of a future generation of professionals in
multidisciplinary thinking; and the PIs will serve as mentors in the new EERI
post-graduation internship program to educate recent graduates in
multidisciplinary research methods.