* 1234936
* Collaborative Research: Planning Reliable and Resilient Transportation Networks against Correlated Infrastructure Disruptions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Xiaopeng Li, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 10/31/2015
* USD 174,586.00

This collaborative research project aims to discover a methodological framework
that enhances the reliability and resilience of transportation network
infrastructure systems that are exposed to multiple linked disruption risks.
Such linked risks could be caused by exposure to common hazards or shared
unreliable supplies. We will first establish a decomposition theory that
transforms a general infrastructure system with linked facility disruption risks
into one with a simpler and more explicit structure with only independent
disruptions, yet ensuring that the two systems have exactly equivalent
functionalities and operational behaviors. Based on this theoretical foundation,
a set of advanced mathematical models will be created to address a number of
pressing engineering challenges, including (i) reliable network design, (ii)
critical infrastructure protection, and (iii) cascading failure mitigation. Case
studies from real-world infrastructure systems (e.g., bridge networks exposed to
earthquakes, electricity grids experiencing power plant disruptions) will be
used to validate the proposed theory and illustrate the practical applicability
of these models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will (i) advance the knowledge base needed to address a wide range of
infrastructure disruptions in many engineering contexts, (ii) provide managerial
insights that hold the promise of enhancing the reliability and resilience of
various infrastructure systems. This will have impacts not only on
transportation and manufacturing industries but also on social communities. This
project will also result in new educational practices by the integration of the
research into educational materials and activities, including a new role-playing
game for interactive teaching focused on infrastructure disruption mechanisms
and protection strategies. Collaborations with public agencies (e.g. state
Departments of Transportation) and private freight and manufacturing industries
(e.g. CSX Transportation Inc. and Caterpillar Inc.) will help assure that the
proposed research and educational activities are of practical relevance and
importance, and that the outcomes are readily implementable.