* 1234237
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying and Correlating Pathogens and a Poultry Feces Marker Gene in Environmental Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Valerie Harwood, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 166,904.00

1234366/1234237&lt;br/&gt;Weidhaas/Harwood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 10,000 US
water bodies are impaired under section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act due to
fecal contamination, as evidenced by fecal indicator bacteria. Agricultural
practices, including land spreading of approximately 1.6 billion kg of poultry
litter (soiled bedding) per year as a fertilizer, were the leading probable
source of water quality impairments in the US in 2008. Poultry litter (bedding
contaminated with feces) contains pathogens which can impact environmental
waters when constituents of land-applied poultry run off during storms. Degraded
water quality leads to regulatory action (impairment), eutrophication, altered
ecosystem structure, and fish kills due to the planned application, and in some
cases mismanagement, of poultry litter as a fertilizer. Microbial source
tracking methods can be used to more accurately determine the source of
impairment to water bodies, and to circumvent known issues and inadequacies in
fecal indicator bacteria-based pathogen monitoring and fecal pollution source
identification. Detection of microorganisms specific to one animal's feces,
a.k.a. a marker, in receiving water enhances environmental stewardship by
allowing watershed managers to investigate and remediate only the most likely
sources of fecal pollution. Development and validation of rapid methods to
conclusively determine whether land-applied poultry litter is in runoff is a
crucial need for watershed management across the U.S. These methods are widely
sought by regulatory agencies and others concerned with water quality beach
advisories/closures, TMDL formulation, and remediation of contaminated
waterways. This research will critically evaluate 1) a poultry litter marker
gene?s correlation with pathogens and fecal indicator bacteria originating from
poultry feces and litter and 2) the fate, transport and inactivation of the
marker gene and human pathogens under environmentally relevant conditions.
Specific studies will be conducted to determine the correlation and survival of
poultry litter associated pathogens, fecal indicator bacteria, and the poultry
litter marker derived from the 16S rRNA gene of Brevibacterium sp. LA35. These
studies will be conducted in soiled poultry litter and feces, in laboratory
mesocosms simulating environmental exposure, and in field-scale, simulated
rainfall runoff studies. At the completion of this project the research will
have critically evaluated the value of the poultry litter marker gene as a tool
to identify poultry litter contamination in water bodies, as well as the
marker's utility in assessing risk to humans from exposure to water containing
poultry litter and its associated pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The completed
study is expected to have a significant positive impact on the efficacy of
monitoring of water bodies for poultry litter contamination and human pathogens
originating from runoff contaminated by poultry litter. This research will lead
to the development of a tool that allows accurate measurement and modeling of
non-point source pollution from land-applied poultry litter, including better
estimates of human health risk from such contamination. In the long term, this
research will provide water quality managers with a rapid and quantitative tool
for identifying pollution sources and for determining appropriate poultry litter
application rates to agricultural fields, which will ultimately lead to lower
public exposure to human pathogens as a result of poultry litter management.