* 1234826
* Travel Support for Workshop on Gravitational Wave Tests of Alternative Theories of Gravity in the Advanced Detector Era at Montana State University April 5-7, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Nicolas Yunes, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

The Scientific Workshop supported by this award will be focused on creative and
potentially transformative research, constituting the first dedicated effort to
test Einstein's theory with gravitational waves. This is an essential step to
exploit the full potential of gravitational wave detection. This type of
research is also timely and relevant, in view of upcoming, advanced detectors
and the dawn of gravitational wave astrophysics. The objectives delineated above
align perfectly with the Principal Investigator Yunes' long-term goals, who has
years of experience building up to this objective. The impact of gravitational
waves signaling a systematic departure from Einstein's predictions is clearly
breathtaking. But the lack of a departure from Einstein's theory would also
constitute a huge step for Science, proving for once and for all that Einstein's
theory is also valid in the most extreme gravitational scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational wave astrophysics is entering a new era of
discovery and exploration, with first detections expected within the next few
years with Advanced LIGO, the ground-based interferometer in the United States.
One of the key missions of LIGO is to test Einstein's theory of General
Relativity where it has never been tested before: where the gravitational force
is enormous relative to Earth's or the Sun's pull. Such a task is achievable
because gravitational waves encode information about this force when black holes
and neutron stars collide in the Milky Way and nearby galaxies. The main
objective of this award is to fund a scientific workshop that will bring
together experts in gravitational wave theory and data analysis, together with
experts in modified gravity theories, to discuss how the discovery of
gravitational waves can be leveraged to learn more about Einstein's theory. This
event is part of a broader outreach initiative, called "Celebrating Einstein",
to be held in Bozeman Montana in April 2013.