* 1234191
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Pacific Section - Nd isotopes and REEs in the South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Brian Haley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2017
* USD 274,188.00

Neodymium isotopes (Nd) and rare earth elements (REE) are recognized by the
GEOTRACES program as key trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) because they trace
the sources and mixing of water masses. Therefore, transport data generated by
Nd measurements will potentially advance our understanding on the dominant
processes that drive TEI distribution in the ocean. There is a particular need
for Nd measurements in the South Pacific because current observations do not
agree with GCM models. Researchers from Columbia University and Oregon State
University will analyze seawater, aerosols, water column particulates, and sea-
floor sediments for Nd, strontrium, and REE during the upcoming 2013 GEOTRACES
cruise. Because of the geographical transect of the GEOTRACES Pacific section
cruise, investigators will assess impacts made by a suite of biological,
chemical, and physical processes including: boundary exchange, high
productivity, surface addition from aerosols, addition to bottom waters from
detached nephloid layers, particles from hydrothermal vents, reversible
scavenging, and groundwater fluxes. Furthermore, within the Peru-Chili Oxygen
Minimum Zone (OMZ), investigators will utilize the TEI cerium to better
understand relative effects of lateral and vertical processes. By improving
understanding of the distribution of TEIs, results will also enhance
biogeochemical models and advance knowledge of climate systems. Broader Impacts:
Research will advance careers of two young scientists, support education and
training of Ph.D. and undergraduate students, and provide materials for outreach
activities. Additionally, results will be published in scientific journals and
all data will be submitted to the Biological and Chemical Oceanography Data
Management Office.