* 1234696
* Electrical Discharge Machining of Biomedical Nitinol Alloys and the Resulting Fundamental Relationship of Microstructure-Property-Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Yuebin Guo, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 370,000.00

The research objective of this proposal is to understand the basic relationship
between machining conditions, white layer (that is, recast layer), and fatigue
and corrosion by electrical discharge machining of biomedical Nitinol alloys by
bringing together complementary international research and education expertise.
It will test the hypothesis that electrical discharge machining using minimum
discharge energy is a very competitive process compared to mechanical machining
to economically fabricate delicate burr-free Nitinol microstructures with high
aspect ratio and excellent surface finish. The research approaches are to: (1)
explore the process capability in electrical discharge machining of biomedical
Nitinol alloys to establish a basic relationship between processing conditions
and surface integrity; (2) determine whether the white layer is metastable nano-
quasicrystal using transmission electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction; (3)
clarify the fundamental role of process-induced surface integrity, white layer
in particular, on fatigue and corrosion performance; and (4) reveal material
erosion mechanism and microstructural evolution in electrical discharging via a
multiphysics process simulation approach with the capability of material
ablation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will have a wide spectrum of
impacts on machining of a broad range of other difficult-to-cut materials
including titanium, Inconel, stainless steel, and hardened alloys. The sound
sustainable practices in electrical discharge machining of metallic biomaterials
can bring business value to biomedical device industry as well as tool, gas
turbine, chemical and oil industries. The project will establish a synergistic
education network between the University of Alabama and Aachen University to
train the next cadre of ?whole-brain? students in the global context. The
collaborative network will also provide an express way for fast technology
transfer from fundamental research to industrial practices.