* 1234976
* Novel Supercapacitors with Ultrahigh Energy Densities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Leon Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 10/31/2012
* USD 333,857.00

PI: Shaw, Leon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1234976&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;Title: Novel Supercapacitors with Ultrahigh
Energy Densities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of both electric vehicles and
renewable energy requires energy storage systems that have high energy density
and power density simultaneously with superior cycle life and low cost. It is
well known that batteries typically provide high energy densities but with low
power capacities, whereas capacitors normally have high power densities but with
low energy capacities. However, for widespread market penetration of electric
vehicles, particularly for plug-in hybrid vehicles and all electrical vehicles,
high energy density is required for long driving distance, while high power
density is needed for rapid recharge. Thus, the growing need for both high
energy density and high power density cannot be met simultaneously with the
existing storage technology. This project is proposed to solve these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a new generation of
electrochemical capacitors, also termed supercapacitors (SCs), will be
investigated and developed. Through innovative design and manufacturing of the
electrode architecture, the key principles for making assembled SCs that have
specific energy equivalent to those of batteries (~85 Wh/kg) while possessing
ultrahigh rate performance (i.e., charging and discharging in a few minutes)
will be established. These underlying principles can be applied in the future to
construct SCs with even higher specific energies when the next-generation design
of the electrode chemistry and nanostructure becomes available. Recent
advancements in the electrode chemistry and nanostructure have revealed that SCs
with high energy densities similar to those of batteries (e.g., 85 Wh/kg) are
possible if the energy density is computed based on the active electrode
materials alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, the high energy density based on
the active electrode materials alone is very difficult to be translated into
assembled devices with the similar high energy density. Assembled SCs, like Li-
ion batteries, contain current collectors, electrolyte, separator, binder,
connectors, and packaging, in addition to the electrodes. As a result, the
energy density of an assembled device is typically lower than that of the active
material by a factor of 3 to 4 or more. The proposed SCs in this project with
interpenetrating positive and negative electrodes will solve this challenging
problem precisely. Due to the innovative design of the electrode architecture,
the thickness, width and height of electrodes can be made as large as possible
until electronic conductivity becomes rate limiting. With this transformative
technology, the PI will convert the high energy density based on the active
electrode material into a comparable high energy density for an assembled
device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of this project will manifest in
three fronts. First, the new generation SCs with unprecedented energy densities
and superior rate performance are expected to revolutionize the field of energy
storage and expedite the market penetration of electric vehicles and utilization
of renewable energy, enabling major leaps to ensure our nation?s long-term
energy security and a clean environment. Second, this project will provide
excellent education and training opportunity to one graduate student and many
undergraduate students in the areas of energy storage and alternative energy.
Third, this project will make contributions to public education about nano-
manufacturing and alternative energy.