* 1234033
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variegated Geographies of Ecological Urbanization: Eco-Cities in the Global South and the Global North
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Eric Sheppard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,989.00

This doctoral dissertation project considers the emergence of green urbanism, as
articulated through the concept of eco-cities, and its circulation between the
Global North (Europe and North America), and parts of the Global South (Asia).
Eco-cities, building cities as sustainable ecological systems, have been widely
embraced as the solution to hyper-urbanization and urban environmental problems
across the globe. Its basic tenets were developed from the post-industrial
experiences of North American and Western European cities. Yet when the eco-city
paradigm is applied beyond the Western world, it must negotiate locally specific
contexts, including local political landscapes and locally specific planning
logics and cultures. This research examines whether and how eco-cities in China
exemplify such variegated ecological urbanization, and whether and how Chinese
eco-cities also generate novel ecological urbanization norms that circulate back
into the Global North via international planning communities and policy
networks. Through a comparative study of the Dongtan Eco-City project in
Shanghai (a China-UK collaboration) and Binhai Eco-City under construction in
Tianjin (a China-Singapore collaboration), this research will elucidate the
particular forms of ecological urbanization emerging in China via its most
prominent eco-city projects, and their relationship to eco-city principles
developed in Europe and North America. The research utilizes a multi-sited
(Shanghai, Tianjin, Singapore, London), multi-method research design, including
archival research, semi-structured and open-ended interviews with key
informants, and participant observation. Designed as an urban comparison, it
examines how connectivities between the four research sites shape what happens
at each node. The research will also assess the adequacy of western urban and
sustainability theories for explaining newly emergent ecological urbanization
paradigms in the Global South.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides new
insights into the functioning of green urbanism regimes in China, of which there
is limited knowledge to date, and into how eco-city models become differentiated
and variegated as they move beyond North America and Europe. The work will
contribute knowledge on transnational policy transfer and urban policy mobility,
advancing the understanding of the contemporary diffusion and dissemination of
ecological urbanization agendas. The findings will be of interest to planners
and urban policy makers internationally, since these case studies are
increasingly presented in the international community as 'best practice' models
of ecological urbanization. As American cities strategize about becoming more
ecologically sustainable, it will be important to understand the successes and
failures of existing eco-city initiatives elsewhere, and their applicability to
the US context. Research results will be distributed widely to a variety of
different academic and professional audiences, through academic and other
English and Chinese venues of publication. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
graduate student to establish an independent research career.