* 1234057
* Collaborative Research: The Next-Generation Electricity Capacity and Transmission Expansion Model with Large-Scale Energy Storage and Renewable Resources
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Andrew Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 208,505.00

The objective of this project is to use a multistage and multiscale stochastic
programming approach to provide optimal solutions for long-term electricity
infrastructure expansion under future uncertainties, incorporating fine temporal
and spatial resolution of electricity market operations. This work will address
the challenges of integrating large-scale renewable energy and energy storage
resources into the electricity grid, to minimize costs and simultaneously ensure
system reliability. Using a hybrid of here-and-now and wait-and-see types of
modeling approaches, the proposed framework will incorporate engineering and
operational details of electricity systems into long-term expansion models that
would otherwise be computationally impractical. The resulting model is a
multistage stochastic mixed-integer program. The model's multiscale feature
makes it highly structured and decomposable. Algorithms proposed to solve the
model will be based on strong reformulation and nested Dantzig-Wolfe
decomposition, which are expected to greatly enhance computing speed, and
consequently, advance the state-of-the-art of decomposition methods for solving
large-scale problems with similar structures.

If the project is successful, it will provide planning authorities the most
advanced electricity system modeling tools. Through established industrial
collaboration, the proposed work holds great potential to transform the current
planning practice in the electricity sector, resulting in substantial savings to
consumers, improved system reliability, and sustainable power systems. Such
systems are expected to have a high penetration of renewable energy, energy
storage, and demand-side resources. The modeling and computational framework
will also provide an efficient methodology for a broad class of strategic
planning problems beyond the electricity sector that exhibit multiscale
characteristics. The research findings will be integrated into curriculum
development and be disseminated widely to encourage testing and collaboration
over the broad scientific community. The project also includes detailed plans to
involve underrepresented groups in all aspects of this research through
established institutional diversification and outreach programs.