* 1234983
* SAVI: PRAGMA - Enabling Scientific Expeditions and Infrastructure Experimentation for Pacific Rim Institutions and Researchers
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2020
* Nadya Williams, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 6,466,479.00

The Pacific Rim Applications and Grid Middleware Assembly (PRAGMA), which began
as a workshop series, explores the technical, organizational, and trust
dimensions that enable small-to-medium-sized international networks of research
scientists to address common scientific questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award uses international scientific expeditions to forge teams of domain
scientists and cyberinfrastructure researchers. Together, they develop and test
the underlying technologies that are needed to create usable, international-
scale, cyber environments. This award includes not only technology developers
but also domain scientists in lake ecology, biodiversity and computer-aided drug
discovery. In technology development, the award will: rebuild PRAGMA's technical
infrastructure as a multi-provider/multi-institution cloud with a unique control
approach; test and develop new analysis and provenance tools to track how data
are utilized by the expeditions; enhance data sharing with user-controlled trust
envelopes enabled by IPv4 and IPv6 overlay networks; and advance sensor network
cyberinfrastructure. Education and training programs will be dramatically
expanded through an international student association. New collaborations with a
refined focus on common questions that affect India, China, and Southeast Asia
will be developed as expeditions. This award broadens engagement of US
researchers through a partnership that includes: University of Florida, Indiana
University, University of Wisconsin, and led by the University of California,
San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRAGMA complements key international research
network activities and large-scale production resources. It leverages
significant investments in people, expertise, tools and infrastructure made by
international members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is developing
practical approaches to enable groups to collaborate through the
cyberinfrastructure. The broader impacts are to fundamentally enable large
numbers of small groups to work together on scientific problems where
international perspective is essential; better inform the US research community
of tools and experts out-side of the US; and create professional networks for
the next generation of students. The transformational impact will be a model for
building people networks to conduct science across international
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is designated as a Science Across
Virtual Institutes (SAVI) and is being co-funded by NSF's Office of
Cyberinfrastructure; Directorate for Biological Sciences; Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering; and Office of International
Science and Engineering.