* 1234294
* Time Series Particle Flux Measurements in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Maureen Conte, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,393,179.00

Understanding ocean variability over interannual and decadal time-scales is of
widespread interest and increasing relevance given the concerns over
anthropogenic perturbations of global climate and ocean chemistry due to
increases in greenhouse gases. The contributions of long-term observations to
our understanding of how the ocean works are numerous and far-reaching. Yet,
such studies are exceedingly rare- especially those with a biogeochemical and
deep ocean focus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1978, the Oceanic Flux Program
(OFP), originally founded and managed by at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and now managed by the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Science (BIOS),
has continuously measured particle fluxes in the deep Sargasso Sea. The 34+ year
OFP time-series is, by far, the longest of its kind and unique in its focus on
the deep ocean. OFP has produced a unique, albeit "edited", record of temporal
variability in the "biological pump", a term loosely applied here to material
transfer from the surface to the deep ocean. The OFP provided the first direct
evidence for seasonality in the deep ocean and the tight coupling between deep
fluxes and upper ocean processes. It has provided clear evidence of the
intensity of biological reprocessing of flux and scavenging of suspended
material in mesopelagic waters. The record has documented interannual and longer
variations in deep fluxes and shorter term fluctuations driven by the
interactions between mesoscale physical variability, meteorological forcing and
ecosystem responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide three more
years of funding for this unique and fundamental oceanographic time-series. As
the record lengthens, we are better able to put into perspective the observed
flux patterns in terms of the interplay between climate and ocean functioning.
The colocation of complementary research programs at the Bermuda Time-Series
Site: the OFP, the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series (BATS), the Bermuda Testbed
Mooring (BTM, 1994-2007), as well as new advances in ship-based, moored and
autonomous observational capabilities at the site present unparalleled
opportunities to study the coupled interactions among ocean physics, biology and
chemistry and material fluxes, and how these in turn are linked to atmospheric
and climatic forcing. New information about ocean biogeochemistry, preserved as
chemical signals in recovered flux materials, continues to be revealed as ever
more sophisticated analytical research tools are applied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: (1) Systematic, long-term biogeochemical
observations, such as those provided by the OFP, are essential to gain an
understanding of natural oceanic variability and to provide a reference point in
which to interpret the repercussions of possible future climate change
scenarios. (2) Previous NSF review panels have recognized the OFP as an
invaluable "community resource". The OFP will continue to share its resources-
sample material, data, ancillary ship time, and use of the mooring platform-
with researchers and students to make possible a diverse range of investigations
at a very low cost to the community. (3) The OFP sample archive is a rare
treasure. The sample material to be collected will continue to be invaluable for
current and future biogeochemical and climate research. (4) Educational
experiences provided by the OFP broaden the research experiences and science
directions of many young students and early investigators at critical junctures
in their careers. Of particular value are opportunities to become directly
involved with observational oceanography, time-series research and integrated
ship- and mooring-based research activities occurring at the Bermuda Time Series
site