* 1234096
* DMREF: Multifunctional Interfacial Materials by Design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Evgeny Tsymbal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,600,000.00

Technical Description: Complex oxides have been fertile ground for new
discoveries, due particularly to their wide-ranging electronic, optical, and
magnetic properties. Interfaces between complex oxides and related materials
create juxtapositions between different symmetries and ordered states, and it
has become clear that these interfaces are new materials in their own right and
lead to dramatically different properties from those in bulk. This project
focuses on an iterative cooperation between forefront theory and experiment that
determines the fundamental principles controlling new physical phenomena at
oxide interfaces, uses these principles to design couplings between multiple
orders at interfaces to generate new functionalities, and experimentally
synthesizes and investigates designed interfacial materials for novel electronic
devices. These atomic-scale interfacial materials can lead to, for example, new
classes of electric-field controllable electronic and magnetic phenomena, and
enable the development of new technologically important devices that exploit
these couplings. Using a predictive theory and modeling, and feedback to theory
from experiments, the research team aims to design, understand, and synthesize
novel oxide hetero-interfaces that have unique properties not presently
available.

Non-technical Description: New approaches to the discovery of materials
displaying novel properties are critical for the continued scientific progress
in condensed matter science and applications. This project addresses this need
with a focus on "oxide interfacial materials," those formed at and near the
atomically abrupt boundary between two oxygen-based materials, each of which can
exhibit a stunning array of phenomena such as magnetism, piezoelectric behavior,
superconductivity, and structural ordering. At the interface, interactions
between these functionalities give rise to unexplored nanoscale behaviors. These
new interfacial materials are some of the most promising in which to realize new
phenomena that will challenge our current understanding, and that will develop
new electronic device directions to address our society's technology needs. The
project brings a broad educational experience to all students, interacting with
faculty members of this research team at five universities, working with
scientists at National Laboratories and international institutions, and
participating in outreach activities. The faculty and graduate students work
with secondary school teachers from the US and Puerto Rico to develop classroom
material based on their materials genome learning/research experience.