* 1234297
* Multi-Physics Modeling and Experimental Characterization of Needleless Electrospinning for Scalable Nanofiber Production
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Xiangfa Wu, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 218,324.00

This grant provides funding for research enabling the development of a fully
three-dimensional multiphysics phase-field model and related experimentation for
understanding of the electrohydrodynamic process of needleless electrospinning.
Needleless electrospinning, based on free liquid-surface jetting, is a novel
low-cost, top-down nanomanufacturing technique capable of continuous, scalable
production of nanofibers of natural and synthetic polymers and polymer-derived
carbon, ceramics, semiconductors, metals, metal oxides, etc. for broad
applications in filtration, biomedical engineering, energy conversion and
storage, nanocomposites, and so on. The developed computational model formulates
a generalized free energy of an electrospinning system that is capable of
uniformly treating the multiphysics, multiphase phenomenon of the process
including multi-jet initiation, jet stretching, phase separation, drying, etc.
The developed phase-field model can overcome the numerical difficulty in
tracking the instantaneous profile of the liquid surface after multi-jetting and
pore formation. Efficient semi-implicit spectral algorithm will be used for
fast, robust numerical simulation. The model will determine several key
parameters used in needleless electrospinning and be validated by controlled
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results will establish
solid theoretical foundation for needleless electrospinning and the predictive
computational model will generate a wealth of fundamental knowledge for design,
optimization and control of needleless electrospinning and other
electrohydrodynamics-related devices (e.g., electrospray) for reliable,
efficient, mass production. The results will benefit the computer-aided
electrospinning engineering (CAEE) in education, research and industrial
applications. The research provides a variety of opportunities for graduates and
undergraduates, specially unrepresented minorities including Native American
students and female students, to involve in the cutting-edge nanotechnology and
computational materials science. The research will be demonstrated to K-12
students and students in the regional Native American tribal colleges. The
results will be used for updating the relevant undergraduate and graduate
curriculum materials and the development of a new cross-listed course at North
Dakota State University.