* 1234155
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Bifurcation With Applications In Cardiac Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Xiaopeng Zhao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 231,069.00

The objective of this collaborative research is to explore the full potential
and limitations of border-collision models in describing cardiac alternans. The
project will develop a theoretical understanding of nonsmooth bifurcations as
unfoldings of piecewise smooth problems, which will allow a more complete
comprehension of the relation between a piecewise smooth bifurcation problem and
the original smooth one. The theory developed in the present project will be
applied to existing and new cardiac models to examine hybrid smooth/nonsmooth
bifurcation to alternans. Theoretical and numerical predictions will be
validated experimentally using isolated cardiac myocytes as well as whole
isolated rabbit hearts to explore physiological mechanisms accounting for hybrid
phenomena in cardiac dynamics.

Cardiac alternans is a marker of ventricular fibrillation, a fatal heart rhythm
that is one of the leading causes of mortality in the Western world.
Mathematical analyses combined with experimental studies of this research may
lead to new insights on the physiological mechanism of alternans and therefore
will impact the diagnosis and treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. The developed
bifurcation techniques will provide new approaches to other nonsmooth problems
in engineering and biology such as vibro-impacting systems, systems with
friction, and switching in electrical circuits. The research program will train
graduate and undergraduate students in a multidisciplinary environment giving
them the ability to use nonlinear analyses to understand complexities in
engineering and biological systems. The outreach activities will expose high
school students to mathematical biology and nonlinear ways of thinking.