* 1234768
* Collaborative Research: Damage Tolerant 3-D Periodic Interpenetrating Phase Composites with Enhanced Mechanical Performance - Design, Fabrication, Analysis and Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Lifeng Wang, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 04/30/2014
* USD 201,224.00

The research objective of this award is to study high-performance carbon-polymer
periodic interpenetrating phase composites (IPCs) with enhanced mechanical
properties (including stiffness, strength, impact resistance, toughness, energy
dissipation, and damage tolerance) through an integrated approach combining
design, fabrication, analysis and experiment. Geometries based on triply
periodic minimal surfaces and 3-D microtrusses will be used to optimally design
microstructures of the proposed IPCs, and 3-D direct-write printing technologies
will be employed to fabricate them. Analytical and computational micromechanics
models will be developed to simulate the IPCs, and various tests will be
conducted to characterize the fabricated IPCs and to validate the proposed
models. It is anticipated that the findings of this proposed research will
provide guidelines for engineering and tailoring IPCs to achieve optimized
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of the proposed
research will lead to new structure-property-function relationships needed for
achieving new and improved mechanical properties of IPCs, thereby significantly
improving our current understanding of IPCs with enhanced mechanical
performance. The proposed project will provide a demonstration of the modern
concept of materials-by-design. It will offer an example of futuristic composite
material technology. The research methodology, tools, and results generated in
this project will be documented and used to improve both undergraduate and
graduate curricula, which will enable engineering students to access cutting-
edge research facilities and acquire new knowledge. The integrated educational
plan will greatly enhance the students' learning experience, challenge their
intellectual curiosity and motivate them to pursue careers in research and
education. New findings will be made available on the Internet and to K-12
students through outreach activities.