* 1234664
* Nitrogen isotopic (d15N) composition of carbonate-bound organic nitrogen in Deep Sea Corals:  A new, high resolution proxy for N cycle studies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Maria Prokopenko, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 355,692.00

The history of the nitrogen (N) cycle provides insight into the links between
past climate and marine biogeochemical cycles. Interpretations of the history of
the N cycle rely on the nitrogen isotopic composition (del15N) of Particulate
Organic Nitrogen (del15N-PON) preserved in sedimentary "archives" such as: bulk
organic nitrogen (ON) buried under suboxic/anoxic conditions in rapidly
accumulating, organic-rich sediments; skeletal-bound ON in diatom frustules and
foraminiferal tests, and organic skeletons of deep-sea proteinaceous corals. As
is often is the case with paleo-proxies, these archives have distinct advantages
and limitations, the latter including the restricted geographic occurrence of
suboxic/anoxic sediments, limited temporal resolution due to bioturbation of
sediments containing diatoms and foraminifera, and the limited time span for
survival of the soft tissues of corals. Therefore, a multi-proxy approach is
highly desirable for better understanding the patterns and causes of N cycle
variability in the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve upon the geographic
and temporal resolution of del15N paleo-records, a scientist from Pomona
College, collaborating with research groups from Claremont-McKenna College and
Princeton University, will evaluate a new proxy for the history of the marine N
cycle-- del15N of ON bound within the mineral lattice of deep-sea corals. Deep-
sea corals can record both short-term regional and longer-term global
variability in the N cycle. These organisms grow slowly, can be dated with a
precision of &lt;100 years, and have broad geographic distribution. Moreover, as
demonstrated by previous research, the ON bound within the carbonate lattice is
protected from diagenetic alteration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By analyzing coral
specimens from disparate oceanographic environments, each chosen to represent a
distinct del15N signature of PON exported from the euphotic zone, the
researchers will determine whether the del15N of coral-bound ON reflects N
isotopic composition of PON exported from the surface ocean. Furthermore, time-
resolved records of del15N of coral-bound ON will be generated in fossil
scleractinian deep-sea corals of established ages and compared to published
del15N records based on more traditional proxies on decadal to millennial time
scales. Much uncertainty currently exists as to which of the pools of exported
PON (suspended vs. sinking) is the main food source for deep-sea corals. This
issue will be addressed by comparing the del15N of modern corals from variable
depths to the del15N of both suspended and sinking PON pools collected during
several one-day cruises to San Pedro basin, one of the California Borderland
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project will support two early
career female scientists and several undergraduate student research assistants
from Pomona College and the new Climate Science lab in the Keck Science
Department (including Claremont McKenna, Scripps, and Pitzer Colleges). Students
will have an opportunity to participate in short research cruises to the San
Pedro basin, to be trained in advanced analytical techniques, and present
research at conferences. The results of this study will be used as topics for
senior theses and independent study projects, extending the educational
experience by exposing undergraduate students to both practical and intellectual
aspects of climate-focused research.