* 1234070
* Model-Driven Process Guidance to Improve the Safety and Efficiency of Human-Intensive Healthcare Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lori Clarke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 326,336.00

The research objective of this Advancing Health Services through System Modeling
Research project is to develop and evaluate health information technology (IT)
interfaces that can be used to guide healthcare providers in real-time as they
complete the complex, error-prone blood transfusion process. The researchers
will determine how the interfaces should be designed to best help individuals
complete the process safely, and to effectively alert and guide individuals when
process failures or exceptional situations arise. The researchers will develop
and evaluate these interfaces using laboratory-based evaluations and experiments
in a realistic clinical setting. This project will establish foundational
principles for the design of real-time health IT-based process guidance systems
that improve healthcare process safety and efficiency. While health IT has the
potential to guide individuals completing complex healthcare processes, it is
often inflexible, forcing individuals to perform non-ideal, inefficient, and
potentially unsafe processes. This project has the potential to dramatically
reduce medical errors by designing health IT interfaces that allow individuals
flexibility in the way they complete processes, yet provide enough guidance to
maintain a high level of process safety. While this project focuses on the blood
transfusion process, the fundamental findings will be generalizable to other
complex healthcare processes. Through this project, graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained by an interdisciplinary team of engineering, computer
science, and nursing faculty members. The process guidance system and interfaces
developed and evaluated through this project will be integrated into clinical
simulation laboratory exercises used in the university?s nursing education
curriculum.