* 1234830
* Carbon Nanotube-Based Sensing Composites: A Novel Distributed Sensing Approach for Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Erik Thostenson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The project proposes to investigate and develop carbon nanotube/polymer-
impregnated fabric for structural health monitoring (SHM). The idea is to attach
the fabric to a structural member in buildings and bridges to monitor
deformations and cracks in the member continuously and trigger an alarm when
they exceed a certain critical level. Because the fabric is continuous, the
deformations and cracks can be measured on all the surfaces where the fabric is
applied. This development, if successful, can be a significant advancement
toward sustainable buildings and structures. A particular effort is aimed at
recruiting talented students from underrepresented groups and Women in
Engineering (WIE) programs. There is a close university/industry interaction
which will facilitate rapid technology transfer between basic science and
technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the
integration of carbon nanotube-based sensing technology into structural health
monitoring (SHM) systems for civil structures and buildings. Carbon nanotube
sensing layers consist of a conductive network structure that enables nerve-like
distributed sensing capabilities. The sensing concept is based on utilizing
electrically conductive carbon nanotube networks integrated into the polymer
matrix of a textile composite. Carbon nanotube-based sensors have a number of
unique characteristics as compared to traditional SHM sensors, such as strain
gages, accelerometers, or displacement sensors, and are extremely well suited
for distributed sensing. Preliminary work by has shown that the novel sensor is
(1) extremely sensitive to strain and micro-damage, (2) applicable to a wide
range of geometries, and (3) robust and functional well into the non-linear
structural behavior. Research in sensor processing, characterization and
modeling, sensor response and data analysis, and model testing of components as
well as complete structures will be performed. The proposed research is a
multidisciplinary collaboration and builds upon the strengths of the two
investigators in structural health monitoring and structural mechanics and in
nanostructured composites and sensors.