* 1234503
* Integrating Hazard Resistant Design with Green Building Design for Life-Cycle Improvements in Building Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Abbie Liel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,854.00

This research aims to discover a framework that incorporates hazard resistant
principles in green building design. Green building design attempts to reduce
the environmental impacts of buildings, the construction and operation of which
contributes significantly to total U.S. energy and water usage and waste
generated. Buildings that are vulnerable to natural hazards are in direct
conflict with green building ideals, because disaster-damaged buildings generate
additional waste and require extra resources for repair. The core component of
the proposed research is the formulation of a life-cycle assessment methodology
that incorporates building environmental impacts and building hazard resistance.
The effect of hazard resistance during each phase of a building?s lifespan is
considered, accounting for 1) differences in building design and construction
depending on the hazards considered, 2) maintenance, repair and renovation
requirements, considering the risk of damage during hazardous events, and 3)
disasters that shorten the building service life. The environmental impacts are
quantified through a mathematical probabilistic assessment of hazard resistance,
the results of which are incorporated in life-cycle analyses. If successful, the
research will facilitate the development of criteria connecting structural
building design considerations for earthquakes, wind and snow loads with green
building ratings that could be incorporated in building standards and design
guidelines. The advancement of building performance science and metrics that
integrate green building with hazard resistance evaluations is a transformative
step toward a more sustainable built environment. The project will also lead to
the development of a new multidisciplinary undergraduate course, Building
Performance: Society, Sustainability, Safety and Style, which will use a LEED-
platinum certified building on the University of Colorado campus as a laboratory
to help students develop a more holistic understanding of building design.
Students in the course will also participate in a long-term study aimed at
understanding how interdisciplinary coursework prepares them for engineering
careers.