* 1234211
* Improving the Reliability of Anaerobic Ammonium Oxidation (ANAMMOX) as an N-Removal Technology through a Mechanistic Understanding of Irreversible Nitrite Inhibition
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Jim Field, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2017
* USD 340,370.00

1234211&lt;br/&gt;Field&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recently discovered microbial
process of anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) offers a more economical and
environmentally sustainable option to nutrient nitrogen removal during
wastewater treatment compared to conventional nitrification-denitrification.
Anammox bacteria catalyze the reaction of nitrite with ammonium to form
dinitrogen gas in the absence of elemental oxygen. The most important limiting
factors of the process are the slow growth rates of the bacteria involved
combined with their sensitivity to the substrate, nitrite. Preliminary research
has demonstrated that nitrite inhibition is considerably more severe in the
absence compared to the presence of the energy donating substrate, causing the
biomass to become irreversibly inactivated. The dependency of the inhibition on
starvation conditions may be related to the unusual organelle structures in
anammox bacteria. The central metabolic reactions of anammox bacteria take place
in a specialized organelle compartment, the anammoxosome, which protects the
rest of the cell from reactive compounds and provides an intracellular membrane
barrier for energy yielding proton gradients. The overarching goal of the
project goal is to demonstrate the validity of the hypothesis and use it as a
guide to develop strategies to prevent nitrite-inhibition during the application
of anammox as an N-removal technology. The project will characterize two
enrichment cultures of anammox bacteria and use them to describe and quantify
the scope of the nitrite-inhibition. Experiments will be conducted to elucidate
the mechanisms of nitrite inhibition by influencing the metabolic energy in
anammox bacteria via starvation or dissipating proton gradients. The mechanistic
insights gained will be used to design and test strategies of preventing
inhibition during the operation of bioreactors including membrane bioreactors
that provide improved cell retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient nitrogen
compounds are important environmental contaminants causing depletion of oxygen,
eutrophication, and fish toxicity in surface waters as well as a posing a public
health threat via ground water resources. To mitigate these impacts,
environmental regulations for nutrient nitrogen are becoming stricter. As a
result, N- removal is becoming a necessary component of wastewater treatment.
The current practice is based upon the nitrification-denitrification process,
which requires costly aeration and electron-donating substrate additions.
Anammox is an alternative N-removal technology that provides important savings
in aeration costs (62.5%), more compact bioreactors and eliminates the need for
substrate supplements. These benefits translate to less energy consumed for N
removal and thus provide a lowered Carbon-footprint for wastewater treatment.
Anammox is particularly suited for waste streams high in ammonia and low in
organic carbon such as sludge liquor and landfill leachate. An important
drawback for the application of the anammox process has been its unreliability
due to the poorly understood cases of anammox organism inactivation. This
project specifically aims to understand the problem so as to design strategies
to provide a solution to make anammox technology more reliable and thus
attractive to utilities and technology suppliers. The project will have benefits
in education by supporting graduate and undergraduate student research as well
as providing scientific results to develop modules in environmental engineering
courses. Institutionally, the project will reinforce industrial partnerships to
scale up the anammox technology.