* 1234338
* Uncooled Semiconductor Nuclear Radiation Detectors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Ashutosh Tiwari, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 327,468.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that the
electromagnetic field associated with the nuclear radiation incident on
semiconductor channels will interact with the spin of the electrons via the
Rashba spin-orbit interaction mechanism. The approach will be to design
4-terminal non-local spin-valve devices comprised of wide band-gap semiconductor
channels over which four electrodes will be deposited. Inner two electrodes will
be made out of a ferromagnetic metal while the outer two electrodes will be made
out of a nonmagnetic metal. Geometry of the magnetic electrodes will be kept
different deliberately in order to make their coercivities dissimilar so that
their relative orientation (parallel or antiparallel) could be changed
independently. These spin-valve sensors will be exposed to controlled radiation
environments and non-local measurements of magneto-resistance and Hanle-effect
will be performed. Experimental research will be supported by Monte Carlo
simulation and theoretical modeling to understand the mechanism of radiation-
spin interaction in semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will lead to room-temperature nuclear radiation detectors which will
find applications in various civil, mechanical, manufacturing, medical imaging
and security systems. The research outcomes will greatly reduce nuclear and
radiological threats and benefit the society at large. The project will promote
learning and education by involving K-12, undergraduate and graduate students in
the inherently interdisciplinary cooperative research activities. The
discoveries of this project will be presented at related technical conferences
by the principal investigators and graduate students. Research results will be
published in high impact peer-reviewed journals.