* 1234686
* Control Of Over-Actuated Nonlinear Systems With Application To High-Efficiency Internal Combustion Engines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Andrea Serrani, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 254,801.00

The objective of this project is to establish a control design methodology for
nonlinear systems possessing redundant control inputs, suitable for application
to supervisory control of advanced combustion engines. The need for a
comprehensive approach to the control and optimization of nonlinear over-
actuated systems is warranted in a variety of engineering applications to fully
exploit the potential benefits arising from redundant actuation. This is
especially true for combustion engines, where simultaneous control of engine
breathing and combustion can only be achieved by combining the effect of
heterogeneous actuators. The proposed approach aims at overcoming fundamental
limitations by exploiting a geometric characterization of system redundancy to
determine the structure of the controller. The integration of two control
strategies is pursued, one aiming at regulating the output, the other at shaping
the transient response through online optimization. The overall integrated
approach is novel and is expected to extend the state of the art in the theory
and practice of control of complex nonlinear
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the automotive industry is the need to
improve fuel efficiency in light of the increasingly stringent government
mandates and fuel price increases. However, significant benefits can only be
achieved if advancements in engine design can be matched by improvements in
controlling engine performance. The outcome of this research will lead to better
fuel economy and emissions control and significantly shorten the development and
integration of new engine technologies, a process that today is significantly
slowed by the use of empirically based design and ad-hoc calibration procedures.
Collaboration with industry will be pursued and fostered by the use of testing
facilities for hardware verification. Integration of research and education will
be achieved and enhanced through the involvement of undergraduate honor
students, especially from under-represented groups, and collaboration with
foreign academic institutions that leverage existing student exchange
agreements.