* 1234344
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Dynamics, Practices, and Impacts of Small Water Enterprises on Urban Water Access and Distribution.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Basil Mahayni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 02/28/2014
* USD 15,763.00

This doctoral dissertation project considers small water enterprises (SWE) and
the role that these play in formal and informal urban water governance in
growing cities. SWEs provide important services to millions of urban poor, but
their existence may perpetuate and reinforce socio-economic inequalities. This
project will investigate this tension by examining the factors that condition
SWE entry into urban water markets, how and where SWEs provide services, and the
ways in which SWEs relate to and overlap with formal water delivery systems,
policies, and reforms. Research to date suggests that economic liberalization
measures in cities reduce the quality of life for residents, particularly the
urban poor, because of scaled back social supports. As a result NGOs, the
private sector, and informal activities play a greater role in the provision of
social services. This, however, can reinforce socio-economic disparities as
informal activities are often precarious and NGO and private sector activities
inadequately incorporate the voices and participation of urban residents. Urban
water utilities and systems are one of many sectors that experienced significant
reforms in the form of greater private sector participation in the past twenty
years, yet such reforms are rarely problem-free because past water policies were
often politically charged. These reforms tend to reinforce socio-economic
inequalities as new management logics emphasize profitability and demand
management within the water utility at the expensive of social equity. This
project will build on analyses of privatization and commercialization of urban
water systems by drawing from research in urban political economy on the rise of
informal, private, and NGO services, in order to systematically analyze the
roles and effects of SWEs. The research integrates geographic information
science (GIS), survey analysis, and ethnography, to systematically assess the
spatial dynamics of access and distribution of water, the role of SWEs in urban
water governance, and the relationship between SWEs and formal water governance
by considering the case of Amman, Jordan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this
research will be of interest to scientists and policymakers in places where
there is an intensification of water scarcity issues. The concerns addressed in
this case have the potential to provide critical insights that may guide
planning and development elsewhere in the Middle East and also in other water
scarce areas, such as the US southwest. This study will shed light on how SWEs
might improve water distribution and access and the way in which they may
provide to relief overburdened water utilities without reinforcing social
inequalities. Findings will be shared with community members, academics, and
policy makers at regional and national conferences, workshops, and through
various academic and popular publications. As a Doctoral Research Improvement
award, this project will also provide support for a promising graduate student
to establish an independent research career.