* 1234872
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Nitride Discovery - Creating the Knowledge Base for Hard Coating Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Daniel Gall, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 282,700.00

The primary objective of this research program is to develop a systematic method
to determine the intrinsic physical properties of transition metal nitrides. The
project uses a combination of experiments and density functional calculations,
to determine intrinsic elastic properties, hardness, and oxidation resistance
values for binary nitrides. Stress-free single crystal layers of unexplored
nitrides are deposited using ultra-high vacuum reactive sputter epitaxy.
Intrinsic mechanical properties and high temperature oxidation rates are
measured and directly correlated to results from first-principles calculations.
This correlation is used to develop a complete property dataset for all binary
transition metal nitrides by classifying them according to their electronic
structure and atomic bonding, using theoretically computed anisotropic elastic
constants and oxygen replacement energetics and measured hardness and oxidation
rates. The knowledge from binary nitrides is used to develop a quantitative
model that relates composition of ternary and off-stoichiometric nitrides to
mechanical properties, using both measured and calculated electron density of
states and the composition-dependent Fermi level, which determines charge
transfer and bond directionality. The project also explores first-level
microstructural features by measuring mechanical properties in a model system
with coherent interfaces and calculating strain-dependent shear moduli and
dislocation energetics at the boundary between two nitrides.

This project is expected to provide a systematic understanding of the
fundamental properties of all transition metal nitrides, based on their
electronic structure. This understanding represents the knowledge base that has
the potential to transform the multi-billion-dollar hard coating industry with a
new coatings design approach. Thus, it provides the basis to accelerate
discovery of hard, wear and corrosion resistant coatings and transform the
evolutionary trial-and-error development of protective coatings into a Coatings-
by-Design approach, resulting in rapid deployment of new coating materials for
emerging applications including fuel-efficient jet engines and gas turbines,
environmentally-friendly lubricant-free cutting tools, high-temperature
concentrating solar power plants, and wind turbines. Graduate and undergraduate
students are trained in this interdisciplinary collaborative research program
which links two research groups with complementary experimental and
computational expertise at two institutions. An integral part of the proposed
effort is the development of an online virtual nitride-property tool including a
research-community-driven database for intrinsic properties of transition metal
nitrides relevant to hard protective coatings.