* 1234436
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Dynamics Of Turbulent Flow Via Unstable Exact Navier-Stokes Solutions: Connecting Theory & Numerics With Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Michael Schatz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 09/30/2017
* USD 359,982.00

The objective of this research program is to develop and to test experimentally
a revolutionary new approach to modeling and predicting two-dimensional
turbulent flows. A set of weakly unstable invariant Navier-Stokes solutions will
be identified and transitions between invariant solutions will be characterized
to provide a coarse global description of the nonlinear dynamics of turbulent
flow. Quasi-2D flow in a shallow electrolyte layer continually driven by Lorentz
forces provides the setting for theoretical, analytic and experimental
development of this approach. Novel and proven techniques, such as periodic
orbit theory, group representation theory, Krylov-subspace numerical methods,
Newton and variational solvers will be used to develop this viewpoint, which
will be tested in experiments where the flow can be measured with full spatial
and temporal resolution throughout the entire flow domain.

If successful, the results of this research will impact several areas of
science, engineering, and medicine. Although the focus of this investigation is
on fluid turbulence in two dimensions, the proposed approach has the potential
to provide new ways to model, and ultimately control, a wide range of
spatiotemporally chaotic systems, such as magnetic confinement fusion reactors
and abnormal cardiac dynamics (from mild arrhythmias to potentially lethal
fibrillation). The most immediate practical application, however, is the
reduction of turbulent drag responsible for a significant part of the fuel
consumed in the automotive, aviation, and shipping industries. Even an
incremental reduction of drag by the proposed flow control methodology would
have a tremendous economic impact. All software and data produced by the
research program will be made publicly available with a central aim of lowering
the barrier of entry to dynamical systems research by providing well-documented,
easy-to-use interfaces to state-of-the-art numerical algorithms.