* 1234547
* 2012 Study of Nanotechnology Commercialization in the United States
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Manish Mehta, National Center for Manufacturing Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2015
* USD 200,829.00

This research study is a follow-up to previous studies performed by the NCMS in
2009, 2006 and 2003 to assess the cross-sector commercialization trends in
nanotechnology by US manufacturers. The proposed study series aims to track the
continuing evolution and maturation of the US nanotechnology industry, develop
profiles of entrepreneurial activity and industrial clustering in
nanotechnology, and identify common and specific concerns across multiple
industry sectors. The 2009 study was performed during a major economic
recession, and analysis of 270 complete datasets obtained from industry
executives indicated nearly 80 percent of the respondents' organizations were
impacted. The results also indicated that significant consolidation was underway
among many nanotechnology startups due to constriction of investment capital,
while even large manufacturers and end-users had delayed or trimmed
nanotechnology product development programs to weather the recession in the
short-term. The 2012-13 study will examine how currently extant organizations
are positioned to scale and integrate nanotechnology advances into innovative
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work should provide important
insights through analytics into the level of "open-innovation" and vertical
integration in different nanotechnology product sectors, and how industrial
requirements are driving the translation of nanotechnology research
breakthroughs to the commercial sector. The significance and benefits of the
study lie in industry-wide dissemination of the "soft" metrics and best
practices in entrepreneurial and commercial activities in Nanomanufacturing.
This information can be used for industry benchmarking and policy planning at
the local, state and federal levels. The findings will identify critical
resource needs and propose approaches that could lead to the improved
competitiveness of manufacturers integrating nanotechnology advances, and
thereby promote the accelerated receipt of the technological and economic
benefits provided by that industry to US society.