* 1234018
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutional Responses to a Changing Environment: Flooding and Natural Resource Access in the Okavango Delta, Botswana
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Brian King, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2014
* USD 13,579.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines how social institutions
that mediate access to natural resources respond to changing environments and
the implications such responses have for people dependent on natural resource-
based livelihoods. As the consequences of climate change increasingly impact
communities across the globe, the local institutions that mediate access to
natural resources will be critical in shaping effective adaptation practices.
This project will inform scholarship on social and ecological change by
integrating political ecology and social-ecological systems theory to analyze
the relationships between institutions, environmental change, and resource
access. The doctoral student will focus on institutional responses to
environmental changes in the globally significant ecosystem of the Okavango
Delta in Botswana. Seasonal floods are an integral part of life for the
residents of the Okavango Delta, where rural livelihoods depend on the
floodwaters for important natural resources. In recent years, however, increased
flooding levels have displaced residents from their homes and disrupted
livelihood systems. The student will examine how social institutions that affect
the rules of use that determine access to natural resources are responding to
these increases in flooding. She also will evaluate the ways in which these
institutional responses enable and constrain residents' livelihood systems. Her
qualitative study will use household-level semi-structured interviews and a
structured survey to address three specific and interlinked questions: (1) What
are the institutions that govern access to wetland resources in the Okavango
Delta? (2) How are these institutions responding to increasing levels of
flooding? (3) How do these responses impact the ability of residents to access
resources and sustain livelihoods?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
enhance understanding of how social institutions shape resource access in an
aquatic ecosystem, a type of system previously under explored in the geographic
subfield of political ecology. It will strengthen the social-ecological systems
(SES) framework developed by Elinor Ostrom by applying the framework within a
dynamic aquatic ecosystem. This project will add to current scholarship that is
working to provide empirical detail to the SES framework and will add new
variables, including: gender, ethnicity, informal rules, and seasonal access
patterns. More broadly, the project will highlight the importance of
understanding the relationships among environmental changes, social
institutions, and resource access across Africa south of the Sahara and in the
developing world. The project will contribute to environmental and climate
change adaptation policy in the Okavango Delta by indicating how institutions
are currently responding to environmental changes and will assess how well
positioned they are to help residents respond to predicted future increases in
flooding variability. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.