* 1234235
* Collaborative Research: Intramural Forecasting of Cardiac Electrical Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Elizabeth Cherry, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 09/30/2017
* USD 266,236.00

This research will promote the design of specific methods for preventing and
treating arrhythmias and also is an important first step in demonstrating the
effectiveness of state estimation techniques for studying cardiac electrical
dynamics and other 3D dynamical systems where little or no depth information is
available. Cardiac arrhythmias result from the disruption of normal electrical
wave propagation in the heart by pre-existing heterogeneous regions or by
dynamically induced heterogeneities that develop as a consequence of rapid
pacing along with the nonlinear dynamics of the system, both of which can lead
to wave breakup. Existing methods for observing electrical waves in three-
dimensional experimental heart preparations result in sparse data sets, with
either detailed surface observations or data from a small number of points in
the interior. Numerical models, on the other hand, are an important method for
studying three-dimensional wave propagation, but are only an approximation of
the true dynamics. Forecasting methods - previously unused for cardiac
electrical models - will be adapted to generate improved estimates of the three-
dimensional propagation of cardiac electrical waves. Specifically, data
assimilation techniques - developed in the field of numerical weather
forecasting - will be applied to combine spatiotemporal observations of voltage
on cardiac tissue surfaces with numerical model results to derive a more
accurate and realistic three-dimensional quantification of cardiac electrical
waves during the initiation and progression of arrhythmias. Using this approach,
a more accurate three-dimensional time series that could be used to determine
the mechanisms involved in arrhythmia induction and maintenance will be created.
Cardiovascular diseases, including cardiac arrhythmias like fibrillation, are
the most common cause of death in the industrialized world and have serious
health and economic impacts. Advances in treating arrhythmias are hindered in
part because of the lack of understanding of their dynamics, which stems from
the difficulty of obtaining observations within the thickness of heart tissue.
Successful techniques from weather forecasting will be applied to infer the
three-dimensional electrical dynamics of cardiac tissue quantitatively using
data obtained at the interior and exterior surfaces of the
heart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to elucidate
mechanisms underlying cardiac arrhythmias and may lead to new treatment
approaches. In addition, the work done as part of this project may contribute to
advances in forecasting techniques in a variety of fields where three-
dimensional observations are difficult to obtain, including understanding the
spread of brain cancer and the dynamics of the deep ocean.