* 1234079
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Characterization of Transition Joints Made by Friction Surfacing Based Additive Manufacturing (FSAM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Manoranjan Misra, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2016
* USD 381,838.00

The research objective of this collaborative study is to demonstrate a
comprehensive understanding of modeling and control of Friction Surfacing-based
Additive Manufacturing by creating a functionally graded, multi-layered weld
transition joint between chrome moly steel (T91) and austenitic stainless steel
(AISI316). The research approach will be to apply various nickel based alloy
layers by friction surfacing, creating a smooth and gradual transition in
physical and metallurgical properties to improve their creep life. The
experimental program involves stress rupture and creep-fatigue tests to assess
the creep behavior of the transition joints. The research approach for in-situ
finite element modeling involves development of fine-scale crystal plasticity
and homogenized anisotropic continuum plasticity models, which will help in
obtaining the optimized process parameters for the fabrication of components
using Friction Surfacing-based Additive Manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will aid the accelerated deployment of T91 and AISI316
weld transitional joints for structures in emerging initiatives including
boiler, nuclear and clean energy concepts. Through the finite element model
development, not only can T91/316 joints be made, but a basic modeling and
manufacturing infrastructure will be developed that can be applied to any
application where transitional joints are needed between hard-to-process
materials and/or materials where fusion welding produces undesirable
intermetallic formation. The successful completion of this research will enable
higher-temperature power plants to generate power 1) at lower cost 2) with lower
greenhouse gas emissions and 3) in larger quantities resulting in a better
quality of life. The results will also help make it possible to manufacture
better performing and optimized components in a host of other engineering
industries. The educational objectives of the proposal will focus on training of
post-doctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students. Advanced Surface
Technology course will be developed which will expose the students to the state-
of-the-art advances in manufacturing technologies.