* 1234428
* Collaborative Research: The North Anatolian Fault system in the Marmara Sea, Turkey - Insights from the Quaternary evolution of a multi-stranded transform
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Leonardo Seeber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2015
* USD 68,855.00

Funds are provided for the principal investigators (PIs) to participate in a
project that aims to investigate the dynamics controlling fault continuity,
strain partitioning, and interaction between multiple fault branches as fault
systems evolve. Specifically, the proposed work will focus on the evolving
relationship between the northern and central branches of the North Anatolian
Fault (NAF). To evaluate a series of possible models describing this
relationship, the project will use high-resolution multi-channel seismic (MCS)
data already collected for the northern branch, and will collect new MCS data
for the central branch. The data will be combined with modeling to characterize
slip history, strain partitioning, and relative fault activity. Results will
constrain the evolution of the NAF system and enable comparisons with other
transform fault systems. Funds will allow the initial participation of the PIs
on the Turkish reserach cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed work has direct implications for understanding seismic hazards in
Turkey, and may also support a future IODP initiative in the area. It will
strengthen international ties through ongoing collaboration with Turkish
researchers. The PIs will continue ongoing outreach efforts. Data management
includes archiving of data in various repositories within two years of
acquisition/analysis.