* 1234961
* GOALI:  Engineering of Functionality Graded Magnesium Composite Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Srinivasan Chandrasekar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,144.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) award is to develop the processing science for mechanical surface
generation so as to enable engineering of magnesium alloy/composite surfaces
with specific microstructures that enhance wear performance. The approach
involves analysis of mechanics of large strain deformation underlying the unit
interaction fundamental to mechanical surface generation - sliding tool
interacting with a workpiece surface. Large strain deformation on the workpiece
surface will be characterized, in situ, as a function of controllable process
variables using advanced experimental mechanics techniques. Microstructure and
properties of the surface will be analyzed at multiple length scales using
electron microscopy, micro-tensile test, and micro/nano tribology methods,
resulting in deformation-microstructure-property maps. Finite element analysis
incorporating grain-level plasticity will be used to predict and optimize the
deformation in order to create graded surface microstructures with desirable
properties. A predictive framework will be established to engineer wear
resistant surfaces by control of process variables. Surface generation processes
of wide-ranging interest to the discrete products sector including burnishing,
surface mechanical attrition, microfinishing, wear and friction stir processing
will be impacted by this work.

The scientific benefits will be enhanced understanding of deformation phenomena
in hexagonal close packed metals and deformation-microstructure-property
correlations for structural magnesium alloys. The technological benefits will be
new or improved processes for creating magnesium alloy surfaces with novel
attributes enabling development of ultra-lightweight powertrain and structural
sub-systems for transportation. Broader impacts include improved fuel economy in
automotive, aerospace, or other transportation systems and concomitant
environmental benefits; and a strong educational component that will contribute
towards a workforce competent in advanced processes and structural materials for
industrial applications. The education and training program also includes
graduate student internships in industry, undergraduate research training for
physically challenged students via collaboration with the National Technical
Institute for the Deaf, Rochester Institute of Technology, and a modest focus on
fostering entrepreneurship in graduate study.