* 1234100
* Stability, Sensitivity and Optimization of Stochastic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kavita Ramanan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

This award provides funding for the development of analytical and computational
tools for determining the sensitivity to system parameters of both transient and
steady-state performance measures in queueing networks. Standard numerical
methods to calculate sensitivity of performance measures with a high level of
accuracy are usually computationally prohibitive because they involve a two-step
approach of first obtaining numerical approximations of expectations of
performance measures at different parameter values and then numerical
differentiation of these approximate expectations. This work aims to provide a
more tractable analytical characterization of the sensitivity in terms of a
single expectation, and to then use this characterization to develop efficient
one-step algorithms for the computation of sensitivities. In particular, this
extends approaches that have been used in finance and other domains to queueing
networks, where the issue is far more subtle due to the presence of boundaries.
This award also supports research in the study of many-server queues, with the
goal of obtaining tractable approximations for transient and steady-state
performance measures associated with many-server queues. New tools will be
developed for the analysis of stability in such systems and obtaining tractable
approximations of steady state and transient performance measures and applied
for optimal system design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to uncertainty in
parameters, computation of sensitivities are very important for design and
capacity allocation in queueing networks. The development of efficient
computational tools would greatly enhance the planning capabilities of companies
with manufacturing processes governed by queueing networks. Many-server queues
arise in diverse applications such as call centers, health-care and data
centers. In applications, knowledge of steady state and transient performance
measures are required for staffing and decisions, the efficiency of which can
have significant economic and social impact. In addition, this research will
also develop new mathematical tools that will be applicable in a broader
setting.