* 1234981
* Colloidal Crystallization via Simultaneous Depletion and Electric Field Mediated Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 304,000.00

1234981 PI: Bevan

The ability to assemble nano- and micro- colloidal particles into ordered
materials and reconfigurable devices provides a basis for emerging technologies
(e.g. photonic crystals, meta-materials, cloaking devices, solar cells, etc.)
and for improving traditional particle based materials (e.g. ceramics, coatings,
minerals, foods, drugs). Despite the range of applications employing colloidal
particles, current capabilities for manipulating microstructures in such systems
are limited in two ways: the degree of order than can be obtained, and the time
required to generate ordered structures. Both of these limitations are due to
fundamental problems with designing, controlling, and optimizing the
thermodynamics and kinetics of colloidal assembly processes. The limiting factor
in colloidal assembly is generally not the unavailability of methods to
manipulate colloids or create sufficiently complex components, but rather the
inability to reliably assemble structures without producing kinetically trapped,
jammed, or dynamically arrested configurations that are defect ridden or even
entirely amorphous.

To address this problem, this project will use experimental and modeling
approaches to constructively combine the best aspects of complementary colloidal
assembly mechanisms. To control colloidal assembly, this project will employ
tunable depletion attraction between colloidal particles (mediated by
unadsorbing micelles, nanoparticles, or macromolecules) and electric field
mediated colloidal interactions. The goal is to use such tunable interactions in
conjunction with recently developed dynamic models of colloidal assembly to
formally engineer the defect density and kinetics in a colloidal crystallization
process. The conceptual strategy is to exploit the strengths, and avoid the
weaknesses, of each independent approach by considering that: (1) depletion
mediated assembly is primarily a thermodynamic approach in that interactions
between particles determine how they assemble themselves; the resulting
structures are thermodynamically stable but are prone to kinetic problems (e.g.
point defects, polycrystals, gels, glasses), and (2) electric field mediated
assembly is more amenable to dynamically altering colloidal assembly kinetics,
which is appealing because it provides more control over stochastic processes,
but particles simply disassemble once external intervention ceases. As a result,
this research will investigate viable kinetic pathways for the rapid assembly of
defect free colloidal crystals using various serial and parallel combinations of
electric field mediated mechanisms (to control transport, structural evolution,
and annealing in growing or pre-existing crystals) and depletion mediated
assembly (to produce mechanically stable equilibrium crystals).

This research will significantly advance our fundamental understanding of the
design rules and control parameters for tuning colloidal interactions to
assemble nano-/micro- particles into perfectly ordered periodic structures. The
ability to robustly assemble and reconfigure ordered materials on length scales
comparable to the wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation will provides a basis
for producing multi-scale "meta-materials" with unique electric, magnetic, and
optical properties. Although the exotic properties of such materials have been
theoretically predicted and demonstrated in proof-of-concept materials obtained
via laborious microfabrication, no existing process is sufficiently
controllable, scalable, and robust to enable the use of such materials in
advanced commercial applications. The novelty of this research effort lies in
the use of quantitative measurement and modeling tools to enable the
constructive integration of complementary colloidal assembly methods to achieve
defect free microscopic structures (where trial-and-error discovery alone might
fail). Ultimately, the proposed research will provide broad fundamental
understanding of how thermal motion, interparticle interactions, and external
fields determine the chemical physics of microscopic ordering mechanisms. Beyond
the technical outcomes, broader impacts of this research project will include
the generation of rich visual data from experiments (e.g. images, videos),
simulations (e.g. renderings, animations), and analyses (e.g. multi-dimensional
plots) for use in various classroom, laboratory, outreach, and dissemination
activities.