* 1234050
* Workshop: MYRES V - The Sedimentary Record of Landscape Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Elizabeth Hajek, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2014
* USD 70,000.00

Workshop: MYRES V - The Sedimentary Record of Landscape Dynamics

by

Elizabeth Hajek, EAR-1234050, PennState Univ.

ABSTRACT Sedimentary deposits comprise important records of information
necessary to 1) quantitatively reconstruct and predict landscape dynamics across
a range of timescales, 2) identify ancient tectonic and climatic conditions on
Earth, and 3) understand landscape response to tectonic and climatic forcing. An
outstanding challenge for geoscientists is to decode this archive in order to
understand the evolution of Earth's environments over a range of temporal and
spatial scales. To this end, the research interests of geomorphologists,
sedimentologists, and stratigraphers have started to converge on processes that
produce, transport, and deposit sediment over millennial timescales and beyond.
Virtual Workshop and the final two days will revolve around discussion-
stimulating field trips through erosional landscapes and stratigraphic deposits
in Central Utah. This will be the fifth biennial Meeting of Young Researchers in
Earth Science (MYRES) meeting. Early-career faculty and research scientists who
participated in previous MYRES workshops have become leaders in their fields and
helped build foundations for ongoing interdisciplinary collaborations. Continued
support of MYRES will sustain and strengthen this grassroots initiative that has
helped jumpstart research in important cutting-edge areas of Earth science. As
part of interdisciplinary community building and communication during MYRES V,
time will be dedicated to learning about the NSF's EarthCube initiative and
discussing how collaborative efforts between geodynamicists, geomorphologists,
sedimentologists and stratigraphers (and others) could be aided by EarthCube. To
this end, plenary discussion on the third day of the workshop will comprise a
virtual workshop about EarthCube. This workshop will be hosted online (e.g., via
Skype), will include EarthCube representatives, and, if possible, other
interested virtual attendees. Throughout the MYRES V workshop we will be
discussing many topics listed in the EarthCube GEO Domain Virtual Workshop
Goals, including 1) science drivers within and beyond MYRES V fields in the
immediate future and up to 15 years out, 2) current challenges and limitations
to interdisciplinary science (including data discovery, modeling, integrating
disparate data types and sources, etc.), 3) existing database and modeling
resources, and 4) tools, databases, and modeling capabilities that MYRES V
communities would like to see developed.