* 1234847
* 3D Finite Element Analysis of Ultimate Capacity of Suction Caissons under  Multi-line Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* William Davids, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 86,803.00

Development of ocean energy sources is significant to the current U.S. renewable
energy and energy independence strategy. Geotechnical site investigation and
foundation design are critical, and often costly, aspects of offshore
development, however are subject to risks and uncertainties associated with
design forces from the dynamic ocean environment and heterogeneous seafloor
geology. Consequently, geotechnical issues have been a key factor in delays and
cost overruns for some European offshore wind farms. This research seeks to
reduce barriers to offshore renewable energy development associated with design
and construction of foundation systems for floating technologies such as tidal,
wave, ocean current, and deep water wind through advancement of a novel
integrated foundation system for multi-device developments. This novel system is
comprised of a network of interconnected suction caissons, which are large
diameter, hollow cylinder, closed cap, pile-type foundations named for their
installation by internal underpressure (i.e., suction) developed during pumping
of water from the gap formed between the seafloor and cap. When used in an
interconnected network to moor multiple devices, suction caissons have the
potential to significantly alleviate development costs by reducing the total
number of installed foundations.

This goal of this research is develop the basic engineering knowledge necessary
to transform the use of offshore suction caissons in clay soils from single to
networked, multi-line mooring anchors. This research will lead to development of
three dimensional numerical models used to predict ultimate capacity and
deformation of a suction caisson under taut, orthogonal multi-line loading. The
models will be calibrated/validated using both published literature and results
from a physical modeling study of multi-line caisson behavior under monotonic
and cyclic loading previously conducted by the principal investigator. The model
will be further developed to investigate the effects of vertical load attachment
point, number of lines and radial attachment angles, and load inclination with
respect to caisson height on predicted capacity. This research effort will
result in numerical modeling and analysis tools that will allow for continued
investigation of multi-line loaded suction caisson capacity for a variety of
offshore applications.