* 1234031
* Investigating the Effect of Pore Fluids on the Stability of Unsaturated Geomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Giuseppe Buscarnera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 77,199.00

The key objective of this project is to investigate the stress-strain response
of multiphase geomaterials and elucidate the mechanical implications of natural
and/or artificial alterations in the state of the pore fluids. The multiphasic
connotation of geomaterials makes their pore network a convenient setting for
the physical interaction among constituents and plays a crucial role on how
these materials deform and fail under stress. Rain infiltration, water table
fluctuations and injection/extraction of fluids are only some examples of the
remarkable interaction between geological materials and the interstitial fluids.
There is therefore a pressing need for predictive theories explaining how
changes in volume fractions and pore pressures can generate unexpected failures.
The study will be based on the combination of advanced constitutive models for
multiphase geomaterials and the mathematical theory of bifurcation. For this
purpose, the predictive capabilities of modern modeling approaches will be
discussed from a theoretical standpoint, with the goal of identifying the hydro-
mechanical mechanisms that can originate failure in geotechnical
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to an improved
understanding of the mechanics of failure in geomaterials and has the potential
to bridge the gap between the mechanical theories for multiphase media and the
fundamental concept of material stability. These advances are important to
extend to general saturation conditions a series of tools currently available
only for fully saturated geomaterials and devise novel strategies for predicting
the initiation of unstable mechanisms. The benefits of the research to society
will be a better understanding of the mechanisms that govern the occurrence of
geo-hazards, novel modeling tools for the design of geotechnical infrastructures
and improved predictions of the consequences of multiphase flow across
geological formations.