* 1234345
* Connecting genetic diversity to ecosystem functioning: links between genetic diversity, relatedness and trait variation in a seagrass community
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Susan Williams, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,064,407.00

There is growing evidence that genetic variation within and among populations of
key species plays an important role in marine ecosystem processes. Several
experiments provide compelling evidence that the number of genotypes in an
assemblage (genotypic richness) can influence critical ecosystem functions
including productivity, resistance to disturbance and invasion or colonization
success. However, these studies use only the number of genotypes as a measure of
genetic diversity. Recent analyses of species diversity experiments show that
phylogenetic diversity may be a more reliable predictor of ecosystem functioning
than simply the number of species. However, such approaches have not yet been
applied to understanding the effects of genetics on ecosystem functioning. While
genetic relatedness within a species holds the potential to predict the outcome
of intraspecific interactions, and the functioning of ecosystems that depend on
those species, we currently have few data to assess the shape or strength of
this relationship. The investigators will build on their own previous work, and
that of others, in eelgrass (Zostera marina) ecosystems showing strong effects
of genotypic richness on a spectrum of critical ecosystem processes. The
investigators will ask whether genotypic richness, or - as in studies at the
level of species diversity - genetic relatedness/distance better predicts
ecosystem functioning? If genetic relatedness measures are better predictors,
then what mechanisms underlie this relationship? Can genetic relatedness predict
ecological relatedness? Although the current focus is on eelgrass, the research
should be applicable to many systems. The project will assess the relationship
between genetic relatedness and phenotypic distinctiveness of a key marine
foundation species and use manipulative experiments to test the relative
importance of the number of genotypes in an assemblage vs. their genetic
relatedness and trait diversity for ecosystem functioning. Specifically,
experiments will: (1) characterize the relationship between genetic relatedness
and trait similarity among individual genotypes of eelgrass, including responses
to experimental warming; (2) compare the effects of genetic relatedness and
trait similarity among genotypes on the outcome of intraspecific competitive
interactions; and (3) test the relative effect of genetic relatedness vs. number
of genotypes of eelgrass on the growth of eelgrass, its associated ecosystem
functions it (e.g., primary production, nutrient dynamics, trophic transfer,
habitat provision, and detrital production and decomposition). Broader Impacts:
Seagrass ecosystems provide important services to coastal regions including
primary production, nutrient cycling, habitat for fisheries species, and erosion
control. Previous studies have shown these services can be compromised by
reduction in the numbers of species of grazers or genotypes, but this study will
allow a more predictive approach to diversity loss by integrating the effects of
multiple components of diversity and clarifying the extent to which diversity
effects can be predicted by the genetic or ecological uniqueness of component
genotypes. The PIs will continue to be involved in direct communication of
findings of biodiversity-related research to federal and state agencies and
other stakeholders. This grant will integrate physiological, community, and
genetic approaches to studying marine ecosystem functioning and will train a
number of young scientists (postdocs, grad students and undergrads) at this
interface. This project will interface with 4 outreach/training programs,
including an NSFsupported UBM collaborative program for undergrads, a University
of California-sponsored program that brings students from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities to UC Davis for summer research experiences at the
interface of ecology and evolutionary biology, a GK-12 program based at Bodega
Marine Lab focused on coastal marine science; and a program that brings
elementary school classes to the campus for a coordinated series of interactive
field trips.