* 1234419
* Transformative Calibration Method for Prediction of Surface Heat Flux
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Majid Keyhani, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2016
* USD 249,916.00

CBET-1234419 PI(s): J.I. Frankel and M. Keyhani University of Tennessee-
Knoxville (UTK)

A transformative calibration methodology is proposed for predicting the surface
heat flux based on in-depth temperature measurements. Instrumenting interior
locations of a test article is often necessary in order to alleviate the
sensor's direct exposure to a hostile environment. A physics based and
mathematically derived calibration framework is proposed for studying a variety
of heating conditions that appear in aerospace applications. This investigation
integrates analytical and experimental activities in a complementary manner for
verifying the science of inverse prediction over a large temperature range and
under various heating scenarios. The calibration concept substantially reduces
systematic errors since it does not require the specification of the probe
position, probe characteristics, and thermophysical properties. Full system
characterization is inherently contained in the resulting calibration equations.
Being ill posed, a new regularization method is proposed for stabilizing the
numerical predictions. Ill-posed problems are highly sensitive to noise in the
collected data. This new, local-future time approach exploits the behavior of
the calibration equation for extracting an optimal prediction. This unique
characteristic may be a consequence of the novel calibration formulation.
Experimental verification of the derived calibration equations will be performed
using either an electrically heated sandwich facility or high-powered laser
facility that are both maintained at UTK. Multidimensional and multi-regional
geometries; and, isotropic and orthotropic material samples will be studied
owing to their importance in the aerospace sciences for thermal protections
systems associated with external skins of hypersonic vehicles and surfaces in
hypersonic combustors. This research is focused on developing methodologies that
can use in-depth temperature data to accurately predict the surface heat flux
for material evaluation and locating transition.

This project will provide new insight into inverse problems through an
integrated analytical and experimental approach based on producing calibration
equations. This contrasts the conventional doctrine that views experimental data
as input to a numerical method for estimating the surface conditions. Hence, the
proposed concept can be expanded to a large class or arena of problems affecting
many areas of physics and engineering including fire and combustion sciences;
metal casting, crystal growth, and welding sciences. Additionally, several
European institutions will be involved in the overall plan indicating the merit
and significance of the approach to future high-speed aerospace studies.