* 1234035
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Fundamental Aspects of the Alkali Silica Reaction through Microwave and Acoustic Measurements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2020
* Laurence Jacobs, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2020
* USD 236,101.00

Two new recent insights - the finding that water is tightly held in the alkali-
silica gel (ASR) structure, contributing to its expansivity and the proposal
that the rate of ASR-induced expansion depends upon the location of the ASR gel
formation (i.e., greater expansion when gel forms within the aggregate) -
suggest that a renewed and comprehensive examination of ASR is now warranted.
The overarching objective of this multi-physics research effort is to bring new
understanding to the fundamental aspects of ASR, with specific focus on
improving understanding of the relationships between location and volume of ASR
gel formation and the composition of the gel, particularly the moisture and
calcium contents, on potential for expansion and damage to concrete. This
comprehensive effort has been developed to take advantage of the sensitivity of
microwave methods to moisture content and binding and the sensitivity of
nonlinear and linear acoustic methods to cracking to overcome some of the
challenges associated with the in situ examination of durability reactions in
cementititious materials. Correlating these data with time-dependent changes in
multi-scale structure, composition, and mechanical properties will bring new
insight to a reaction which is increasingly damaging to concrete
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-held technical beliefs surrounding ASR
in concrete have been increasingly questioned in recent years, undermining the
ability of engineers to assess aggregate reactivity, to design ASR-resistant
concrete, and to assess the potential for ASR damage in service. New
understanding of the progressive ASR damage occurring in concrete will allow for
improvements in concrete design to avoid ASR, advances in field monitoring of
damage, identification of appropriate maintenance strategies for ASR-damaged
structures, and contribute to improved accuracy in service life predictions.
Beyond the contributions of improved concrete durability to the broader impact
of sustainable development, impact will be made through training and mentoring
of a diverse and multi-disciplinary team of graduate and undergraduate
researchers at both Georgia Institute of Technology and Missouri University of
Science and Technology Broad dissemination of research results to technical and
non-technical audiences alike is planned. In addition, the PIs and their
students will participate in outreach activities through programs established at
their home campuses.