* 1234183
* Investigating the Shear Localization Mechanisms in Bulk Metallic Glasses via Novel Energy Landscape Exploration Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Harold Park, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this grant is to develop novel atomistic modeling
approaches to explore the potential energy landscape in order to elucidate the
fundamental atomistic shear deformation and localization mechanisms in bulk
metallic glasses (BMGs) at experimentally relevant time scales. Because their
elastic moduli are of the same order as many metals, BMGs offer the tantalizing
possibility of a material that exhibits both high strength and moderate
toughness at room temperature, with a range of potential applications in fuel
cells, aerospace, auto parts, sporting goods, and medical devices. One key
unresolved issue for BMGs is that the atomistic details governing the formation
of shear transformation zones (STZ), which are the unit plastic deformation
mechanism, have not been identified. This lack of a mechanistic, atomistically-
based understanding of BMG plasticity has significantly inhibited the further
development and application of BMGs. Accomplishment of the research objectives
will be made possible by the development of a novel numerical technique, called
the autonomous basin climbing (ABC) method, which will generate an autonomous
escape trajectory on the 3N-dimensional potential energy surface from any
metastable initial state. Specifically, the PI will (1) develop a coupled
ABC/kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm that enables the study of shear localization
at experimentally-relevant strain rates, (2) develop novel non-local instability
criteria to identify the sizes, shapes, and dynamics of interacting STZs, and
(3) develop a unified self-learning scheme to substantially reduce the
computational cost such that the ABC method, when applied to BMGs or any other
atomistic system, can access length scales that are comparable to classical
molecular dynamics (i.e. tens of nanometers) while also being able to access
time scales far beyond that of classical molecular
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will make original
contributions to understanding the fundamental inelastic deformation mechanisms
that lead to localized shear deformation and thus catastrophic failure in BMGs
specifically, and amorphous solids in general. Furthermore, knowledge of these
atomistic deformation mechanisms and their relationship to the structure of
amorphous solids will lead to new, atomistically-informed continuum deformation
and plasticity theories for amorphous solids. Education and outreach objectives
will focus on (1) recruitment of women and underrepresented minorities to
participate in the exciting and rapidly expanding field of nanomaterials
research, (2) outreach to high school students to encourage future careers in
science and engineering, (3) novel web-based dissemination of both new course
materials and software interfaces that are developed through this
interdisciplinary modeling effort to link research, education, and broader
impacts, and (4) course development at the undergraduate level to encourage
freshmen to pursue majors in science and engineering.