* 1234957
* Collaborative Research:  Chemical and Biological Quantum Nanosensors Based on Nanoparticle Molecules
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Chuanbin Mao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2016
* USD 363,145.00

The research objective of this collaborative award is to explore chemical and
biological quantum nanosensors by combining quantum coherence in hybrid systems
consisting of semiconductor quantum dots and metallic nanoparticles with
biomolecules' recognition functionalities. The unique feature of these sensors
is their capabilities to utilize quantum coherence in such systems to convert
the impact of introduction of biological molecules and chemical substances into
noticeable and easily measurable physical quantities. The approach will include
using collective properties of single and ensemble of quantum dot-metallic
nanoparticle systems, such as molecular-type resonances and coherent dynamics of
exciton-plasmons coupling, to detect biological and chemical agents with
ultrahigh sensitivity. Optical signal transduction includes the way introduction
of these agents changes the time delay that is coherently induced in the
emission of the quantum dots when these hybrid systems interact with time-
dependent laser fields. This research involves fabrication of nanochips
consisting of arrays of semiconductor quantum dots and metallic nanoparticles
separated from each other by dielectric materials or biomolecules. In such chips
either the quantum dots or metallic nanoparticles are biologically
functionalized for target detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will link coherent nanoscience to life science applications and can
advance the areas of quantum computers, nanodevices and sensors. Through the
outreach program of this research, the high school students in Alabama will
acquire first-hand experience of nanoscience through mini-workshops that offer
meticulously designed experiments and interactive softwares. This research forms
a platform for education of undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary disciplines and provides them unique opportunities to
investigate nanoparticle systems that harness biology to function, fabricate and
test nano-systems with biological and physical applications, and become familiar
with the diverse impacts of nanotechnology. Combination of these issues will
prepare the ground for development of new curricula and programs and diversify
the research activities in nanoscience.