* 1234367
* Bio-Cementation Field-Scale Trials:  Addressing the Challenges of Treatment Uniformity &amp; Verification, Biostimulation, &amp; By Product Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Douglas Nelson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 596,646.00

Bio-mediated soil improvement, and in particular the use of microbially induced
calcite precipitation (MICP) as a natural bio-mediated cementation process for
sand improvement, has progressed rapidly. We propose to directly address the
critical issues of treatment uniformity &amp; verification, bio-stimulation, and
by-product management through modest field-scale trials that are supported by
experimental and numerical modeling techniques. Specifically, we proposed to
perform two field-scale trials in a deep test chamber using natural liquefiable
sand. The first trial relies on bio-augmentation (injection of bacteria) in
order to provide a low-risk ground-truth set of data unencumbered by the unknown
spatial distribution of native bacteria that we face with bio-stimulation. This
first experiment builds directly on extensive laboratory research, has high
likelihood of success and thus will enable focus on treatment uniformity and
verification using in-situ and laboratory geotechnical tests. The second trial
will use bio-stimulation (activation of native sessile bacteria) that introduces
the additional degree of freedom (spatial distribution of bacteria) but is also
the most desirable field scale treatment approach for the future. It is more
practical (cost, permitting), has reduced by-product generation, and may
increase uniformity. Both trials will enable study of by-product generation
during treatment and its fate after soil improvement. We believe that field-
scale treatment in a large test chamber provides the necessary balance between
length scale and experimental control to rigorously, but practically, address
these issues. The full-scale work will be supported by parallel efforts
developing a robust bio-stimulation technique and modeling of the field trials
to develop a predictive modeling tool that accounts for bio-stimulation, by-
product transport and fate, and spatial heterogeneity. The scope builds on the
team?s continued research activities over the past eight years, making this a
challenging, yet feasible, scope. We envision that successful completion of this
project will be transformative through improvement in treatment uniformity,
validation of verification tests, development of a bio-stimulation approach, and
management by-product generation and fate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-mediated
soil improvement is a relatively new, novel technique for improving the
engineering properties of soils to a level where civil infrastructure can be
supported. In particular, microbially induced calcite precipitation, or MICP, is
a process in which microbial activity in the soil temporarily modifies local
environmental conditions such that calcite crystals bind soil particles
together. In the laboratory loose, liquefiable sand can be transformed into
sandstone-like material in a matter of days. MICP is also attractive in that it
uses less energy, and may be more sustainable than existing technologies using
man-made chemicals. This research project is up-scaling the technology towards
full-scale field deployment. Focus is placed on particular issues that directly
influence the cost, environmental impact, sustainability, uniformity, and
permanence. These issues include stimulation and utilization of naturally
existing soil bacteria, optimization of treatment formulation, and optimization
of the physical injection technique. This will be studied through a combination
of numerical and experiment work across length scales from about 10 cm up to 5
m.