* 1234374
* Collaborative Research: Variable Geometry Dies for Polymer Extrusion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Myszka, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 350,030.00

This grant provides funding to develop variable-geometry dies for extruding
complex plastic parts. Unlike most existing polymer extrusion dies, which have a
single fixed geometry, design techniques will be created to build novel moving
dies that morph between different shapes. Coordination of multiple actuators
during the extrusion process will impose these changes in shape. The actuator
locations will be optimized to provide the mechanical advantage required to
resist the sizable pressure loads inside the extruder. The optimization will be
accomplished with a genetic algorithm that considers the many design
constraints, which include avoiding interference of moving parts, eliminating
obstructions to the flow of the molten plastic, achieving a reasonably sized
die, and minimizing actuator power consumption. Experimental work will develop
new ways to manage the leakage of molten plastic within the die due to its
moving parts. Prototype variable-geometry dies will be built and tested on a
production extruder operated by an industrial collaborator. Validation
experiments will derive empirical relationships between changes in the die
geometry, extruder screw speed, and plastic temperature to provide process
control settings that yield defect-free parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to create the next generation of polymer extrusion dies that can
produce a wider variety of more complex plastic parts. Specifically, the work
aims to enable polymer extrusion to replace injection molding for a class of
plastic parts, thereby simultaneously reducing production costs and
manufacturing time. Additionally, it aspires to offer designers the flexibility
to create novel engineering solutions with entirely new plastic parts of varying
cross sectional shape. The developed design tools will have broader application
to creating other variable-geometry structures such as morphing aircraft wings
and micro-scale extrusion dies.