* 1234307
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Ownership, Cultural Identity, and the Legal Displacement of Family Commons in the Southeastern United States.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Matthew Zook, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 02/28/2014
* USD 11,513.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the legal vulnerability associated
with heirs' property ownership and the cultural attachment to heirs' land among
Gullah-Geechee people in the Southeastern United States. Using an integration of
approaches from legal geography, critical property studies, and political
ecology, and using a blend of ethnographic and archival methods, this project
answers three primary research questions: How do landowners define ownership
rights and negotiate land use on heirs' property? How do these practices compare
to legal and judicial definitions of ownership and land use rights? How do
heirs' owners resolve conflicts over landownership? The answers to these
questions are important because they are relevant to the global processes of
land privatization, enclosure, and the commodification of nature. Much of the
existing research on these issues comes from research on the Global South,
therefore it is valuable to study commonly owned family land in a place such as
the U.S. where the power of law and advanced capitalism are thought to have
largely erased alternative property regimes. Furthermore, this research
illustrates how American property law creates surprising varieties and degrees
of enclosures and commons by defining rights as bundles, which can be separated
and commodified in part or whole. Finally, this project will inform debates
about the extent to which property law has become placeless, by defining rights
through social relationships between people instead of between humans and the
land. By combining critical property studies and legal geography with political
ecology, this project brings place back into an understanding of the importance
property to material livelihoods and the connection of cultural identity to
land. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work are important for an
understanding of and combating the displacement and loss of heirs' landownership
beyond sites in the Southeastern United States. The future of heirs' ownership
will be shaped by how landowners understand, combat, and harness a variety of
legal, economic, and environmental processes that determine how land is valued
and claimed. The research findings of this study will be shared with communities
and organizations that are attempting to find equitable and just solutions to
heirs' property conflicts, as well as disseminated via academic conferences and
publications. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
project will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.