* 1234688
* Can you hear me now? Estuarine soundscapes and their role in larval settlement
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2018
* David Eggleston, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2018
* USD 456,414.00

The overall goal of this study is to advance our general understanding of the
role of underwater sound in biological oceanography by characterizing
spatiotemporal variation in an estuarine soundscape, and determine if this
variation affects the settlement of larval invertebrates. The investigators will
use larval bivalves and subtidal oyster reefs in Pamlico Sound, North Carolina
as a study system. A combination of field and laboratory experiments will be
used to test the effects of sound on larval behaviors and settlement. The
underwater sonic environment has the potential to provide meaningful sensory
information to all aquatic animals. Acoustic signals are transmitted relatively
large distances, are present at all depths, and reflect biological and physical
characteristics of the environment, while other cues (e.g. light, chemicals) are
rapidly attenuated from the source. Sound is well established as an orientation
and habitat selection cue for marine mammals and fishes, and has recently
emerged as a potentially important contributor to larval settlement. Building
capacity (knowledge, expertise, equipment) for integrating geophysical aspects
of underwater sound propagation with ecological and oceanographic processes is
central to bio-physical studies of larval connectivity and recruitment in marine
systems. It also informs our understanding of the potential adverse effects of
noise pollution in the ocean and may elucidate untested benefits of marine
reserves - ultimately leading to healthier and better managed oceans and
estuaries. The project supports graduate, postdoctoral and undergraduate student
training, as well as educational outreach programs that span local, regional and
national levels. Underwater sounds and their biological implications are of
interest to a wide audience, and will be used to highlight the exciting nature
of this inter-disciplinary science through: (i) an educational website allowing
visitors to experience biotic and abiotic estuarine sounds and learn about their
role in the environment, (ii) the sound files will be made available to the NSF-
sponsored Wild Music travelling exhibit, and BioMusic/UPBEATS program at UNC-
Greensboro, (iii) integration of estuarine soundscape lessons into NCSU/CMAST's
Science Academy led by the Carteret County, NC School System and targets middle-
school students, and (iv) data and results will be used by Southeast COSEE
program for training to teachers.