* 1234532
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Fundamental Properties of Lead-free Nanosolders for Nanoscale Assembly and Nano-joining
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sammy Shina, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 272,380.00

The research objective of this grant is to determine the synthesis-structure-
property relationships in nanoscale lead-free solders (nanosolders) for
joining/bonding applications. Although nanotechnology has experienced dramatic
development in the area of electronics and devices, some key challenges have to
be overcome in order to reach the stage of nanoelectronics manufacturing and
commercialization. To date, one major challenge in nanoelectronics and device
research is the effective joining of nanoelements (such as nanowires or carbon
nanotubes) with low contact resistance to obtain reliable electrical and thermal
interconnection. In this project, the PIs will synthesize several promising
lead-free nanosolders, in the form of isotropic and anisotropic nanostructures
(nanospheres, nanorods, nanowires, etc), and determine the fundamental
properties underlying their potential applications in nanoscale assembly and
nano-joining. Melting points of nanosolders, nanoscale wetting, inter-metallic
formation, and phase transformation will be studied. The potential issues of
nanosolders, including surface oxidation, will be probed and addressed through
collaboration with local electronics companies in the New England and US
Northeast Region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this interdisciplinary
collaborative effort will provide a pathway into further miniaturization of
nanoelectronic devices with high quality and reliability. Lead-free nanosolder
materials and nano-soldering techniques are expected to play a key role in the
electronics industry, as well as in various areas of advanced materials joining,
including medical devices, nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS), sensors,
aerospace and defense industries. The results from this project will be
disseminated through the NSF NSEC Center for High-rate Nanomanufacturing (CHN),
the New England Lead-free Electronics Consortium (over 30 local and national
companies), the Integrated Electronics Engineering Center (IEEC) in New York,
and professional conferences. Technical seminars, joint workshops, and
conferences on nanosolders and nanoelectronics assembly will be organized by the
PIs at the two institutions in Massachusetts and New York. The new findings will
also be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses, including the
development of new nano-joining lab modules, and in K-12 outreach with the
Museum of Science (MoS) in Boston.