* 1234560
* Collaborative Research: Reliability-based Hurricane Risk Assessment for Offshore Wind Farms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jerome Hajjar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 183,043.00

This collaborative research grant provides funding for a program of fundamental
research into the assessment of hurricane-associated risk to Atlantic wind farms
and hurricane resistant design of OWT support structures to overcome barriers to
offshore wind energy development. The research program builds upon the bodies of
knowledge associated with oil and gas platform development in the hurricane-
prone Gulf of Mexico and wind energy development in the North and Baltic Seas.
The project comprises four integrated research tasks: (1) the development of a
probabilistic hurricane hazard modeling framework for the Atlantic coast; (2) a
fragility analysis framework for OWT support structures including case studies
of prototype support structures; (3) relationships between individual turbine
fragility and wind farm reliability; and (4) novel design details for improving
the robustness of OWT support structures to combined, hurricane induced, wind
and wave loading. A vertically integrated, collaborative research team spanning
from the undergraduate to full professor levels across two institutions of
higher learning and a program of outreach including partnership with the
Offshore Wind Energy IGERT program at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst
and mentorship to high school youth in Boston through the Northeastern
University Center for STEM Education promises to enrich the experience of
student participants and to enhance this project through interdisciplinary
interactions with the multidisciplinary faculty
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meeting the national goal of generating 20 percent of
total energy needs from renewable sources by 2030 should, according to the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, include the installation of 54 GW of
electricity generated from offshore wind. This, in turn, requires the
transformational removal of barriers to offshore wind energy development. A
recent U.S. National Academies report has identified the vulnerability of
Atlantic wind farms to hurricanes as such a barrier, and this project addresses
the engineering aspects of this barrier. The likelihood of Atlantic wind farms
encountering hurricanes during their operational life adds to the cost of energy
by increasing uncertainty associated with wind farm performance and therefore
the associated financing and insurance costs. This collaborative research
project focuses on offshore wind turbine (OWT) structures that are typical of
those proposed for the Atlantic coast and that will therefore be exposed to
extreme wind and wave loads. Probabilistic hurricane hazard modeling and
fragility analysis of OWTs and development of recommendations for increased
structural robustness are key components of this project, which builds upon the
extensive knowledge available within the field of seismic engineering, including
probabilistic hazard analysis, performance-based design concepts and non-linear
dynamic modeling. Partnerships with industry will focus the direction of
research to the specific needs of the wind energy and catastrophe risk
industries.