* 1234828
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maize Cultivation and the Politics of Agricultural Modernization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Karl Zimmerer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,362.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the complex
relationship between agricultural modernization and tradition by studying the
practices and perceptions of three key categories of actors in central Mexico.
Agricultural modernization (the process of intensifying agricultural production
through mechanization, chemical inputs, and high-yield crop varieties) has been
a top priority of governments and development agencies around the world since
the Green Revolution. Mexican research organizations dedicated to breeding high-
yield maize varieties have become world leaders in the development and
dissemination of modernized maize technologies since their founding in the
1940s. These programs have had limited success, however, in stimulating the
adoption of such technologies among Mexican farmers. Despite decades of
government policies promoting high-yield maize, the overwhelming majority of
maize farmers in Mexico continue to cultivate traditional varieties that they
have bred themselves. Existing research on the persistence of traditional
agricultural systems has concentrated on farmer perspectives, seeking to explain
why they do or do not adopt modern maize varieties, to the exclusion of actors
working within development institutions who likewise have a livelihood stake in
the process of modernization. This project will explore how agricultural
modernization is engaged and negotiated by agricultural scientists, extension
agents, and small-scale maize farmers in the Central Highland region of Mexico.
The doctoral student will seek answers to the following sets of research
questions: (1) How do those involved in maize production directly and indirectly
conceive of and engage particular development institutions, agricultural
technologies and practices, and processes of agricultural change? (2) How do
these relationships vary within and across livelihoods? (3) How do these
relationships shape existing development institutions, and whose purposes do
they serve as a result? Using a combination of oral histories, semi-structured
interviews, and participant observation, the student will examine how
participants' understandings of and motivations for engaging in particular
agricultural practices and partnerships have developed over time. The student
will determine whether actors working both inside and outside of development
institutions engage in livelihood practices that subvert agricultural
modernization in partial yet significant ways.

Project findings will provide insight into the overlapping effects of investment
in modernizing agricultural systems and adherence to traditional cultivation
methods by filling in gaps in basic understanding regarding the network of
actors implicated in agricultural change. The project also will provide insights
into the contingency of agricultural modernization in Mexico's Central
Highlands, a region that hosts some of the world's foremost centers of maize
research and is a global center of maize diversity. Greater understanding of the
relational process through which development is negotiated will aid in the
conservation of agricultural biodiversity and will increase the effectiveness of
development policies designed to serve the needs of farmers in a region where
maize cultivation is a source of food security, livelihood, and cultural
identity. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.