* 1234046
* SHINE:  Observations and Analysis of Kinetic Dissipation Processes in the Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* John Podesta, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2015
* USD 200,061.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans to investigate plasma turbulence in the
solar wind, solar corona, and throughout the heliosphere by using spacecraft
data and simulations. His research team will study turbulent dissipation
processes in order to determine how propagating kinetic Alfven waves (KAWs)
cause heating of solar wind protons. These results may also be relevant to the
processes that heat the solar corona.

The PI's team will use data from the Cluster spacecraft to study several
important problems in plasma turbulence. These problems include the
determination of the specific wavenumbers at which protons are heated by
turbulence, the factors determining the form of the magnetic helicity spectrum
in the kinetic regime, and whether stochastic heating by a particular KAW
spectrum is a viable mechanism for the perpendicular heating of thermal protons
in the solar wind. The PI will compare the predictions of theory and simulations
for the form of the KAW spectrum in the vicinity of the spectral break and
determine how these predictions compare with real solar wind observations.

The PI's team will integrate their research with education by participating in
the 'Los Alamos Earth and Space Science Academy' (LAESSA) outreach program,
which provides training to New Mexico middle school science teachers. Scientific
results will also be disseminated through publications in scientific journals
and through presentations at community workshops and meetings.