* 1234852
* PESO: Materials and Multivariable Models to Predict Tissue Tropism in Metastasis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Shelly Peyton, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 603,000.00

This PESO award to University of Massachusetts at Amherst by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research is cofunded by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, Biomass Engineering Program (ENG/CBET); the Materials and Surface
Engineering program (ENG/CMMI); and the Office of Physical Sciences-Oncology
(OPSO) of the National Cancer Institute. Metastasis is the leading cause of
fatality for women diagnosed with breast cancer. The most common tissue sites of
distant tumor growth in breast cancer include the brain, lung, liver, and bone.
Given the clear diversity of the biophysical properties of these distant tissue
sites, this proposal hypothesizes that the physical and chemical properties of
these tissues regulate the ability of cancer cells to migrate and proliferate,
the two critical steps for the metastatic lesion formation. The objectives of
this proposal include: 1) the development of 3D biomaterials, which can be
engineered to capture physical and chemical factors of the extracellular matrix
of these tissue sites (brain, lung, and bone); 2) quantification of how a
variety of distinct human breast cancer cell lines migrate and proliferate in
response to these physical and chemical cues; and 3) use of statistical modeling
tools to both describe and predict the relationship between the tunable
biomaterials cues, the signaling network within human breast cancer cell lines,
and the ability of cancer cells to migrate and proliferate in these 3D tunable
biomaterials. The results of these objectives will establish a new class of
biomaterials in which to systematically study how the extracellular matrix
impacts breast cancer metastasis, as well as gain fundamental knowledge of how
biophysical tissue properties impact the biology of cancer metastasis. As part
of the outreach activities, the project plans to initiate a summer research
program for female high school students and teachers in collaboration with the
diversity program at the campus. The PIs have also proposed to develop plans on
how to evaluate the success of educational and outreach program, and how to
improve them.

Most of the breast cancer deaths are linked to metastasis: the ability of
cancer cells to leave the primary tumor site and spread to other organs. One of
the roadblocks holding back progress is that the vast majority of breast cancer
research is performed with cells cultured on plastic or glass surfaces, which
are flat, incredibly rigid, and behave nothing like the complex, three-
dimensional, comparatively soft tissues in the human body. For this reason, this
project is in developing novel environments that look, and functionally behave
like actual human tissue. With this award, 3D structures in a tissue-like
environment that will be prepared to make breast cancer cells think that they
are in a real tumor tissue, or tissues that breast cancer cells most frequently
metastasize to such as the bone, lung, and brain. Using these novel tissue-like
systems, this project will study how metastatic breast cancer cells sense and
respond to these distant tissue sites, and why certain breast cancer cells
prefer to spread to one organ versus another. It is well known that each breast
cancer patient is unique, and the preference for cancer to spread to certain
organs is patient-specific. For this reason, this project will investigate cells
from many different breast cancer disease subtypes, to learn why this cancer
spread is patient-specific. The project envisions that these novel tools will
radically change how the cancer field studies metastasis, and by using materials
that behave more like human tissue, much more rapid progress could be made
possible toward the development of useful chemotherapy drugs. As part of this
grant proposal, this investigator is partnering with the Diversity Program
Office at the campus to form an educational outreach program titled 'Engineering
the Cell: A Bioengineering Experience for Young Women' targeting high school
teachers and female students. This program will integrate research and education
by training both students and teachers in a laboratory setting, and allowing
teachers to take laboratory modules back with them to the classroom for
curriculum development. Successful implementation and growth of this program
will be one mechanism by which to increase the participation of women in
bioengineering and related scientific fields.