* 1234126
* Biomediated Geomechanical Processes for Dust Mitigation and Monitoring at Mine Tailings Impoundments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Stanley Vitton, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 218,912.00

Massive volumes of waste materials are produced annually by mining operations. A
significant fraction of these materials is in the form of tailings that are
discharged as a slurry and contained in earthen structures known as tailings
disposal impoundments. These large earthen structures are subject to intense
regulatory and public attention because of the hazards associated with the
materials they contain. In particular, one of the key physical hazards
associated with tailings in these impoundments is the air pollution from blowing
dust. Conventional approaches for controlling the hazard associated with dust
emissions have several limitations and potential negative side effects on human
health and the environment. In addition, monitoring of mine tailings for
susceptibility to dust emissions is limited and poses a long-term cost to the
mining industry. Recent research using biomediated techniques for ground
improvement have shown the effectiveness of using microorganism to improve the
engineering properties of granular soils. However, the use of bioengineering on
materials such as iron-mine tailings, presents many significant challenges such
as dealing with micron and submicron particles, as well as techniques for
application, distribution, and potential long-term water quality issues.
Therefore, the overall goals of this project are two-fold. First, novel and
sustainable, low-impact biogeoengineering practices for stabilization of mine
tailings to mitigate dust emissions will be developed and tested. This will
entail the engineered stimulation of biomediated cementation processes (e.g.,
calcium carbonate or iron precipitation) and/or artificial cryptogam (biological
crust) formation. The resulting crust will improve the surface strength of mine
tailings impoundments, reducing the potential for fugitive dust emissions, and
thereby mitigating the associated hazards to human and environmental health.
Second, these efforts will be coupled with innovative remote sensing techniques
for monitoring the susceptibility of tailings to dust emissions. Specifically,
thermal inertia computed from remotely sensed thermal images will be used for
monitoring the effect of biomodification of mine tailings and to analyze the
susceptibility of the tailings to dust emissions. These goals will be achieved
via a series of bench-scale laboratory box model evaluations. Society will
benefit in several ways from this application of biomediated geomechanical
processes, and the development of remote sensing techniques for monitoring such
near-surface processes. Mine tailings sites from active, inactive, and abandoned
mine are observed throughout the world. These mine tailings remain un-vegetated
for tens to hundreds of years, and are a significant source for emission of
particulate matter. The particulate matter emissions are monitored in newly
established mines, but the older sites remain unmonitored. Mine tailings and
their associated metal contaminants, which are contained in large surface
tailings impoundments, are prone to significant dust events, both in warm and
cold weather climates. Some of the more dramatic dusting events occur in cold
climates due to the sublimation of the frozen pore waters, also known as dry
freezing, leaving a layer of desiccated (dry) tailings on frozen tailings,
easily allowing the tailings to become airborne and a large source of fugitive
dust. Dust control has been a significant and sensitive issue because of the
effects of dusts on human living conditions. Dust causes human respiratory
health problems (e.g., asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, etc.) and can lead to
vehicle accidents due to poor visibility and road conditions. Correspondingly,
there is need for effective, and economical dust mitigation techniques, as well
as methods for monitoring tailings impoundments and predicting when dust events
might occur.