* 1234855
* Reliability-Based Multidisciplinary Systems Design Under Time-Dependent Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Xiaoping Du, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 276,365.00

The objective of this award is to explore optimal ways to design high
reliability into multidisciplinary systems under time-dependent uncertainty.
Varying randomly over time, time-dependent uncertainty is the major factor that
hinders the ability or reliability of a system to perform its intended function
over its service period. This research aims to optimally reduce the effect of
time-dependent uncertainty on the system reliability. To best address the
challenges in multidisciplinary systems design, the developed methodologies will
specifically account for complexities such as coupling between subsystems,
nonlinearity of system responses, and expensive system simulations. This
research will integrate methodologies of both multidisciplinary systems design
and advanced time-dependent reliability analysis. The integration will
accurately predict the time-to-failure distribution for a given set of design
variables, hence allowing for a direct link between design variables and time-
dependent system reliability. Then with multidisciplinary design optimization
(MDO), optimal system designs can be automatically identified with desired
system reliability and reduced cost.

If successful, the results of this research will impact broad areas of
engineering design and will be applicable to wide engineering applications,
ranging from large defense and civil systems to small integrated circuit
systems. Beyond engineering design, potential areas that will benefit include
energy, system engineering, operations research, management, and reliability
engineering, where time-dependent probabilistic approaches play a vital role.
The knowledge from this project will be transferred through seminars, conference
presentations, and journal articles. The introduction of the research results
into the classroom will also increase awareness of uncertainties and better
foster engineering students' probabilistic skills.