* 1234156
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Determinants of Livelihood Strategies in a Marine Extractive Reserve.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Christian Brannstrom, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,983.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines how the establishment of
marine extractive reserves (MER) affects livelihood strategies of resource users
and investigates how livelihood strategies are lived as compared with the way
such strategies were framed by MER institutional frameworks. As a type of
community-based conservation strategy, the establishment of marine extractive
reserves aims to protect biodiversity as well as traditional communities and
their livelihoods. By considering the case of the Cassurub√° MER in northeast
Brazil, the institutions of the MER and the processes and territorial practices
surrounding its establishment will be examined through a combination of an
analysis of planning and management documents, household surveys, and interviews
with key actors. This mixed methods approach will illuminate how resource users
have used livelihood strategies to contest or adjust to what was expected in the
institutional construction of the MER, and by extension, of this type of
community-based conservation strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
the potential to inform conservation initiatives and policy. MERs are being
widely implemented in places throughout the world where traditional livelihoods
and conservation need to coexist. It will also inform scholarship and research,
likely suggesting that a more flexible approach in the institutional framing of
extractive reserves will permit a closer alignment with the actual livelihood
practices of resource users. The household livelihood data will be used to
create a 'Livelihoods Teaching Module' to be implemented in an undergraduate
course at Texas A&amp;M University. Through the engagement with this model
students will discover the processes that influence the livelihoods of small-
scale resource users in Latin America and elsewhere. The research findings will
be shared with the resource users of the MER, local key actors, and will be
broadly disseminated via scientific conferences and publications. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.