* 1234417
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Pacific section: Collection and analysis of atmospheric deposition
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Ana Aguilar-Islas, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2016
* USD 299,042.00

During the 2013 GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific zonal transect, a gradient in aerosol
inputs to surface waters will be encountered with higher inputs near Peru and
decreasing offshore. This zonal section contrasts sharply to the high aerosol
deposition areas found and sampled during the GEOTRACES North Atlantic Zonal
Section in the fall of 2010 and 2011. As such, this Pacific section represents a
unique opportunity to characterize aerosol and rainfall chemistry in a low
deposition environment. Scientists from the University of Alaska and Florida
State University plan to collect and characterize aerosol and rainfall samples
along this transect, as well as distribute samples to the community. Bulk and
size-fractionated aerosol samples collected on a 24 to 48-hour integrated basis
and event-based rain samples will be analyzed for trace elements and isotopes
(TEIs) to quantify their atmospheric input. The TEIs to be analyzed will be
aluminum, vanadium, chromium, manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc,
cadmium, lead, and thorium, as well as the major ions sodium, magnesium,
potassium, calcium, nitrate, phosphate, chlorine, and fluorine. Other efforts to
be carried out as part of this study include (1) aerosol leaches to determine
seawater-soluble and ultrapure-water-soluble TEI fractions: (2) determine the
size fractionation and redox speciation of seawater-soluble iron: (3) obtain
subsamples of water column samples from other GEOTRACES scientists for the
analysis of the TEIs of interest to help interpret the atmospheric deposition
data; and (4) collaborate with researchers from other institutions to
characterize and constrain estimates of atmospheric deposition. This project
will contribute towards the overall goal of the GEOTRACES Program by
establishing the range of fractional aerosol solubility and better quantify
deposition across the global ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One graduate student
from the University of Alaska would be supported and trained as part of this
project. Relying on a cruise blog, email, and project website updates, the
scientist from the University of Alaska plans to continue her interactions with
students in Alaska, Arizona, and Florida and results from the study would be
incorporated into class curricula, as well as disseminated via public outreach
and web dissemination.