* 1234320
* DMREF: Engineering Organic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Campo
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,100,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With support from the NSF DMR under the Materials Genome
Initiative, Lian Yu, Mark Ediger, Juan de Pablo, and their coworkers will study
Engineering Organic Glasses. Glasses constitute an important class of materials
that combine the advantages of solids, including mechanical stability, with the
advantages of liquids, including macroscopic spatial uniformity, making them
ideal for a wide range of applications. Glasses, however, are inherently non-
equilibrium materials, which makes their study and design particularly
challenging. While familiar glasses are inorganic and polymeric, organic glasses
of relatively low molecular weights are finding applications in electronics,
bio-preservation, and drug delivery. The team seeks to create a knowledge base
and develop design principles for the engineering of organic glasses. The effort
builds on previous progress in the engineering of crystals and inorganic
glasses, as well as recent discoveries in the field of organic glasses, in
particular, the creation of high-density and high-stability glasses with tunable
anisotropy by physical vapor deposition (PVD).

A concerted program of experiments and simulations will target three areas of
organic glass engineering that have technological relevance and where current
understanding is lacking: (1) controlling anisotropy, (2) controlling molecular
conformation, and (3) inhibiting crystallization. Under Aim 1, the team will
study the creation and control of anisotropy in organic glasses by PVD, external
fields, and liquid-crystal order. Though often isotropic, glasses with
controlled anisotropy have potential applications in data storage, non-linear
optics, and laser technologies. Work under Aim 2 seeks to produce organic
glasses while actively controlling molecular conformation. Conformational
flexibility characterizes many molecular components of organic glasses;
controlling conformation offers a unique opportunity in optimizing their
properties (e.g., HOMO/LUMO levels and charge mobility). Under Aim 3, the team
will stabilize organic glasses against crystallization using polymer additives.
This capability will enable promising but easy-to-crystallize organic glasses to
serve as durable amorphous materials. Work in all areas will be performed in a
high-throughput manner, with simulations used to screen the selection of
materials and conditions for experimentation, and to interpret experimental
data.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Glasses are amorphous materials that combine solid-like
mechanical stability and liquid-like spatial uniformity, making them ideal for
many applications ranging from telecommunication to bio-preservation. This
research seeks to advance the science and technology of organic glasses, and the
results will provide a foundation for designing organic glasses with desired
properties through concerted use of simulations and targeted experiments. This
research will benefit materials scientists and engineers in other fields where
glasses and amorphous materials are important, and contribute to a broader
perspective on the science of glasses in general. The improved ability to
stabilize amorphous materials against crystallization will especially benefit
pharmaceutical scientists as they develop amorphous formulations to deliver
highly potent but poorly soluble drugs. Poor solubility is limiting the
development of many drugs that would significantly advance health care in the
U.S. and developing countries. In addition to journal publications, results from
this work will be disseminated via a central website, a mechanism especially
important for archiving and sharing the extensive data from high-throughput
investigations.

Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the multi-disciplinary
nature of this project, having significant exposure to simulations and
experiments, crystals and glasses, and polymeric and low-molecular-weight
materials. Personnel supported by this grant will work with UW-Madison's Pre-
college Enrichment Opportunity Program for Learning Excellence (PEOPLE), which
has a proven record of increasing the enrollment of minority and low-income high
school students in colleges and universities. This program provides experiences
that help students to become scientifically literate citizens and encourages
them to consider careers in science and engineering.