* 1234263
* Elucidation of the Structure-Property Relations of Hybrid Particles and Their Assembly Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Bockstaller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the governing parameters
that determine the structure and cohesive properties of polymer-grafted particle
assemblies and to establish the knowledge base that will enable the efficient
molecular-engineering of nanoparticles that are capable to form mechanically
robust array structures. The assembly of nanoparticles into array structures is
of central importance to the integration of nanoparticle systems into device
architectures for applications ranging from photovoltaics to solid state
lighting. A major barrier in the scalable production of self-assembled particle
array structures is the brittle nature of particle solids that promotes crack
formation during the processing. The proposed study will establish a novel
methodology to enhance the cohesive interactions between particles by binding of
polymeric ligands to nanoparticle surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the proposed research will provide new opportunities for the facile fabrication
of polymer nanocomposites with prescribed microstructure and enhanced
performance and fuel a range of transformative technological innovations, for
example, in the area of solid state lighting for which alone the market is
estimated to grow to $14.3B by 2013. This research grant will enable cross-
disciplinary training for one graduate student and several undergraduate
students in the critical areas of polymer and nanoscale materials. Collaboration
with ongoing programs funded through the National Science Foundation will
promote the participation of minority students and underrepresented groups. This
research grant will support the teaching of a new course and encompass the
development of a teacher workshop on "nanotechnologies for sustainable energy
technologies" as well as a new module to "The Science Van" program that is aimed
at supporting STEM education in underfunded schools in the Pittsburgh area.