* 1234727
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Honeysuckle Encroachment on White Oak Savannas in Relation to Understory Light, Soil, and Dispersal Characteristics.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Melvin Duvall, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,991.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the role of an invasive species
in the decline of a dominant savanna species in the grassland savanna landscape
of central North America. The objective of the study is to identify and develop
ways to stimulate the once dominant white oak by decreasing the aggressive Amur
honeysuckle invasive species. Oak savannas once covered 10 to 13 million
hectares throughout central North America, but have now become geographically
restricted and rare. White oak is a shade-intolerant tree species, and its
regeneration is currently impeded by the domination of an aggressive shade-
tolerant invasive species, Amur honeysuckle, which has spread underneath oak
canopies over the past 70 years. Without a better understanding of how oak trees
can become dominant again, effective land management to help white oak regain
its dominance in the landscape is hindered, and it is predicted that white oak
will lose its historical dominance within the next few decades. This will, in
turn, further deteriorate the Midwest oak savanna remnants, an ecosystem already
threatened in other ways. This project addresses three specific research
questions: (1) How does Amur honeysuckle encroachment effect understory light
environments and photosynthetic efficiency of white oak seedlings and saplings?
(2) What impact does Amur honeysuckle have on soil moisture, soil chemistry, and
soil quality characteristics that are important to white oak regeneration and
development? (C) Finally, how can understanding the temporal and spatial
dispersion patterns (gene flow) of encroaching Amur honeysuckle populations be
used to design effective management strategies? To answer these questions the
PIs of this project will conduct a biogeographic study at the Nachusa
Grasslands, a grassland conservation area in north-central Illinois. They will
analyze the spatial differences in light availability, the differences in soil
moisture and soil quality underneath oaks and honeysuckle, and conduct an
analysis of the dispersion patterns (gene flow) of honeysuckle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will be communicated directly
to land managers and stewards at Nachusa Grasslands and other similar
conservation areas in order to inform management and conservation policies
regarding invasive species management. Students from underrepresented groups
will be recruited to work on the project and results will be incorporated into
relevant courses at Northern Illinois University to help students apply
scientific concepts and methods to real world situations. The project will also
be included in NIU STEM outreach efforts with youth and community groups.
Additionally, findings will be presented at regional and national academic
conferences, and published in key journals. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support for enhancing the training
and professional development of a promising graduate student as she establishes
an independent research career.