* 1234628
* Hurricane Wind Load Monitoring for Coastal Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kurtis Gurley, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 125,044.00

The collection of full-scale dynamic wind pressure on residential roofs during
land falling hurricanes is important for determining how to cost effectively
reduce damage in hurricanes. Wind tunnel technology has been used for wind
pressure measurements on small scale models. These pressures need to be
correlated with data collected on real structures in actual high wind events.
The proposed research pursues the means to accurately measure wind loads on the
roofs of residential buildings during land falling hurricanes. A self-contained
portable roof pressure monitoring system is under development. The objectives of
the project are to finalize the sensor assembly, to conduct controlled
experiments, to develop statistical algorithms to validate the collected data,
and to extend the underpinning technology to wind velocity data collection. The
research will advance basic knowledge concerning the wind pressures experienced
by homes during extreme weather events. A well-defined understanding of such
wind loads will have major implications on the development of methods to
mitigate wind damage. Students working on the project will gain experience in
sensor technology, and in structural and hurricane engineering.

The proposed research will address the characterization and modeling of dynamic
wind loads on complex shaped full-scale residential structures during land
falling hurricanes. Scale model tests in boundary layer wind tunnels have been
an important tool for the derivation of appropriate design wind loads found in
the ASCE 7 Wind Load Provisions. Questions have been raised concerning the
ability of wind tunnel simulations to accurately determine peak loads from
strong wind events, emphasizing the need to compare wind tunnel with full-scale
loads. This is a significant issue that can alter the current knowledge of the
wind vulnerability of residential construction along the entire hurricane prone
U.S. coast. A self-contained portable roof pressure monitoring system has been
developed for rapid deployment and collection of roof pressure data during land
falling hurricanes. Data collection among multiple units on the same structure
is synchronized to quantify spatial correlation and aggregate wind loads. The
physical profile of the individual units may interfere with the dynamic pressure
being measured in some flow regimes. These scenarios will be identified
experimentally in a controlled laboratory environment, and post-processing
algorithms developed to evaluate which portions of sensor records should be
retained for analysis. The underpinning technology developed for the pressure
measuring units will be adapted to interface with anemometers in order to
characterize lateral length scales in ground-level hurricane winds. The proposed
full-scale data collection in the field is needed to evaluate wind load modeling
and prescriptive design loads. With this knowledge, a risk-consistent framework
for the sustainability and future development of the coastal infrastructure will
be possible.