* 1234241
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Homesteading: Changing Social and Economic Relations and the Practice of Self-Provisioning in the City.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Deborah Martin, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 02/28/2014
* USD 11,634.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the social and economic relations
that develop around urban self-provisioning practices. In recent year self-
provisioning practices such as home-based small-scale agriculture have exhibited
visible growth in U.S cities. Local municipal governments across the country
have been refashioning land-use, zoning, and food safety policies accordingly,
as a means of encouraging urban sustainability. Self-provisioning is especially
prevalent among urban homesteaders who are reclaiming domestic agrarian skills
such as food-oriented gardening, food preservation, and the keeping of poultry,
to foster household and community resilience. Despite the current rise of self-
provisioning practices in the U.S. and the popularity of urban homesteading,
little research has sought to fully explain why these practices are on the rise,
who is practicing them, and how they affect dynamics of gender, race, and class
in social and economic relations within urban environments, including the home
and household. Through an integration of participant observation, semi-
structured interviews, and surveys of urban homesteaders in the Boston area,
this doctoral dissertation research project aims to answer the following
questions: (1) What is the nature of self-provisioning among urban homesteaders
in the Boston area? (2) What kinds of social and economic relations are self-
provisioning practices embedded in and enabled by? (3) What are the impacts of
self-provisioning on social and economic relations across various urban scales?
Working with the urban homesteaders' league and other community organizations
committed to urban sustainability and food justice, this project samples a wide
range of individuals and self-provisioning practices occurring in different
kinds of spaces (homes, community gardens, places of worship), each with
particular legal, social, economic, and environmental constraints, including
property values, industrial toxins, zoning, and food safety laws. The research
contributes to human-environment geography by asking what new relationships with
nature self-provisioning creates, and contributes to economic geography by
considering how these activities contribute to the diversification of local
economies. It also makes more specific contributions to feminist geographic
research on domestic labor and social reproduction by examining the ways in
which urban homesteading expands and reworks the gender relations of work in the
home.

Findings from this research will be of interest to policy makers as they
consider the quality of life, economic resilience, gender equity, and social
justice dimensions of urban agriculture and sustainability. The research will
produce an everyday account of what urban sustainability means in practice, in
terms of urban homesteaders? lived experiences, spatial practices, and
attitudes. Research findings will be shared with participants and local policy
makers through public talks, community forums, and an interactive website. The
research will also identify possible policy changes in land use, zoning, and
food safety laws that will benefit urban residents engaged in a variety of urban
homesteading practices. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this project will provide support that will enable a promising graduate student
to establish an independent research career.