* 1234835
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Timing and the Paleoenvironmental Significance of Wind-Blown Sand Activity During the Last Glacial Period in the Upper Mississippi River Basin.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Henry Loope, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 02/28/2014
* USD 15,869.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the distribution and timing
of eolian (wind-blown) sand activity during the last glacial period in central
North America. The landscape setting, form, and age of eolian sand deposits
indicate past changes in the supply of sand for movement by the wind, wind
regime, vegetation cover, and factors that influence vegetation such as
temperature and precipitation. This information is important for reconstructing
past climate change south of the Laurentide Ice Sheet during the last glacial
period as well as for improving boundary condition inputs to climate models.
Much of the understanding of environmental conditions in the North American
midcontinent over the last 21,000 years relies on biological proxies (e.g.,
pollen and plant or animal fossils) but eolian sediments provide important
additional parameters to complement these data. Determination of an accurate age
for eolian activity is an important task in reconstructing past climate change.
This project will use optically simulated luminescence (OSL or optical) dating
to determine the age of eolian sand. Optical ages provide an estimate of the
timing of burial of sand after exposure to light during transportation. The
project will address several research questions: 1) Was the timing of eolian
sand activity time-transgressive from south to north (i.e., older in the south
and younger in the north) as the ice sheet and permafrost (permanently frozen
ground) retreated northward after the last glacial maximum ca. 21,000 years ago?
2) Does the chronology and landscape setting of eolian sand indicate a response
to abrupt climate change during the last deglaciation? These questions will be
addressed by collecting and analyzing samples for optical dating along a ca. 500
km north-south transect from western Wisconsin and southeastern Minnesota to
eastern Iowa. The time sequences of eolian activity will provide key insight
into the landscape response to climate change during the last glacial period in
the North American midcontinent.

Understanding past landscape response to environmental change is an important
step in predicting future response and its impact on society. This is especially
relevant for dry areas in central North America, which are vulnerable to future
warming and increasingly variable precipitation. These conditions may influence
eolian sand activity, which has major implications for preserving productive
agricultural land as well as human health concerns related to airborne dust.
This project investigates the climatic parameters during the most recent past
episode of relatively rapid warming (ca. 21-10 thousand years ago) and provides
background for predicting future changes in eolian activity in central North
America. Results from this project will be presented to academic as well as
broader audiences through publication and conference presentations, and also
collaboration with private (The Nature Conservancy) and public (Department of
Natural Resources of several states) agencies, with an emphasis on outreach at
native sand prairie sites. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this project will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish an independent research career.