* 1234067
* Collaborative Research: MEMS Frequency Converters Based on Nonlinear Resonances
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Steven Shaw, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The goal of this collaborative research effort is to develop micro-electro-
mechanical frequency converters that make use of subharmonic resonances. The
first approach utilizes a chain of N coupled resonators with 2:1 internal
resonances among nearest neighbors, which takes an input frequency at one end
and provides a set of output frequencies that are the input frequency divided by
2^j, for j=2,?,N along the chain. The second approach makes use of subharmonic
responses in vibro-impact devices; these provide frequency division by integer
factors using a single resonator driven with input frequencies near multiples of
its natural frequency. Both systems will be investigated from a fundamental
dynamical systems point of view, and the results will be used to develop and
optimize MEMS designs. The resulting devices will be fabricated, experimentally
characterized, and tested for performance
metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frequency converters are devices that take an
input frequency and change it into another frequency at the output. They are
used in spread spectrum communication systems, signal synthesizers, mixers,
clock generators, and sensors. The originality of the proposed effort is the
combined use of nonlinear mechanical vibrational resonances and the inherent
design flexibility of micro-electro-mechanical systems to develop entirely
passive converters that do not require the buffers and amplifiers used in most
electronic converters. The anticipated designs are appealing due to their size,
ease of fabrication, integration with electronics, ability for frequency tuning,
and low power requirements. The broader impacts of the effort include outreach
activities, multi-disciplinary training of students, inclusion of students from
underrepresented groups, development of classroom materials, and dissemination
of research.