* 1234594
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: National Integration or Regional Competition? Industrial Policy Debates in a Rising Power.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* James Murphy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 02/28/2014
* USD 15,997.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate how contemporary emerging
economies (such as the 'BRIC' countries of Brazil, India and China) are
mobilizing state actors, institutions, and private firms in order to enhance the
quality of their engagement with global markets and to improve the distribution
of economic development at the sub-national scale. It will do so by examining
recent changes to Brazil's industrial development strategies. Since the 1980s
most developing and emerging countries have shifted away from using state-led
industrial policy to accelerate and distribute economic growth and facilitate
integration into global value chains. Brazil has been an exception to this
trend, as the state has targeted strategic industrial development initiatives
that can both accelerate the pace of global economic integration while
addressing the country's historic imbalance between its Northeast and Southeast
regions. This project will analyze the institutional changes accompanying the
return of industrial policy with particular emphasis on the imaginaries,
ideologies, and networks that support and enable state-led development projects
to be devised and implemented. These institutional changes, ideas, networks, and
projects will be linked to emerging development outcomes within Brazil's richer
Southeast region and its poorer Northeast region. Theoretically, the project
draws on contemporary institutional theory, cultural political economy theory,
and assemblage theories of regional development to provide critical insights
into the ideological factors behind, and contestations associated with,
industrial policy formation and implementation within Brazil and how these ideas
and policy-making processes influence regional and national development
objectives such as growth, poverty alleviation, and global market integration.
Two sets of questions are addressed: First, how and why have the policy shifts
been achieved, and what institutional and ideological shifts have been central
to this reformulation of industrial policy? Second, what do these changes mean
for the geographic distribution of industrial and social development within
Brazil, and more broadly for the quality of that country's integration into the
world economy? To answer these questions the co-PI will analyze government and
media documents about the reintroduction of industrial policy and conduct a wide
range of in-depth interviews with officials and key informants from relevant
policy institutions and research centers. To enable the comparative aspects of
the project, the selected institutions and individuals will be drawn from
Brazil's Southeast and Northeast regions.

The results from this research will contribute significantly to contemporary
debates among academics and policy makers about the benefits and drawbacks of
state-driven industrial policies. Research findings will be disseminated through
a series of scholarly publications, conference presentations, and presentations
to the project's participants and policy officials. Through collaboration in
this project the PIs will develop durable ties to researchers and policy makers
in Brazil and will thus establish long-term pathways for intellectual exchange
between the countries. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this project will provide support to enable a promising graduate student to
establish an independent research career.