* 1234473
* Along-isopycnal transport in the Southern Ocean: Assessing DIMES results with an assimilating model
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Sarah Gille, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 823,268.00

Intellectual Merit: The Diapycnal and Isopycnal Mixing Experiment in the
Southern Ocean (DIMES) is designed to evaluate the role of isopycnal (mostly
horizontal) mixing along the steeply tilted density surfaces of the Southern
Ocean, and at the same time to determine the magnitude of diapycnal (mostly
vertical) mixing processes that have the potential to transform water properties
at mid-depth. Together these two processes are key contributors to the global
meridional overturning circulation. DIMES carried out an extensive sampling
program including acoustically-tracked sub-surface floats, a mid-depth tracer
release, a mooring array and water property surveys. Now that the bulk of DIMES
data collection has taken place, the objective of this project is to make
optimal use of the DIMES observations by employing them as constraints for an
ocean general circulation model, the Southern Ocean State Estimate (SOSE), which
is run using a 4-dimendional variational data assimilation technique. SOSE will
provide best estimates of the background conditions in the DIMES research
domain, which is vital for the DIMES float and tracer analysis. SOSE fields will
be closely compared with DIMES and other independent observations to provide an
assessment of uncertainties in SOSE, as well as uncertainties in the DIMES
observations and in its derived estimates of Lagrangian mixing. SOSE fields will
reveal the details of isopycnal mixing and oceanic heat transport in the DIMES
domain and throughout the Southern Ocean. Lessons learned in the DIMES domain
about isopycnal mixing will be extended to the entire Southern Ocean to evaluate
spatial variations in isopycnal mixing and its sensitivity to local bathymetry,
wind, and buoyancy forcing. SOSE fields will also be analyzed to evaluate the
strength of meridional overturning circulation, and to assess poleward heat
transport across the ACC and towards the climatically sensitive ice shelves
surrounding Antarctica.

Broader Impacts: Research conducted for this project using SOSE will contribute
to the broader multi-institution, multi-PI efforts to interpret data collected
as part of DIMES, with the ultimate goal of developing a better understanding of
along-isopycnal and diapycnal mixing processes in the ocean. Output from SOSE
will to be made publicly available to be used for analysis by DIMES-affiliated
research groups and by other interested researchers. The state estimate setup
(forward and adjoint model) will be at the DIMES research groups' disposal for
additional runs in support of their science goals. Results from DIMES will
ultimately lead to better physical understanding of these mixing processes and
suggest improvements in the mixing parameterizations of numerical models used
for future climate projections. In addition, the project will contribute to the
training of one graduate student who currently holds a NASA Earth System Science
graduate fellowship and will provide support for a post-doctoral researcher, who
will develop his skills in assimilation and model analysis.

This project is a contribution to the U.S. CLIVAR (Climate Variability and
Predictability) Program.