* 1234162
* LTER:   Biodiversity, Multiple Drivers of Environmental Change and Ecosystem Functioning at the Prairie Forest Border
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2019
* USD 6,125,699.00

The Cedar Creek Long Term Ecological Research program is designed to understand
how the prairie grasslands and forests of the Midwest function and how this
functioning may be influenced by human activities. The research combines large,
well-replicated, long-term experiments with long-term observations in native
ecosystems, and uses the results to develop and test theories of ecosystem
dynamics and functioning. The experiments focus on how and why the loss of
native species, shifts in fire regimes, climate change, elevated atmospheric
CO2, and elevated rates of nitrogen deposition affect the productivity,
stability and functioning of prairie and forest ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will help to provide
solutions to some of the environmental problems the nation and world face as
global population approaches 9 or 10 billion people. Some human actions are
decreasing the ability of ecosystems around the world to provide goods and
services vital to humanity. Cedar Creek research addresses how human activities
alter the ability of natural and managed grasslands and forests to remove carbon
dioxide from the atmospheric and store it in soils and plants, purify
groundwater, produce sustainable biofuels, and increate soil fertility; and
seeks ways that these abilities can be improved and restored. The program will
continue its history of creative dissemination of results to the broader public
and of advising government official and agencies. Its signature professional
development program trains both K-12 teachers and students, and included 6000
teachers and students in 2011. The site's education program will continue
partnerships to train educators of Native American students and strengthen
engagement with urban, underserved schools. Diverse undergraduate students from
across the country together with graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
will be trained through this highly integrative program.