* 1234500
* Axial Dispersion Due to Shear-induced Diffusion in Suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 282,357.00

1234500&lt;br/&gt;PI: Stone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding suspension
mechanics is crucial to the design and characterization of new and developing
technologies since particle-laden materials occur in a myriad of fluid systems,
e.g. particle-reinforced plastics, colloidal materials for chemical and
biological detection, disease identification and drug delivery, cellular
suspensions, emulsions, and building materials. Quantitative understanding of
common suspension flows is complicated by the coupling of the particle
concentration distribution to the rheology of the material. In particular,
typical suspensions are non-Newtonian as they exhibit dependence of the
effective viscosity and normal stress differences on both the local
concentration of particles and the shear or extension rate. Furthermore, the
particle distribution in a flow typically evolves in directions both parallel
and transverse to the mean flow direction due to the phenomenon of shear-induced
migration. This feature of the transport process affects both the dispersion of
a plug of particles, and the average speed of motion of the suspension. We have
recently made progress towards characterizing theoretically axial dispersion in
a dilute suspension, where the fluctuations responsible for the dispersion occur
as a consequence of shear-induced migration/diffusion of the particles. Most
significantly, for typical flow conditions, the effective axial dispersion of a
bolus of particles is reduced when shear-induced diffusion effects are
significant. In addition, the effective axial dispersivity scales linearly with
the average flow speed and as the third power of the pipe or channel radius,
both features differ from the traditional Brownian motion-driven axial
dispersion. The focus of the proposal centers on three main problems: (i) the
generalization of axial dispersion ideas for the case where axial spreading of a
monodisperse suspension is produced by fluctuations that are driven by shear-
induced migration/diffusion, (ii) analyzing the influence of shear-induced
diffusion on transport and particle separation in bidisperse suspension flows,
and (iii) analyzing the axial dispersion process for channels with non-uniform
cross-sectional shapes as is typical of many microdevices. In each case it is
necessary to couple the distribution of particles to the transport properties
(effective diffusivity, effective viscosity, normal stress differences, etc.).
Experiments will complement the modeling. The results will be applicable to new
applications involving suspensions or detection methods whereby a bolus of
specially designed particles is injected into a flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
common materials are suspensions, which refers to solid particles (or other
kinds of particulates) distributed in a liquid. These materials are used
industrially and are in common uses in households, food products,
pharmaceuticals, etc. Often it is necessary to blend additional particles into a
suspension, either to modify the properties of the suspension (e.g. how easily
the material flows), or to add a functionality to the mixture (e.g. adding a
drug), or to add objects that may detect harmful particles in the flow (e.g.
small sensors that might identify or capture pathogenic cells). In these cases
it is necessary to understand quantitatively and qualitatively how this mixing
takes places, and how the additive is redistributed in the suspension. Although
there are sophisticated theoretical and numerical tools for such mixing of
molecular solutes, there is much less known about the spreading and distribution
of macroscopic particles. We will address these questions using theory, modeling
and experiments, and develop quantitative guidelines for understanding these
dispersive, i.e. spreading, processes.