* 1234993
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Design and Operation of Dye Sensitized Solar Cells Using an Integrated Strategy Involving First-Principles Modeling, Synthesis, and Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 57,500.00

PI: Soroush, Masoud / Lee, Daeyeon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236180 /
1234993&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Drexel University / University of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Optimal Design and
Operation of Dye Sensitized Solar Cells Using an Integrated Strategy Involving
First-Principles Modeling, Synthesis, and
Characterization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs an integrated
research strategy involving first principles mathematical modeling and
simulation, synthesis and characterization to design solid-state dye sensitized
solar cells (DSSCs) with optimal performance, and optimally operate and
integrate the cells. Current DSSC technology faces limitations from significant
photogenerated charge recombination losses at the photoanode-electrolyte
interface. Central to this research is the hypothesis that higher power
conversion efficiencies will be obtained by reducing major losses in electrical
conduction within the photoanode and electrolyte of the cell. A holistic
approach will be taken where a first principles solid-state DSSC mathematical
model will provide a detailed understanding of charge transport behavior, which
will then efficiently guide the design and fabrication of effective photoanodes
and electrolytes that mitigate recombination losses. This approach is expected
to lead to design of new energy materials, fabrication of optimized next
generation DSSCs with significantly higher solar cell efficiency above current
state-of-the-art, and optimal operation and integration of the cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this project is to design and test a
highly-efficient DSSC array through model-based optimal design, integration and
operation. The proposed study will be conducted using the integrated research
strategy. The specific goals of this project are: (a) Develop a detailed
macroscopic first principles mathematical model of solid-state DSSCs. (b) Using
the developed predictive model, search the DSSC design parameter space
systematically to arrive at an optimal design of DSSCs. (c) Investigate the
effect of electrophoretic deposition parameters on the structure and composition
of TiO2-carbon nanotube (CNT) composites. (d) Study initiated chemical vapor
deposition (iCVD) synthesis and processing conditions on pore filling and
resulting polymer structure and properties. (e) Fabricate and characterize DSSCs
integrating iCVD polymer electrolytes and hole conductors. (f) Fabricate and
characterize solid-state DSSCs incorporating TiO2/CNT photoanodes and iCVD
polymer electrolytes and hole conductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is expected to benefit society as a whole as we gain a predictive model
for creating enhanced energy materials as well as the necessary components for
significantly increasing DSSC efficiency above the current ~11% which has been
the record for the past 15 years, and approach the theoretical limit of ~30%. In
addition, the fundamental knowledge of model and materials development has
practical applications in other energy devices such as in fuel cells,
supercapacitors and batteries. The ability to create viable, lighter and less
expensive polymer and organic based solar cells is expected to establish a
strong intellectual property position for replacing silicon technology, and open
the door to flexible photovoltaics. The PIs and Co-PI will train and mentor one
pre-doctoral and one Master?s research assistants as well as six undergraduate
(REU) and several local high school students. The students will participate in
broad range of research activities from mathematical modeling to synthesis,
processing and characterization. The PIs also plan to be actively involved in
various outreach scientific and technological events and activities in the
Philadelphia area. The project results will be released to the public at
conferences and in journal and conference proceedings papers.