* 1234114
* DMREF/Collaborative Research:  Multi-Scale Fundamental Investigation of Sintering Anisotropy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Eugene Olevsky, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 298,610.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) grant
is focused on the development of a new integrated multi-scale approach
incorporating modeling and experimentation on sintering-induced deformation
processes taking into account anisotropy phenomena. Sintering-induced
anisotropy, one of the most fundamental aspects of powder processing, is poorly
understood and cannot be predicted properly by the existing models and
approaches. It is also technologically very important since many powder-
processing approaches induce anisotropy. The project includes the study of the
complex interplay between processing conditions and anisotropic microstructure-
constitutive properties which will provide fundamental, basic knowledge and a
novel practical approach to design and optimize the manufacturing of advanced
ceramic and metal systems with programmable macroscopic characteristics and
microstructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research intends to establish a new
methodology to optimize the sintering of a broad range of complex material
systems including multilayered solid oxide fuel cells. The developed concepts
can be used to design the processing of other multilayered material systems
(e.g. sensors, actuators, solar cell packaging) or processing under applied
stresses (e.g. hot-pressing, sinter-forging). The project also contributes to
the general framework of processing approaches which are enhanced by
experimentally validated simulations and which significantly accelerate the
development of new materials and processes. The teams from the two universities
will work closely with collaborators from the industry to continuously test and
refine the simulation approaches. Co-PIs will also collaborate with researchers
from the Sandia National Laboratories in the development of the multi-scale
simulation algorithms. This integrated, collaborative research program provides
a unique high quality learning opportunity for students at the University of
Washington, Seattle and at the San Diego State University.