* 1234125
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Middle Paleolithic Lithic Technology and Behavior in the Hrazdan River Gorge, Armenia.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Daniel Adler, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 21,168.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Daniel S. Adler, Beverly A. Schmidt will conduct a
technological analysis of curated and recently excavated lithic assemblages from
the cave sites of Lusakert I and Yerevan I, located 25km apart in the Hrazdan
Gorge, Armenia, dating to between 60,000 and 40,000 BP. Both sites are located
within relatively shallow, naturally-formed columnar basalt caves in close
proximity to numerous high-quality obsidian sources. Lusakert I is the only cave
site from this time period in Armenia with stratified deposits of well-preserved
archaeological material recovered using modern methods, while Yerevan I has
traditionally been used as a benchmark assemblage for southern Caucasus lithic
industries. However, the few available publications for the two sites present
conflicting interpretations regarding the nature of early human technological
behavior, site occupation and duration, mobility, and land-use. Therefore, it is
even more important to substantiate or reject prior interpretations with a
thorough and detailed analysis. Ms. Schmidt's research provides the first
opportunity to conduct a variety of technical and behavioral studies in the area
that would be comparable to published studies from neighboring regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Armenia presents a gap in our knowledge of lithic
technologies and behaviors in the Caucasus region, which is situated between the
Black Sea and Caspian Sea, incorporating areas of Russia, Georgia, Armenia,
Iran, Azerbaijan, and Turkey. The identification of technological and stylistic
variants in a lithic assemblage can be interpreted as markers of cultural
traditions and innovations. Due to the influence on lithic technologies by raw
material quality and availability, foraging practices, mobility range, and cost-
benefit decision-making, it is possible to infer human behavioral patterns in
flake production, reduction, resource acquisition and exploitation, planning and
curation, economic efficiency, regional networks, and material transportation
patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of Ms. Schmidt's project is to
expand the limited knowledge of early human behavior in the southern Caucasus
and to test hypotheses related to technology, behavior, site occupation and
duration, mobility range, and raw material economy, establishing a dataset for
comparisons with already published sites. This research will also contribute to
the exchange of scholarly information both within the Caucasus, and between
adjacent regions, in the form of academic publications, conference
presentations, and online availability of site graphics, regional information,
maps, and site reports. The collaboration and academic relationships established
through Ms. Schmidt's research will continue to promote archaeological field
research and technological analysis in Armenia, specifically the ongoing
cooperation between Yerevan State University, the Institute of Archaeology and
Ethnography and the Armenian National History Museum in Yerevan, and the
University of Connecticut in the US.