* 1234166
* Role of Organic Matter in Determining the Solubility of Atmospherically-Delivered Iron
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Patrick Hatcher, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2015
* USD 367,105.00

The atmospheric delivery of soluble Fe to the ocean is an important process
contributing to oceanic primary production and the drawdown of atmospheric CO2.
Combustion influenced air masses carry highly soluble Fe, but the reasons for
this increased solubility remain unclear despite the importance to global carbon
cycling. Acidic organic matter (OM) components (e.g., -COOH groups) can complex
with trace metals, yet no study to date has investigated the comprehensive
molecular characteristics of aerosol OM for their role as a determinant of Fe
solubility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at Old Dominion
University will study the relationship between the molecular characteristics of
marine aerosol water soluble OM (WSOM) and Fe solubility. Marine particulate
aerosols collected during GEOTRACES cruises will be examined to identify WSOM
characteristics that may play a role in delivering soluble and bioavailable Fe
to the N. Atlantic Ocean. Aerosol WSOM will be characterized using advanced
molecular and chemometric techniques to test whether: (1) continental
combustion-influenced aerosol samples show molecular characteristics unique from
those of continental dust influenced samples, having characteristics consistent
with higher contributions from OM with acidic functional group; (2) aerosol WSOM
examined along a gradient of Fe solubility show concurrent changes in the
relative magnitude of highly oxygenated compounds and contributions from acidic
functional groups; and (3) 2D HMBC NMR reveal unique components in composite
continental combustion influenced samples relative to marine and dust-influenced
samples, and these unique components include OM with carboxyl functional groups
that can bind Fe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first of its
kind to extensively examine WSOM molecular characteristics and Fe solubility on
concurrently collected aerosol samples. The results will be useful for
understanding Fe distributions and biogeochemical cycling in the ocean. A
potentially transformative aspect of this proposal will be the identification of
aerosol WSOM molecular components unique to combustion influenced air masses
that have the potential to facilitate aerosol Fe solubility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The findings of this project are expected
to be highly relevant to oceanic and global biogeochemical cycling of OM and
many trace metals that form organic complexes. Combustion-influenced OM
associations may help explain patterns in the global oceanic distribution of
other trace metals and provide key insights into oceanic processes (e.g.,
primary production, biological pump). The project would provide a strong
interdisciplinary, training and learning environment for the PIs and
undergraduate and graduate students at ODU. A PhD student would be involved in
all aspects of the project and learn state-of-the-art analytical techniques and
gain experience in aspects of project management, data processing, and data
presentation