* 1234286
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Advanced Driver Assistance and Active Safety Systems through Driver's Controllability Augmentation and Adaptation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,551.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the next generation,
proactive, driver-assist active safety control systems (ASCS) for commercial
passenger vehicles. The main novel ingredient over existing methods is the
adaptation of the ASCS specifications and operation to the individual driver
habits and driving skills (e.g., aggressive or timid), his/her current cognitive
state (e.g., attentive or not). By using recently developed techniques from the
field of computational neuroscience and adaptive control theory, this research
will develop algorithms that will capture the state of the driver, the vehicle
and the environment from automotive sensors and behavioral (e.g., eye movement)
measurements that will be subsequently used to adapt and customize the ASCS to
particular situations so as to achieve maximum performance (e.g., minimum
stopping distance during emergency braking, etc). This research will take
advantage of recent advances in sensor technology, which has led to the reliable
fusion of data, so as to provide situational awareness for the vehicle and the
persistent monitoring of the (re)actions of the driver.

If successful, this research will enable new levels of performance for the
current active safety systems for passenger vehicles, thus leading to decreased
accident rates, increased comfort and improved fuel economy. Graduate and
undergraduate engineering students as well as local high school teachers will
benefit from their involvement in this research through NSF's REU and RET
projects and through Georgia Tech?s PURA and Dash undergraduate research
fellowship programs. Undergraduate and high-school minority students will
actively participate in data collection and analysis. Under-represented groups
will be particularly targeted for participation in the research activities under
this award, directly through active recruitment and indirectly through the
collaboration with the industry partner, Ford Motor Company, e.g., in the form
of summer internships.