* 1234561
* Sensing and Control of Photopolymerization-based Additive Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* David Rosen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2016
* USD 269,188.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypotheses that 1) an
interferometery-based sensor can monitor the extent of polymerization throughout
the irradiation area of a photopolymerization-based additive manufacturing
process, 2) the sensor will enable measurement of cured part size, and 3) the
sensor will enable feedback control of the process. Most additive manufacturing
processes operate in an open-loop manner. In contrast, a novel interferometry-
based sensor is investigated to monitor photopolymerization processes in real-
time. The sensor will be integrated with a research Exposure Controlled
Projection Lithography system to enable part fabrication. With this sensor, high
resolution interrogation of polymerizing samples can be performed, enabling an
understanding of the spatial and temporal distribution of polymerization rate
and degree of cure as a function of process variables. A new model of
photopolymerization will be tested that incorporates polymerization rate,
inhibitor presence and diffusion, and shrinkage. The model will be used in the
development of a new approach to process planning and to predict cured part size
and shape. Feedback control capability will be developed that enables
adjustments of photopolymerization extents in order to improve process precision
and repeatability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research could
benefit society by enabling the manufacture of precision micro-optics devices
that could not be fabricated economically by conventional processes. These
devices could have applications in medical imaging, portable energy,
photography, and metrology industries, among others. Graduate and undergraduate
students from under-represented groups will be recruited for this project. The
work will enhance the infrastructure for research and education by developing
and maintaining facilities for photopolymerization sensing and control
experiments and for part fabrication. Broad dissemination will be achieved
through courses enhanced with research results, undergraduate research
opportunities, active industry involvement, papers and presentations in
engineering forums, and a web-site to report results and provide access to the
developed additive manufacturing sensing and control system.