* 1234780
* Evaluation of Field-Based Liquefaction Approaches for Calcareous Sands Using Shear Wave Velocity
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Miguel Pando, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2015
* USD 189,540.00

The objective of this project is to assess the applicability of current field-
based liquefaction approaches for calcareous sands. This is of importance
because there are many coastal communities in areas of high seismicity founded
on calcareous sands (e.g. Haiti, Puerto Rico, Hawaii, etc.), and existing field-
based approaches were developed almost entirely for case studies in silica
sands. We will perform a combined in situ and laboratory-testing program at two
sites in western Puerto Rico, which is an ideal site because of the extent of
calcareous deposits throughout the island, the relatively high seismicity of the
region, the high population density, and the expertise of the research team with
these particular soils. The in situ testing program will consist of conventional
drilling and sampling techniques, Standard Penetration Tests with hammer energy
measurements, and Cone Penetration Testing with shear wave velocity
measurements. The laboratory-testing program will consist of cyclic triaxial and
cyclic simple shear tests with shear wave velocity measurements. Research by the
PIs has shown that the relationship between cyclic resistance and shear wave
velocity (CRR-Vs) is soil specific and can be used to link in situ test results
with laboratory determined values of CRR. Shear wave velocity (Vs) has been
shown to be a good measure of the combined effects of stress and fabric, and it
is hypothesized that samples consolidated or prepared to in situ values of Vs
yield the in situ CRR. This approach will be used to estimate the in situ CRR at
each site by linking the shear wave velocity in the laboratory and the field,
and then comparing this with values of CRR predicted from existing field based
approaches (SPT, CPT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to a better
understanding of how existing field based correlations for the assessment of
liquefaction potential, which is the state-of-the-practice in geotechnical
earthquake engineering, applies to calcareous sands that can be found in many
tropic and subtropical coastal regions. In addition, this project will build
upon existing research that shows that shear wave velocity measured
appropriately in the laboratory and in situ can provide a link between
laboratory testing and field measurements for characterizing the in situ
behavior of soils that are difficult to sample. The primary societal impact of
this research will be to help minimize losses from earthquakes by improving the
current methods for liquefaction potential assessment in calcareous sands.
Another important component of this project is the inclusion of students from
underrepresented groups in the STEM fields of research. Three Hispanic American
students from Puerto Rico will be working on this research project. One Hispanic
American from Puerto Rico is currently a Ph.D. student at the University of
Rhode Island and will complete her dissertation on the proposed research. Two
undergraduates will work on this project as summer research assistants through
an existing collaboration between the PI, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez,
and the University of Rhode Island Transportation Center as part of the Federal
Highway Administration Dwight D. Eisenhower Fellowship Program.