* 1234364
* Exploring Deformation Mechanisms in Hierarchical Metallic Nano-Lattices: Experimental and Computational Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Julia Greer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 01/31/2016
* USD 547,214.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the fundamental deformation
mechanisms that govern the overall mechanical properties of material systems
with competing material- and structure-induced size effects. Crystalline solids
have been shown to exhibit both intrinsic/material size effects, such as the
grain-size dependent strength of polycrystals, as well as extrinsic/structure-
induced size effects, such as the size-dependent strength of single-crystalline
micro- and nano-pillars. While both types of size effects have been studied
independently, the mechanical response of material systems in which macro-
structural feature size and characteristic size of the microstructure merge is a
key open question for two reasons. First, experimental techniques for
fabricating and testing micro- and particularly nano-scale structures are
intricate and often require specialized facilities. Second, most computational
models fail to describe physical phenomena, which require both a discrete
atomistic description and realistic (i.e. experimentally accessible) temporal
and spatial resolution. This research project will combine advanced
computational models for coarse-graining atomistic simulations with novel
fabrication and in situ experimental methods to synthesize and test hollow
metallic nano-trusses, which will give insight into the governing deformation
mechanisms and the resulting mechanical properties of nano-structural
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the outcome of this
interdisciplinary collaborative research will be transformative in the synthesis
of new materials with highly desirable properties, which have been historically
coupled in limiting combinations (e.g. stiffness and weight). The gained
knowledge promises to be essential for the development and improvement of
structural materials, and it makes a prime example to illustrate the importance
of structure-property relations in solids, which will be included in classroom
and high school education. This project will train undergraduate students from
both engineering and physics backgrounds through interdisciplinary research
projects with special emphasis on recruiting students from underrepresented
groups and women. Broad outreach activities geared towards K-12 students will
offer opportunities to become involved, including a summer program for high
school students who are invited to spend three to six weeks working in the labs.
The PIs will provide training and career development for graduate students in an
exciting interdisciplinary field to combine materials phenomena with theory and
experiments. Finally, the integrated and iterative computational and
experimental tasks will make a prime example for successful interdisciplinary
research to close a knowledge gap across scientific disciplines.