* 1234690
* Prioritizing and Selecting Bridge Management Actions for Heightened Truck Loads and Natural Hazards in Light of Funding Allocation Patterns
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jamie Padgett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,996.00

Effective allocation of funds for bridge management poses a key challenge
nationwide, as bridges continue to deteriorate and undergo exposure to heavier
permissible truck traffic which collectively aggravate their vulnerability to
natural hazards. Meanwhile, public safety, industry and economic development
depend upon a reliable bridge and transportation network under operational loads
and post-extreme events. This project provides a transparent approach to
prioritize and select bridge management actions for natural hazards in light of
heightened truck loads, funding allocation patterns, and a condition of
deficient structures, neglected hazard protection and limited budgets. To propel
a new approach to bridge inventory management, this research will: (1) Derive
surrogate models for efficient performance assessment of bridges across a
network considering seismic hazards and heightened truck traffic by taking
advantage of emerging statistical learning techniques. (2) Develop new
prioritization approaches to rank critical bridges for upgrade that account for
their vulnerability to extreme events and role within the transportation network
including enabling freight flow. (3) Select mitigation actions for bridges that
achieve safety and seismic hazard protection, while reflecting typical aid
allocation preferences and past project experience. Through this approach, the
need for risk mitigation from natural hazards such as earthquakes can be
balanced with requirements for upgrade of deteriorating bridges that must
sustain heavier truck traffic and freight throughput. Hence bridge management
solutions can be achieved which address both operational load demands and
seismic hazard protection for improved bridge network
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a direct influence on
improving public safety by protecting US bridge infrastructure subjected to
natural hazards within the context of increasing operational loads and
deterioration. Furthermore, interstate commerce and economic development will
benefit from improved safety and efficiency of transportation infrastructure,
including wise investment of scarce funds to avoid load limitations on bridges
and improve connectivity and freight flow across transportation networks, even
when subjected to seismic hazards. Working closely with stakeholders will help
to ensure the relevance of intervention actions to address practical
infrastructure challenges and promote adoption into next generation short and
long-term bridge management programs, using a case study in South Carolina to
test and refine the proposed bridge and network assessment, ranking, and
intervention methodology. Such test bed execution and interaction with relevant
stakeholders can engage students in solving real world problems and facilitate
translation of the research to practice. The integrated research and education
program will have a broad impact on the preparation and experiences of future
engineers prepared to tackle US infrastructure challenges. Students will benefit
from a multi-disciplinary research team and development activities that provide
civic-minded training for engineering students to advance their participation in
effective infrastructure management with heightened awareness of the socio-
economic and political contexts of infrastructure improvement programs.