* 1234260
* Collaborative Research: In Search of the Greatest Good with Imperfect Triage in the Aftermath of Mass-Casualty Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* James Winslow, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 69,817.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to use mathematical
models to investigate if and when triage is useful in the aftermath of mass-
casualty incidents. The first stage of the project will develop and analyze
mathematical models to identify conditions under which triage is most or least
useful given that triage takes time and resources, and is imperfect. The second
stage will focus on understanding the effects of triage errors on the expected
number of survivors. In particular, the project will examine whether overtriage
can be useful as suggested by some in the emergency medicine literature. The
research will investigate the effective management of triage errors given that
some degree of error is inevitable. Finally, in the third stage, a realistic
simulation study will be carried out to test the basic principles and policies
obtained in the first two stages.

This research project will contribute directly to the society's continuing
efforts in improving emergency response systems. Mass-casualty incidents
overwhelm the emergency response resources of a community and triage is the
means by which these resources are rationed. However, potential benefits of
patient triage are unclear mainly for two reasons. First, triage takes time and
resources, which can be otherwise used, for example, for stabilizing patients.
Second, triage decisions are highly error-prone with a significant overtriage
rate. Although these problems have been recognized before, there has been no
systematic effort to investigate whether triage meets its intended goals. The
current practice largely relies on the belief that triage must have some
benefits. The objective of this research is to question this belief and in doing
that identify conditions under which triage is useful/harmful, when it makes
sense to eliminate triage and move directly to treatment or transportation, and
investigate the effects of triage errors.