* 1235061
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Warehouse Integration in Enterprise-Wide Supply Chain Planning under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Xinhui Zhang, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 165,000.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) collaborative research award is to develop a set of innovative
models and solutions for analyzing the three-way interaction among warehousing,
inventory, and transportation decisions. The warehouse-inventory-transportation
problem (WITP) for multi-echelon and multi-period supply chains is proposed and
modeled through a stochastic integer quadratically-constrained program (SIQCP).
Decisions associated with products with differing life-cycles flowing through
the supply chain are also considered in the WITP. To solve industry-sized
stochastic WITP instances, a seamless integration of decomposition approaches
for stochastic integer linear programming (SILP) and continuous convex
relaxation techniques for deterministic integer quadratically-constrained
programming (IQCP) will be pursued.

If successful, this research will develop novel insights into interactions
between the three key supply chain drivers and will prescribe low cost,
realistic, plans to supply chain managers. This research will facilitate
innovation and excellence in decision analytics at over 600,000 warehouses with
annual expenditures of over $100 billion, leading to substantial economic
benefit to enterprises both nationally and globally. After successful validation
in collaboration with our industry co-PI, opportunities for potential
commercialization within the $6.1 billion annual worldwide supply chain software
market will be considered. Key findings from this research will be incorporated
in an interactive educational website to demonstrate the interplay among
warehousing, inventory, and transportation decisions.