* 1235327
* Performance-Based Evaluation of Self-Centering Concentrically Braced Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Akhilesh Chandra, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 302,803.00

Conventional concentrically braced frame (CBF) systems designed following
current practice can achieve life safety performance but have limited drift
capacity prior to structural damage in case of an earthquake event. This
structural damage (that is permitted in current design practice under the
design-basis earthquake) will not lead to direct collapse of the structure, but
often results in residual drift and non-structural damage, causing high post-
earthquake direct and indirect costs. This proposal plans to pursue research in
demonstration of benefit of self-centering concentrically braced frame (SC-CBF)
system rather than a CBF for earthquake-resistant structures. The demonstration
of benefit will be judged through performance-based earthquake engineering
(PBEE) and through life cycle cost analysis of the system. The project will
consider parameters of probabilistic ground motions, various configurations of
SC-CBF, and considerations of uncertainties including structural properties,
statistical processes, and capacity/demand models. A key element of this project
is to assess life-cycle cost benefit of SC-CBF against CBF. The life cycle cost
will include direct cost of damage as well as indirect economic losses in case
of an earthquake event. The interdisciplinary research team includes structural
and geotechnical expertise as well as economics/accounting expertise. The
graduate and undergraduate students working on the project will benefit from the
interdisciplinary efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed work will evaluate
the effectiveness of SC-CBF systems in terms of seismic performance and
financial benefits. The proposed research includes several tasks: 1. Selecting
suites of probabilistic ground motions for a site that capture the uncertainties
relating to magnitude, distance, soil type, and local effects, to incorporate
the stochastic nature of the seismic loading. 2. Consideration of a full range
of parameters in the development of SC-CBF designs and the associated nonlinear
finite element models. 3. Development of unbiased probabilistic capacity and
demand models for SC-CBF systems that properly account for prevailing
uncertainties in structural property as well as in statistical procedures, in
randomness of the ground motions, and in errors in the capacity and demand
models. 4. Conducting damage and loss analyses based on the seismic fragility
assessed using the proposed capacity and demand models. 5. Comparison of the
life cycle cost of several SC-CBF systems with conventional CBF systems through
a case study. Uncertainty in all assessment stages will be examined
simultaneously, thereby integrating the entire framework into a single
interdisciplinary probabilistic model. This integration combines economic
considerations in earthquake engineering with the geotechnical and structural
engineering principles. The validation of the SC-CBF system based on life cycle
costs will have impact on its use by the industry.