* 1235979
* Solid State Dye Sensitized Solar Cells Using Tunable Surface Plasmons of Core-Shell Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jung-Kun Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 290,724.00

PI: Lee, Jung-Kun&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1235979&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;Title: Solid State Dye Sensitized Solar Cells
Using Tunable Surface Plasmons of Core-Shell Particles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to significantly improve the energy conversion efficiency of solar cells,
a fundamental understanding is needed on how the light absorption mechanism,
specifically related to solid dye sensitized solar cells (SDSSCs). One of a
promising ways to control the light absorption is to exploit the resonance
phenomenon, such as surface plasmons. The objectives of this research are 1) to
develop a fundamental understanding the physical interactions among surface
plasmons, solar light modulation, and carrier/exciton generation, and 2) to
design the novel plasmonic particles (i.e. metal nanoshell) that enhance light
absorption capacity of SDSSCs. The metal nanoshells will avoid inherent problems
of the metal nanoparticles such as fixed plasmonic frequency, fabrication
complexity, long-term aging and carrier transfer. Newly obtained knowledge on
enhanced photon-electron conversion by metal nanoshells will enable us to
exploit the full potential of plasmonic SDSSCs. The proposed research holds the
potential to provide new directions for the hybrid solar cells by extending our
current knowledge on the plasmonic nanostructures and the solar radiation
harvesting. This work will generate knowledge on the plasmonic nanostructures
and facilitate a new class of photovoltaic where the solar radiation absorption
and the carrier generation are significantly improved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is expected that the development of the proposed research will contribute to
furthering the goal of energy security of the US. Given that the electricity
produced from solar energy is more than 1% of the total annual electricity
consumed in the US, the expected results of this research will contribute to
increasing energy conversion efficiency by exploring surface plasmon enhanced
light absorption and carrier generation. The anticipated research results will
be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses such as ?Materials for
Energy Generation and Storage? and other activities.