* 1235906
* Simulation and Modeling of Turbulent Dispersion: Backward Tracking, Molecular Dispersion and Particle Inertia
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Pui-Kuen Yeung, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2016
* USD 293,747.00

1235906 Yeung

The characteristic of turbulent fluid flow as an agent of efficient dispersion
of contaminants, chemical reactants and particulate matter in general is of
critical importance in many environmental and engineering applications.The
objectives of this proposal are to pursue fundamental advances in the study of
contaminant dispersion in turbulent flows, with emphasis on several aspects
crucial in the linkage between basic understanding of turbulence physics and the
development of the predictive tools of improved physical realism.The research
will involve a tightly-coupled combination of large-scale numerical simulations
enabled by the use of advanced cyberinfrastructure, and the development of novel
extensions of Lagrangian stochastic modeling using a massive simulation
database. The intellectual merits of this work include the unique challenges of
tracking Lagrangian fluid element trajectories backwards in time, which will
provide new insights in relating the trajectory data on multi-particle clusters
to the local spatial structure of the flow, where intense local deformation can
develop especially in conditions of high Reynolds number. When coupled with
trajectories of diffusing molecules in Brownian motion relative to the fluid,
this approach also connects particle paths directly to the statistics of passive
scalar fluctuations arising from typically localized sources of pollutants in
the environment.The effects of finite particle inertia and gravitational forces
will likewise be addressed. New stochastic models accounting for these effects
will be developed in collaboration between researchers with demonstrated high
synergism and expertise in high-performance computing, turbulence theory and
modeling.

As broader impacts, this project will provide much-needed improvements in the
modeling of a major fluid dynamics problem in environmental science. Improved
models of turbulent dispersion expected from this work will be applicable not
only to atmospheric air quality but also to accidental or terrorism-driven
discharge of toxic material (where higher-order moments are important), insect
behavior in agriculture (where backward tracing mimics essential organism
behaviors) and windborne dispersion of seeds and other aerosol-like material
(where inertia is important). Besides training a PhD student with exposure to
the expertise and perspective of a senior and internationally-respected
scientist, this project will provide special summer internships at Georgia Tech
for undergraduate students with disabilities to be selected from a national pool
of applicants. The latter arrangement will be administered via a subaward to the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, which has been very active
in recruiting and nurturing students from this under-represented population.