* 1235688
* Market Driven Emissions from Recovered CO2 Industrial Gas
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Steven Skerlos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 277,253.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;1235688 (Skerlos). The objective of this project is to
quantify the net greenhouse gas emissions associated with using carbon dioxide
(CO2) as an input to sustainable manufacturing operations. CO2-based processes
have been found to serve as excellent substitutes for processes utilizing large
quantities of toxic and polluting materials in manufacturing. However, companies
considering the on-site use of CO2 face an instant and major increase in "carbon
footprint" according to current carbon accounting and life cycle assessment
(LCA) methodologies. Current accounting and LCA practices make CO2 use appear
unfavorable from a sustainability perspective when the import of CO2 to
manufacturing operations can provide clear benefits to the economic,
environmental, and social dimensions of sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research will be to advance the field of
consequential life cycle assessment (cLCA) to enable estimation of the market
driven emissions associated with the recovery and use of CO2 in sustainable
manufacturing operations. Current economic allocation methods are inadequate for
this purpose. Therefore an economic allocation methodology will be created that
encompasses market forces, technology selection, and process substitution
options. The cLCA methodology will then be exercised using life cycle modeling
to permit an estimation of emissions associated with CO2 capture from various
sources (e.g., the production of hydrogen, ammonia, and ethanol) as well as from
different modes of transportation (e.g., trucking versus pipeline). Then
regional supply burdens associated with the supply of recovered CO2 will be
estimated for the entire US. Having addressed the supply-side emissions, the
project will then estimate demand-side emissions associated with replacing
existing manufacturing technologies with CO2 based technologies. Three case
studies will be developed: semiconductor manufacturing, machine cleaning, and
metalworking. Putting the regional supply side emissions together with the net
demand-side emissions will allow the market driven emissions associated with
recovered CO2 to be determined for sustainable manufacturing operations. We will
extend the methodology to show how the framework for cLCA created for commodity
gases can be extended to other commodity and pseudo-commodity materials (e.g.,
alloys of aluminum) used in sustainable design and manufacturing applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal will include
advancements in the general field of cLCA, cLCA education for undergraduate,
graduate, and distance learning students at the University of Michigan (UM),
cLCA education for LCA students and practitioners world-wide, and the needed
development of cLCA graduate student talent in the U.S. UM has recently launched
a Program in Sustainable Engineering with a cornerstone undergraduate course in
Sustainable Engineering. This course (CEE 265), which teaches approximately 125
students per semester (and growing), already teaches economic and environmental
assessment methods and will in future directly teach the cLCA methods developed
in this project. Graduate students taking Sustainable Design of Technology
Systems (ME 589: approximately 130 students per year) will study the case
studies of this project in depth and apply the cLCA methodology in their term
projects. In addition to journal and conference publications, a web based portal
to cLCA resources will be created that will include at least five 20-minute
video short courses and case studies based on this research. As part of the
broader impacts of the project, modifications will be proposed to the World
Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable Development
accounting standards and also a working document will be developed to
standardize the cLCA treatment of commodity gases in parallel with existing ISO
LCA standards. It is also expected that, by challenging existing LCA and
accounting treatments of carbon dioxide, it will be possible to promote the
diffusion of CO2-based processes where appropriate as a sustainable
manufacturing strategy. The project PI recently led the development of a cLCA
methodology for consumer products with market driven design, a methodology that
recently attracted national attention via its use to analyze Corporate Average
Fuel Economy Standards. The development of an analogous cLCA methodology for
industrial commodities, using similar economic methods, is a natural extension
that can be anticipated to lead to significant research, education, and
technology transfer impacts related to sustainable manufacturing and LCA.