* 1235605
* Large-eddy simulation of smooth and rough-wall turbulent boundary-layer flows at arbitrary Reynolds numbers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Dale Pullin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,796.00

The large-scale, computational simulation of turbulent fluid-dynamical phenomena
will continue to have an enormous impact on many diverse areas of science and
engineering ranging from climate modeling of planet earth, to environmental
fluid dynamics and to industrial and engineering applications at large Reynolds
numbers. The ideal is direct-numerical simulation (DNS) in which all relevant
physical processes are properly represented and all length scales are resolved
within numerical simulation. At the extreme Reynolds numbers required for many
engineering applications, however, full DNS is unlikely to be practicable within
the foreseeable future. The standard engineering prediction tool has been
Reynolds-averaged modeling (RANS). Whilst RANS will remain useful for many
applications, there exists a growing need for a more detailed but
computationally tractable numerical simulation capability in engineering
development work. Examples include internal pipe flows and external streamlined
and bluff-body flows where physically realistic modeling of turbulent boundary-
layer dynamics including transition, curvature, separation and Reynolds-number
effects is required for accurate prediction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-eddy
simulation (LES), where the large scales of turbulent motion are resolved on the
computational grid while the effects of small, unresolved eddies are modeled, is
intermediate between RANS and DNS. LES has been very successful for free-shear
and mixing turbulence in a wide variety of settings. In unbounded flows, the
large eddies carry most of the turbulent kinetic energy, dominate momentum
transport and set the length and time scales that condition the small-scale
turbulence dynamics. This picture is reversed near a smooth or rough wall, where
the most energetically productive eddies are necessarily part of the small-scale
motion. Hence despite decades of effort, the accurate numerical prediction of
wall-bounded turbulent flows remains a challenging area for computational fluid
dynamics. The broad objective of the present research is to construct a robust
LES capability for wall-bounded flows at Reynolds-numbers typical of practical
engineering interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will aim to develop a
subgrid-scale methodology for LES of wall-bounded turbulence with emphasis on
application to spatially evolving smooth or rough-wall turbulent boundary-layer
flows in the presence of favorable and adverse pressure gradients, wall
curvature, laminar-turbulent transition and flow separation at essentially
arbitrarily large Reynolds numbers. The novel element is a subgrid-scale wall
model, based on a wall-normal integration of the stream-wise momentum equation,
which enables dynamical calculation of the wall shear stress without requiring
near-wall scale resolution, but which incorporates local surface roughness,
wall-normal momentum transport and pressure-gradient effects. The LES modeling
resulting from this work will be available for incorporation into general
computational fluid-dynamics codes. It is expected that this will provide a
significant advance in our capability for the numerical simulation of complex
turbulent flows at very large Reynolds numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
research will form an important part of the education and training of individual
graduate students. Additionally the work will support dissemination of the
concepts and applications of modern computational engineering technology through
participation in K-12 outreach programs.