* 1235138
* Collaborative Research: Damage in Soft Solids: Elasticity vs Fracture
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Krishnaswamy Ravi-Chandar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 278,425.00

The research objective of this proposal is to develop fundamental quantitative
understanding of the initiation and propagation of damage in elastomers directly
in terms of their elastic behavior, their fracture behavior, and the properties
of the defects at which damage can initiate. A second objective is to make use
of this understanding to explore and identify regimes where damage may lead to
failure and where, on the other hand, it may be utilized as a beneficial
mechanism. This will be accomplished by means of a combined
experimental/theoretical approach. Experimentally, use will be made of state-of-
the-art optical equipment to monitor in-situ the spatial and temporal evolution
of damage under a wide range of systematically varied conditions. Theoretically,
recent innovative micromechanics techniques for the analysis of finitely-
deformable solids containing general classes of defects will be utilized as the
basis to construct a fracture mechanics framework with the capability to
determine damage initiation and propagation in nonlinear elastic solids under
general loading conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key aspect of the mechanics
of soft solids (materials such as elastomers, gels, and biological tissues that
are able to undergo large reversible deformations) that is poorly understood, is
that of the initiation and propagation of damage. This project will provide
unprecedented in-situ experimental data and precise quantitative insight into
the processes of damage initiation and damage propagation in elastomers. It will
also make available, for the first time, tractable analytical techniques to
study the irreversible growth via fracture of defects with realistic geometries
in nonlinear solids subjected to arbitrary finite deformations. At the
applications level, this work will put forward a quantitative basis in terms of
geometry, material properties, and conditions of loading to determine when
damage leads to failure and when (and how) it may be used to an advantage.
Research results will be integrated into the graduate curricula at UIUC and UT
Austin, and the researchers will continue their participation in mentoring and
outreach activities.