* 1235535
* DMREF/GOALI: High Efficiency Hierarchical Thermoelectric Composites by Multiscale Materials Design and Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Alex Jen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 900,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop high efficiency thermoelectric
composites. We propose a new hierarchical multiscale strategy to develop high
efficiency thermoelectric composites that build upon atomistic-nano-continuum
computation guided material design; interfacial modification techniques; bulk
functional gradient approaches; and nano-to-continuum characterization
methodologies that are being developed at the University of Washington and at
the General Motors R&D Center. We will apply these methodologies to solve
critical problems of designing and developing high efficiency thermoelectric
composites. There are three main tasks: 1. determining the optimized atomistic
composition, molecular surface modification, and macroscopic morphology with
first-principles, perturbation theory, and continuum modeling; 2. synthesizing
bulk thermoelectric composites containing nano-scale grain with surface
modifications and macroscopic functional gradients; and 3. characterizing
electron and phonon transport from the molecular to the macro-scale. These tasks
extend existing modeling and experimental capabilities, provide new
understanding of interfacial and functional gradient electron and phonon
scattering mechanisms, and directly interface with industrial development of
thermoelectric waste heat recovery technology for improved fuel economy.
Hierarchical multiscale composites are chosen for their potential to have the
greatest impact on understanding nano-to-macro electron and phonon transport on
thermoelectric properties of materials as well as their industrial development.
Connecting fundamental electronic structure studies of alloys and interfaces at
the atomistic scale and bridging this to continuum modeling for new materials
design; coupling with materials synthesis and characterization for validation;
and direct incorporation in industrial usage is a potentially transformative
concept in materials science and engineering. It offers the promise to move
beyond the existing trial-and-error approaches, and the combined talents of the
academic-industrial collaboration with GOALI are uniquely positioned to meet
this challenge. The long-term impact of this project is a reduction in global
energy demands through increased efficiency and reduction in U.S. dependency on
foreign energy sources without compromising safety in the transportation
industry, as well as many other industrial sectors. GOALI?s direct industrial
partnership accelerates the assimilation of basic science research into
industrial practice. Besides the indicated long-term societal benefits, a key
component of this proposal is the education of students and postdocs for the
twenty-first century workforce and efforts to increase diversity in science and
engineering, as well as outreach to K12 schools. GOALI also involves students
directly in connecting science to industrial technology development.