* 1235719
* All-solid-state  Interface-free Li-ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Chunsheng Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2016
* USD 313,528.00

PI: Chunsheng Wang&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET
1235719&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;Title: All-solid-state Interface-free Li-ion
Batteries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to revolutionize the
current concept of solid-state Li-ion battery fabricating a single continuous
phase for the anode, electrolyte, and cathode, and thus, eliminating the highly
resistive interfaces between the electrolyte and electrodes found in
conventional solid-state Li-ion batteries. Advanced Li-ion battery technology
will play a critical role in the realization of Hybrid Electric Vehicles,
Electric Vehicles, and the increasingly critical field of renewable energy.
Current solid-state Li-ion batteries have much lower energy and power densities
than liquid electrolyte batteries due to the use of three different materials
for the anode, the cathode, and the electrolyte causing high interfacial
resistance between the solid electrolyte and the solid electrodes. This project
focuses on three primary research thrusts (1) To understand the formation
mechanism of interface-free solid-state Li-ion batteries, (2) To explore the
effect of interface properties on solid-state Li-ion batteries, and (3) To
discover the relationship between electrochemical performance, material
structure, and material composition of potential material for fabricating high
temperature solid-state Li-ion batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed research lies in exploring and overcoming the challenges
associated with the electrode and electrolyte interfaces, which are the main
contributing causes of the poor cycle life and low power density of current
solid-state batteries. The elimination of such interfaces will enable the
miniaturization of a solid-state Li-ion battery to a true nano-size power
source, and allow Li-ion batteries to operate efficiently in high temperature
environment due to their inherent safety merit. Understanding the relationship
between performance and battery structure will enable strategic design of
interface-free Li-ion batteries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this
project will potentially lead to new Li-ion battery markets, and will have a
profound impact on the electronic, automobile, and renewable energy industries.
The proposed project will help train the scientific workforce for both academic
communities and energy storage industries. This outreach will provide a broader
horizon for academic success in a region well-poised to contribute to the
diversity of the scientific workforce.