* 1235196
* Collaborative Research: Uncertainty Quantification and Model Validation in Thin-Walled Structures: A Probabilistic Paradigm for Advancing Analysis-Based Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Benjamin Schafer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 147,137.00

This project will pursue research towards an advanced framework for nonlinear
stability analysis of thin-walled structures taking into account the uncertainty
associated with geometric imperfections. Thin-walled structures most commonly
fail in buckling failure mode. Whether this buckling is benign or catastrophic
depends, to a great extent, on the details of the structure, most importantly
its geometric imperfections. The research aims at providing a leap towards
uncertainty quantification and model validation in the analysis of thin-walled
structures by devising a probabilistic paradigm that uses advanced uncertainty
quantification techniques along with novel structural analysis methods.
Methodologies for the characterization and representation of geometric
uncertainties as well as probabilistic imperfection sensitivity analysis
frameworks are proposed that have the potential to pave the way for a fully
stochastic nonlinear analysis of thin-walled structures. The proposed techniques
are complemented by experimental measurements of imperfections with high
accuracy, and testing of imperfect members.

If successful, the results of this research will transform how geometric
imperfections are handled in advanced analysis-based design of thin-walled
structures. Because of the very general and mathematics-driven nature of the
stochastic approaches adopted in this project, the methodologies developed will
be applicable to a wide variety of problems and will have potential impact
across all science and engineering disciplines. Alongside graduate student
mentoring, undergraduate research will be a focus of the efforts at both
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (UMD) and Johns Hopkins University (JHU).
The involved undergraduates will be asked to share their experience with
students at local high schools and a community college as well as students
attending Freshman Summer Institute at UMD, in hopes that their success will be
emulated by others. Also, in collaboration with programs that specifically
target underrepresented groups, qualified students are invited to participate in
research at both universities. In addition to academic dissemination through
conferences and papers and providing all developed work as open source, the PIs
will capitalize on their involvement in engineering committees (e.g. AISC, AISI
etc.) to disseminate the findings outside of the academic community.