* 1235361
* Correlating Local Defect Structure with Dynamical Response in Graphene
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Michael Crommie, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 324,000.00

The research objective of this award is to correlate the local, atomic-scale
structure of graphene nanoresonators with their non-local oscillatory response
at high driving frequencies. This will be performed by combining high-resolution
scanning tunneling microscopy with high frequency opto-electric actuation
techniques to probe suspended graphene membranes. We will investigate clamped,
suspended membranes having diameters down to 25 nm, a regime that has so far
been inaccessible to dynamical measurement. Using a combination of ion
irradiation, high energy electrons, and adsorbate deposition, we will control
and characterize specific defect and adsorbate configurations of graphene
nanoresonators and monitor how this affects their resonant and dissipative
behavior. The nonlinear tunnel current of a scanning tunneling microscope will
be used here in a new rectifying mode that will serve as a sensitive probe of
high frequency surface oscillatory amplitude and spatial eigenmodes. This will
provide a powerful new tool for testing multi-scale theoretical models that
combine atomistically defined defect configurations with continuum material
properties.

This research will explore new physical phenomena that have been predicted but
never before observed, such as the effect of specific defect configurations on
the dynamical susceptibility of strained, suspended graphene nanoresonators. The
research will enable an entirely new technique of microscopy that marries
atomic-scale spatial resolution with high-frequency dynamical characterization.
This will facilitate the exploration of nanostructure processes and behavior
that were previously inaccessible due to a lack of tools for simultaneously
measuring the atomic scale properties and oscillatory response of individual
clamped graphene nanoresonators. The potential impact on technology is strong,
since this work should result in new types of nanoresonators that will be
applicable in the areas of nano-electronics, communications, chemical detection,
mass sensing, charge sensing, probing quantum fluctuations, and general
exploration of elastic behavior at the atomic scale. The impact on education and
outreach will also be strong. This project will provide scientific training to
graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students in a strongly
interdisciplinary area