* 1235142
* The Chemical Ecology of Marine Sediment Bacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Paul Jensen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2016
* USD 708,445.00

Intellectual Merit: This project explores the ecological functions of bacterial
secondary metabolites as agents of chemical defense. It targets marine
sediments, a major and poorly explored marine biome. The aims are to test three
hypotheses related to the effects of bacterial secondary metabolites on co-
occurring microorganisms and protistan grazers. The focus is on the bacterial
genus Salinispora, which is well defined in terms of its diversity and
distributions in marine sediments, and well characterized at the genomic level
and in terms of secondary metabolite production. A genetic system recently
developed for these bacteria will be employed to establish links between
biological activities and specific secondary metabolites. By employing a variety
of innovative methodologies including imaging mass spectrometry, it will be
possible for the first time to gain insight into the potential roles of
Salinispora secondary metabolites in structuring marine sediment microbial
communities. The results will have broad implications for our understanding of
the factors that regulate the diversity and distributions of bacteria in the
marine environment. They will additionally address the supplemental hypothesis
that secondary metabolites represent ecotype-defining traits that delineate
Salinispora species.

The hypotheses to be tested are: H1: Secondary metabolites inhibit microbial
competitors, H2: Secondary metabolites affect bacterial community composition,
and H3: Secondary metabolites function as invertebrate feeding deterrents.

A large collection of diverse, co-occurring microbes will be tested for
sensitivity to Salinispora secondary metabolites using a direct challenge assay.
These types of assays are highly informative in that they can detect behavioral
and morphological responses in addition to toxicity. A recently developed
imaging mass spectrometry technique will be used to visualize secondary
metabolites associated with any observed biological activities. The results will
be linked to existing genome sequences and used to aide in compound
identification. The associated pathways will be knocked out to provide
experimental support for the biological activities of specific compounds.

Given that most marine bacteria are not readily cultured, these experiments will
additionally address the effects of secondary metabolites on the sediment
bacterial community by employing culture independent techniques. In situ growth
chambers and next generation sequencing technologies will be used to test
extracts and pure compounds against a natural assemblages of sediment bacteria.
The results will inform future cultivation efforts and provide a more
comprehensive assessment of the organisms targeted by native chemical defenses.
Finally, a robust feeding assay using two model protists will be developed and
used to test the roles of bacterial secondary metabolites as invertebrate
feeding deterrents. In situ experiments will provide insight into the natural
assemblage of invertebrates affected by these defenses. The overall results of
these studies have the potential to profoundly impact our understanding of the
ecological functions of microbial secondary metabolites and the extent to which
these compounds affect community composition.

Broader Impacts: This research presents the opportunity to fundamentally advance
our understanding of the ecological roles of microbial secondary metabolites in
a major marine biome. The activities are highly interdisciplinary and bring
together aspects of microbiology, ecology, and marine natural products chemistry
in unprecedented ways. It strengthens international collaborations with
colleagues in Mexico and includes student and postdoctoral training and outreach
to under-represented groups. The later includes participation in the anticipated
UCSD/HBCU (Historically Black College and University) program and the UCSD
Summer Training Academy for Research in the Sciences (STARS) program. Separate
NIH funding will be leveraged to explore the medicinal potential of any new
secondary metabolites discovered. These compounds will also be provided to the
NIH Molecular Libraries program where they will be made broadly available to the
scientific community. The project leverages existing NSF-funded ship time and
has the potential to yield new assay models that will be broadly applicable to
the chemical ecology research community.