* 1235896
* Transportation Educators Conference: Advancement of the National Transportation Curriculum Project
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* David Hurwitz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 04/30/2013
* USD 29,987.00

Most ABET-accredited civil engineering undergraduate programs include at least
one required transportation course. However, many of these courses are taught as
a collection of topics, disconnected from one another and from the rest of the
discipline of civil engineering. This poses significant challenges for faculty,
students and practitioners in transportation engineering. The aims of the
conference are to: 1) engage and train a diverse group of educators in the
development and application of active learning for transportation engineering at
the undergraduate level, 2) engage and train diverse group of educators in the
development and application of conceptual understanding in transportation
engineering at the undergraduate level, and 3) promote and facilitate the
adoption of the learning activities and conceptual assessments by conference
participants as well as other transportation engineering educators around the
country.

The conference organizing committee and expert lecturers include faculty in
transportation engineering and engineering education with expertise in active
learning and in students' conceptual understanding and misconceptions. At this
conference, faculty participants participate in collaborative design of active
learning modules and conceptual assessment in the undergraduate transportation
engineering space. The specific aim of the conference is to increase the
prevalence of active learning and conceptual assessment in the introduction to
transportation engineering course taught by conference participants. The
organizing committee is disseminating the conference outcomes to the broader
STEM field through publications and presentations through groups such as the
American Society for Engineering Education.