* 1235232
* A-DRIVE: Affordable Design by Realistic Interactions for Virtual Explorations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 415,164.00

This award provides funding to develop a new class of design scenarios,
interaction and manipulation paradigms for design using sketching in 2D and
natural gestures enabled by affordable depth sensing cameras. These natural
interactions will transform human gestures to tangible shapes. Gestures will
also be developed for 2D and 3D interaction with the created shapes. This
natural gesture-based interaction paradigm will enable exploratory processes
typical during brainstorming and support creative design exploration for
sketching in 2D on real world surfaces, physical world to virtual transformation
of 3D objects, and assembly with no training. A computational foundation and
algorithms for accurate creation of sketches and manipulation using gestures in
2D will be developed while exploring design scenarios using virtual construction
kit ideas and design assembly scenarios. We will develop a theory and scientific
basis for Human-Computer-Human Interaction and architectural framework for
design collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Since the natural expression of
shapes is the essence of creativity and visual thinking, it will be useful in
design processes, especially in early stages. The new design concepts, methods
and tools to support transformative design thinking will create new affordances
for designs and if successful transform early design processes. This award will
also introduce effective design learning in workshops to assist K-12 STEM
education. Over the long term, the research, education, and dissemination
efforts for natural design in 2D and 3D will enhance the creative design
capacity. It would also enable any common person, including those that are
young, to communicate and prototype design ideas directly in 3D space that have
potential to fundamentally alter design paradigms.