* 1235484
* Models For Designing Evidence-Based Patient-Centered Health Care Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Zelda Zabinsky, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,655.00

The research objective of this award is to develop models that increase our
understanding of complex health care delivery systems from the perspective of
the patient flowing through the system. The project will i) create a care
delivery reference model, that will explain the interactions and inter-
dependencies of the many functions, process flows, behaviors, constraints, and
attributes of current U.S. health care delivery systems; and ii) using the
reference model as a guide, construct a suite of operational systems engineering
models to examine the complex interactions between patients, sources of primary
and secondary care, facilities, insurance providers, laboratories, pharmacies,
and other ancillary services. The approach will include simulation, Markov chain
models, stochastic optimization, and simulation optimization. These models will
help compare the performance of design alternatives and their impact on patient-
centered care in modern health care delivery systems.

The modeling effort will relate patient needs with resources and clinical
outcomes to guide design of primary care based health care delivery systems. The
models developed will be used to investigate: the Patient Centered Medical Home,
which will examine how to reorganize the clinic workforce to match patients with
care provider teams in an optimal manner; Accountable Care Organizations, which
will investigate when to contract outside specialists to optimize the flow of
patients with regards to clinical effectiveness and financial factors; and
Redesign of Outpatient Health Care Facilities, which will analyze the
performance of new patient-centered arrangements where services are brought to
the patient's physical location. The impact of virtual interaction between
patients and providers including video, email, and phone communication will also
be evaluated. This research will make a broad impact on national health care, by
creating a consistent and comprehensive basis for evaluating alternative designs
of patient-centered health care delivery systems.