* 1235060
* Design of DNA Origami Machines and Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Hai-Jun Su, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2016
* USD 410,000.00

This research award provides funding for the development of a systematic design
framework for nanoscale machines and mechanisms using DNA origami
nanotechnology. DNA origami enables construction of two and three-dimensional
nanoscale shapes with unprecedented geometric complexity via molecular self-
assembly. The majority of DNA origami research focuses on assembly of static 2D
or 3D structures. The goal of this work is to incorporate functional dynamic
parts with directed motion into the DNA origami design toolbox. To achieve this
goal, a kinematics approach will be implemented to design DNA origami machines
and mechanisms that are comprised of links and joints, similar to macroscale
machines. A catalogue of various DNA origami links and joints will be designed
and fabricated, and their mechanical properties will be characterized
experimentally and by molecular simulation. These links and joints will be
implemented in the design of prototype mechanisms for proof-of-principle
studies. A new theory called projection kinematics will be developed to evaluate
the three-dimensional motion of these prototype mechanisms from two-dimensional
electron microscopy snapshots. To facilitate future application of DNA origami
machines, a computer aided design and simulation program will be developed that
facilitates conceptual mechanism design and automates the integration of DNA
origami links and joints from the previously developed part catalogues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will greatly advance the
fields of DNA nanotechnology, nanoscale design, and nano-robotics. The machines
and mechanisms developed in this work together with nanoactuators and
controllers will enable design of future nanorobots for applications in numerous
fields such as self-assembling computers and chemical compounds, nano-
manufacturing, molecular transport in bio-reactors, and drug delivery. This work
also opens the door for applying kinematic design to DNA nanotechnology. The
computer design automation software developed in this research will greatly
facilitate the widespread use of DNA origami mechanisms and machines.