* 1235236
* Collaborative Research: Novel Tighter Relaxations for Complementarity Constraints with Applications to Nonlinear and Bilevel Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jean-Philippe Richard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 213,816.00

This collaborative research award provides funding for the development of new
and stronger techniques for the solution of optimization problems with
complementarity constraints to global optimality. Complementarity problems are
pervasive in business, engineering, and economics, since complementarity
conditions arise in optimality conditions for nonlinear programs and in models
of equilibria. Algorithms for complementarity problems have until recently
focused on feasibility problems by employing local optimization techniques. This
project focuses on the development of convex relaxations for these problems,
with the goal of incorporating them into branch-and-bound algorithms for global
optimization. The research is aimed at deriving procedures that (i) exploit the
combinatorial and disjunctive structure of complementarity constraints, (ii)
focus on relaxations with a provable guarantee of strength, and (iii) target
problems in which some of the constraints (besides complementarities) are
nonlinear. The benefits of relaxation techniques will be studied relative to
mature implementations of global optimization
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the new relaxations developed
with this research, along with factorable decomposition and separation
techniques, will advance the state of the art in the global optimization of
complementarity programs, bringing many practically relevant problems within the
range of tractability. Because complementarity constraints arise in equilibrium
analyses of supply and demand, adversarial relationships between strategically
interacting entities, traffic equilibria, and in the analyses of multistage
optimization problems, this research could lead to improved efficiencies in
various sectors of the economy. Further, since bilevel programs have numerous
applications in defense planning, including interdiction and protection of
critical infrastructure, this research could impact positively various areas of
national defense. From an educational perspective, related material will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate education and doctoral students
will be trained in relevant technologies including integer programming and
global optimization. In addition, a website will be designed to disseminate
prototype implementations and problem data sets.