* 1235735
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Contaminants and Isotopic Tracers Associated with Coal Combustion Products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* James Hower, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 84,823.00

1235661/1235735 &lt;br/&gt;Hsu-Kim/Hower &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: Characterization of contaminants and isotopic tracers associated with
coal combustion products &lt;br/&gt;Coal combustion products (CCPs) represent
the largest industrial waste stream in the U.S. with approximately 130 million
tons generated every year. This waste is known to contain toxic elements such as
arsenic, selenium, and mercury. While a subset of CCPs is recycled for
beneficial purposes, the majority of the waste is stored in hundreds of
landfills and storage ponds across the nation. CCPs are not classified as
hazardous waste, and as a result, these landfills and storage ponds are
typically unlined and susceptible to leaks and failures. Moreover, discharge of
effluents from storage ponds are often not monitored and may pose an ecological
hazard if they contain toxic elements leached from CCPs. The goal of this
project is to understand the hazards posed by CCPs during their disposal or
accidental release to the environment. The research will involve laboratory
experiments to characterize the geochemical composition of CCPs sampled from a
wide array of coal-fired power plants, determine the composition and trace
element speciation of CCP leachates generated under environmentally-relevant
conditions, and perform field investigations to characterize effluent from CCP
holding ponds in North Carolina. This research will provide an in-depth
evaluation of the metal and metalloid contaminants that can leach from CCPs and
how their speciation and bioavailability change as a function of environmental
conditions. A novel component of the work is the use of isotopic signatures of
boron, strontium, and radium in the CCPs as methods for tracking contaminants
released from CCPs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coal-based energy currently represents
approximately 40% of the total worldwide electricity production and is expected
to increase significantly in the next 20 years (in the U.S. and globally).
Despite the large amount of CCP wastes that are generated annually, the risks
associated with disposal practices are not well-known, particularly in light of
a recent coal ash spill in which the PIs identified release of toxic elements
(arsenic, selenium, mercury) associated with CCP wastes. An outcome of this
research will be a hierarchy of coal ash wastes based on their potential to
cause harm delineated by known variables such as the original coal geology and
combustion operation parameters. The research will attempt to establish
relationships between known process variables (e.g., coal type, coal ash
composition, combustion parameters) and the leaching potential of toxic elements
from CCPs. Collectively the results of CCP leaching studies and holding pond
analyses will be used to evaluate methods to rank CCPs for their exposure risk
potential. This information will be needed for future regulatory actions on CCP
disposal practices from federal and state environmental agencies. The
researchers will leverage outreach programs at Duke and on-going collaborations
with public interest stakeholders to provide broader dissemination of this work
to the public and to students.