* 1235610
* GOALI:   Understanding 3D Dislocation Behavior in Al-Mg through Combined Electron Tomography and in situ TEM Nanomechanical Testing.
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Raja Mishra, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,597.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award will combine two advanced electron microscopy techniques,
electron tomography and in situ mechanical testing inside a transmission
electron microscope (TEM), to experimentally study dislocation plasticity in Al-
Mg alloys exhibiting serrated flow and Portevin-Le Chatelier (PLC) instability.
The main aim of the project is to uncover the precise role of the 3D dislocation
structure in dynamic strain ageing that limits the ductility of an important
class of automotive grade AA5xxx materials. The experimental work will center on
the imaging of the mesoscale defect configuration in three dimensions using
electron tomography before and after quantitative in situ nanocompression and
nanotension tests inside a transmission electron microscope (TEM). The
experiments will measure the evolution of dislocation networks in Al-Mg alloys
with and without the PLC instability. The data will provide for the first time
insight into the aging characteristics and aging dynamics of dislocation
networks in three dimensions to add insights into mesoscale modeling of the PLC
effect in forming simulations.

This research, which combines state-of-the-art techniques in electron microscopy
and nanomechanical experiments, will also provide an experimental basis for
designing compositions and strain paths for Al-Mg alloys. As the research leads
to new experimental techniques, they will underpin the creation of an advanced
laboratory on electron tomography for a graduate TEM course and outreach
activities related to increasing the role of women and minorities in science and
engineering.