* 1235769
* Development of Enhanced Performance Energy Storage Materials Using Tailorable Percolation Networks of Nanofibers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amy Fleischer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 331,483.00

CBET-1235769&lt;br/&gt;PI: Fleischer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many sustainable or
alternative energy systems such as large scale solar energy plants provide a
surplus of energy at certain times (when the sun is shining) but much less at
other times (such as at night). If the plants can be designed to store the
surplus energy for use during times of decreased supply, the plant will operate
more economically and efficiently. This will be even more beneficial if the
plants can respond to rapid changes in energy requirements by using stored
energy to meet this demand. This research project focuses on the use of phase
change materials for large scale energy storage. Phase change materials store
energy inside the material itself as it melts. As the material melts, energy is
needed to release the bonds as the material transitions from solid to liquid.
This energy is absorbed from the surroundings and is stored. When the material
later solidifies, this stored energy is released from the material and can be
used. The only down side to phase change material energy storage is that most
existing phase change materials have characteristics that prevent a quick energy
transfer response. Thus this project is focused on designing and creating
improved phase change energy storage materials by improving the characteristics
of the material to allow rapid storage of energy, and rapid release again upon
demand. This will be done by embedding graphite nanofibers in the material and
then controlling the motion of the nanofibers to provide a continuous path for
the energy to penetrate into the material. The first layer of nanoparticles will
be anchored at the surface and the remaining nanofibers will create a matrix of
energy paths connected to these initial anchor points. The researchers will then
extend this development such that the materials can be tailored for specific
applications by creating controlled nanofibers networks with electrical and
magnetic field control. The ability to control and manipulate nanofiber motion
to tailor thermal properties has the potential to be truly transformational in
the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage though solid-liquid phase change
is a wide-reaching technology that can be utilized in many applications. These
applications include a wide range of sustainable technologies not just including
solar energy systems, but also high efficiency heating and air conditioning
systems, domestic hot water, and advanced building materials. Phase change
materials can also be used to absorb heat and provide thermal control for
portable electronics and communication systems. This study addresses a key
weakness in phase change material technologies, and the successful execution of
this project will enable greater implementation of sustainable technologies. The
research undertaken in this project will provide educational opportunities for
several graduate students and the researchers will use the solar energy system
designs to enhance an existing engineering outreach project used to introduce
middle school girls, particularly those from underrepresented minorities to
engineering. This outreach project is executed through a partnership with Girl
Scouts of Eastern Pennsylvania.