* 1235732
* Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Wave Energy Arrays -- Integrated Control/Array Design in Random Seas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Scruggs, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 187,085.00

PI: Scruggs, Jeffrey / Taflanidis, Alexandros&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1235732
/ 1235768&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan Ann Arbor / University
of Notre Dame&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Wave Energy
Arrays -- Integrated Control/Array Design in Random Seas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the transition of the US energy economy from traditional technologies to
renewables, ocean wave energy technology has a signi&amp;#64257;cant role to
play. However, our understanding of how to best harness the resource is still
evolving. For Wave Energy Conversion (WEC) technologies to be relevant on a
utility scale, it will be necessary to distribute vast arrays of energy-
harvesting buoys across a wide expanse of ocean. Maximization of power
generation from large-scale WEC arrays requires a synthesis of optimal control
and optimal geometry techniques. The present state-of-understanding is limited
to single buoys and small array sizes. It also does not account for the
limitations of power conversion systems, or the fact that sea states are random
and uncertain phenomena. This collaborative project constitutes an
e&amp;#64256;ort to rectify these issues, through a novel synthesis of two
disparate research threads: robust control theory and large-scale stochastic
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will focus on accurate
techniques for assessing and optimizing the power generation potential for a
given geographic location and a given array perimeter. This will provide answers
to some necessary questions for this technology to move forward: (i) Given an
array perimeter, a probabilistic characterization of the sea state, and a
technological characterization of the generators, what is the optimal number of
WEC buoys, and how should they be arranged? (ii) How do the optimal number of
buoys and con&amp;#64257;guration depend on the conversion technology used?
(iii) How does the buoy con&amp;#64257;guration depend on the
e&amp;#64259;ciency of energy storage and transmission systems that interface
the array with the grid? The PIs will integrate their respective approaches (the
optimal power generation control algorithm for a WEC system, and stochastic
sampling methods) into a single computationally-e&amp;#64259;cient framework,
which simultaneously reshapes the array and redesigns the controller upon each
iteration. This will reduce the time necessary to accurately evaluate the
maximum power generation capability for a given array size by several orders of
magnitude. In this work the PIs will innovate generic techniques for large-scale
WEC array design using techniques from robust control theory and advances in
high-performance computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
will provide a clear insight into the true potential of large-scale WEC arrays
to meet future energy needs. Also the project has the potential to lift
technology adoption barriers and to promote advocacy among the public. This will
be accomplished via di&amp;#64256;usion mechanisms that enhance ambassadorship
among students and awareness among stakeholders. The PIs will adopt a two-
pronged strategy, involving: 1. development of open-access online resource
assessment software, and 2. educational outreach initiatives focused on ocean
energy. In the &amp;#64257;rst component, the online application, supported by a
friendly user-interface, will assess the optimized annual power output and array
con&amp;#64257;guration for a user-speci&amp;#64257;ed geographic location and
array perimeter. A more technical o&amp;#64260;ine version targeted at WEC
developers will also be made freely available. The second component will be
achieved through interdisciplinary REU initiatives that target underrepresented
groups and through the development of project-based learning modules, leveraging
the proposed online assessment tools. This will motivate and empower the student
participants to advance this research both within their profession and the
public at large, thus propagating the broader impacts of this research.