* 1235301
* Engineered Anisotropic Biphasic Nanoparticles for Bio-Therapeutic and Pharmaceutical Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Prabhas Moghe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 396,364.00

This study proposes a novel nanomanufacturing paradigm for anisotropic micro-
and nanoparticles, termed Janus particles. While this class of particles has
received much attention recently, their formulations have not been compatible
with biotechnology, where bio-benign polymers are called for, and staged
delivery of multiple biotherapeutic factors is frequently desired but difficult
to achieve. The key goal of this work is to create novel biodegradable and
biocompatible anisotropic biphasic nano- particles (ABNPs) for large scale
production, capable of dual compartmentalization and incorporation of two or
more therapeutic drugs with staggered release profiles. Three specific aims will
be pursued. Aim 1 is focused on the design and synthesis of a platform of
ABNP/ABMPs with different combinations of polymeric and lipid materials that
self-assemble into anisotropic particles. Aim 2 is focused on the modeling of
polymer/polymer and polymer/lipid for the rational design of engineered
ABNP/ABMP; Aim 3 proposes to demonstrate the broader functional impact of the
nanomanufacturing paradigm of ABNP/ABMP on phased delivery of dual-combination
drugs by applying these particles for difficult-to-treat
cancers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this project will lead to
significant advances in pharmaceutics, biomedicine, materials engineering and
dispersion stabilization. Furthermore, multicompartmental, biocompatible
particles will constitute a new avenue in the design of active and passive drug
delivery vehicles, tissue engineering scaffolds, and biomimetic particles. The
broader impacts are in the mechanisms for broadening participation of URM
scholars; and developing curriculum and professional training mechanisms in the
tools for nanoparticle manufacturing and drug delivery science and engineering.
Four specific mechanisms for broadening participation are proposed: 1) Study
modules will be created by the PI for all participating students to complete and
discuss research findings in joint group meetings; 2) Results will be
incorporated into teaching courses and laboratory modules; 3) Active
participation in already established outreach programs at Rutgers; 4) Outreach
to URM students and dissemination in workshops and conferences.