* 1235488
* The Antarctic Circumpolar Current: a Fractured Transport Barrier
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Andrew Thompson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,389.00

In recent years, the application of residual mean theory to the Southern Ocean
has greatly improved our understanding of how eddy transport controls the
stratification and meridional overturning of the Southern Ocean's Antarctic
Circumpolar Current (ACC). Yet, this model is firmly rooted in a two-
dimensional, or zonally-integrated, framework, which runs counter to a major
theme of recent Southern Ocean research: the large degree of zonal asymmetry in
dynamical properties of the ACC. Recent results have shown that eddy-mean flow
interactions, which are responsible for generating and sustaining the
characteristic heterogeneous frontal structure of the ACC, vary significantly
along the path of the ACC with transitions between different regions largely
controlled by topography. Thus there is increasing evidence that zonally-
averaged models of the Southern Ocean are insufficient to resolve controls on
transport and overturning rates. The goals of this project are two-fold. The
first is to quantify and dynamically describe the regional variability of eddy
heat and potential vorticity fluxes in the Southern Ocean. Of particular
interest are transitions in the vertical structure of the ACC fronts and their
effectiveness as transport barriers near topography. In this project, the
hypothesis, that meridional transport in the Southern Ocean occurs in discrete
locations determined by flow interactions with topography will be tested. A
major ramification of this discrete view of the ACC is the potential sensitivity
of global transport properties to local forcing changes. The second goal is to
provide a better dynamical description of flow-topography interactions by
conducting a suite of process study models. Insight gained from the eddy flux
distributions will be used to develop and test scaling arguments that predict
the spatial extent of these "transport corridors." This study will also consider
how this localized behavior responds to changes in forcing conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Advances in remote sensing techniques
and in computational power have meant that the ability to model and observe the
Southern Ocean has progressed significantly over the past decade. Insight gained
from both models and observations have emphasized the heterogeneity of the
hydrographic structure and dynamical behavior within the ACC. Yet, the current
understanding of the mechanisms that control this regional variability remains
underdeveloped. As the Southern Ocean is the primary site of water mass exchange
and water mass modification in the global circulation system, documenting the
spatial distribution of transport and mixing processes in the ACC is essential
for understanding its role in the climate system. This project attempts to move
beyond the zonally-averaged view of Southern Ocean overturning with the goal of
bringing our fundamental dynamical understanding of the ACC in line with both
observational data and ocean global climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project will contribute to our understanding of Southern Ocean
circulation. As this region is typically the most poorly constrained aspect of
ocean general circulation models, insight gained from a systematic process-study
modeling approach will help to guide improvements in eddying ocean circulation
models and interpretation of results from such models, which may be sensitive to
vertical resolution and representation of topographic features. The project will
provide training to a post-doctoral researcher who will have the opportunity to
work in two stimulating environments at Caltech and the University of Hawaii.
The international collaboration with colleagues at JAMSTEC in Japan during
analysis of their high-resolution ocean model results is also an important
aspect of the project.