* 1235084
* DMREF: Collaborative Research - Programmable peptide-based hybrid materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Darrin Pochan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1235084 PI: Pochan, Darrin ORG: University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1234161 PI: Saven, Jeffrey ORG:
University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: DMREF: Collaborative
Research - Programmable peptide-based hybrid
materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;Biologically-derived proteins
and peptides assemble to yield complex structures and functions (e.g. viruses).
In contrast, much simpler assemblies typically result (e.g. spherical micelles)
when synthetic macromolecules are employed. The sophistication of protein and
peptide structures is possible because of their (1) versatile, heteropolymeric
chemistry (i.e., amino acid sequences), (2) defined secondary structures (i.e.
molecular conformations such as beta-sheets, alpha-helices, and other turns and
coils) that provide for specific, local shapes to display amino-acid
functionality,(3) well-defined, intramolecular, folded conformations (tertiary
structure), and (4) well-ordered quaternary, or intermolecular, structure
through the assembly of multiple polypeptide chains. As in nature, the potential
exists to build new complex structures and functions via the careful choice of
the sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide. This DMREF effort will elucidate
fundamental principles and methods for the design of nonnatural one- and two-
dimensional polypeptide assemblies. The solution assembly of these designed
peptides will be characterized experimentally, and they will be functionalized
to realize polypeptide/metal nanoparticle hybrid materials. Theoretical
approaches for the design of polypeptide assemblies will be applied and refined
in an intimate collaboration with experimental studies. The chemical versatility
of peptides will be harnessed to explore and exploit solution assembly processes
that are hierarchical, multicomponent, thermodynamically preferred and/or
kinetically controlled. Comprehensive nanoscale- through-microscale
characterization of the polypeptide assembly, structural intermediates, and
final materials will inform future iterations of theory and solution processing.
The development of these approaches to materials assembly will facilitate the
technological goal of creating robust, solution-assembly methods to produce
metal nanoparticle arrays with controlled interparticle spacing and
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort
parallels goals of the Materials Genome Initiative. Concepts and methods for
predictive materials discovery will be developed in the context of theory-driven
design of polypeptides that assemble into targeted materials and nanostructures.
New experimental methods for studying and guiding molecular assembly in solution
will be refined to monitor polypeptide assembly and to build
polypeptide/nanoparticle materials with hierarchical complexity. The close
interaction of theory and experiment is essential in the development of a
predictive understanding of these materials. The concepts and methods so
developed will speed the discovery of new polypeptide-based hybrid materials,
and the use of the peptides to specify the arrangement and positioning of metal
nanoparticles, has a variety of potential applications, including enhancement of
light capture in photovoltaic cells. This collaboration will provide
undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers at the
University of Delaware and University of Pennsylvania with multidisciplinary
knowledge and expertise in the design, modeling, fabrication, and
characterization of peptide-based biomaterials. This physical science effort
will coordinate with the Interdisciplinary Humanities Research Center at the
University of Delaware. Journalism students and faculty associated with the
environmental humanities program will work with the DMREF science team. This
effort will produce: (1) researchers better trained in communicating science to
the general public and in describing the impact of the science and any eventual
technology, and (2) future journalists with experience in multidisciplinary
research who are skilled in assimilating scientific nuance and complexity into
discussions of the research and its impact.