* 1235150
* GEOTRACES Pacific section: Dissolved Fe, Cd, and Zn isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Seth John, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2016
* USD 394,048.00

Iron (Fe) and other trace metals have a profound impact on marine
biogeochemistry. In about 20 to 50% of the world's oceans, primary productivity
is limited because phytoplankton cannot obtain enough Fe to satisfy their
physiological needs. Small changes in seawater Fe concentrations can therefore
have an immense impact on the growth of phytoplankton, affecting the
productivity of ecosystems and the sequestration of carbon in both the modern
and ancient oceans. Other trace metals such as zinc (Zn), and cadmium (Cd) can
be important nutrients for phytoplankton in their own right, and can be used as
chemical tracers to explore processes such as nutrient supply and
remineralization, ocean circulation, and earth's climate history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at the University of
South Carolina at Columbia will measure dissolved Fe stable isotopes in samples
collected on the US GEOTRACES Eastern Tropical South Pacific (ETSP) transect.
GEOTRACES is an international effort to map the distribution of biogeochemically
important metals in the oceans. Trace metal isotope ratios add a crucial
dimension to the GEOTRACES mission because the information contained in isotope
signals is often very different from what can be learned by concentration
distributions alone. Along with Fe isotopes, they will simultaneously generate
Cd and Zn isotope ratio data in some of the same samples. These data will be
used to distinguish between competing hypotheses about trace-metal and nutrient
distribution in the oceans, with a focus on two specific questions:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) What are the sources of bioavailable Fe to the oceans?
Dust deposition, flux of reduced Fe from continental margin sediments, and
hydrothermal vents have all been hypothesized as major contributors to the
global dissolved Fe pool. The team will measure the stable Fe isotopic
signatures of these fluxes at 'end-member' locations including surface waters
(dust), the Peru oxygen minimum zone (reducing sediments), and the East Pacific
Rise (hydrothermal vents). Basin-scale Fe isotopic distribution will then be
studied in order to quantify how these various sources contribute to the global
pool of biologically utilized Fe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) What processes cycle
Fe within the ocean? As Fe is cycled by various biological and inorganic
processes, the team will track Fe isotopic composition in order to better
understand how source-Fe isotopic signatures are modified through internal
cycling, how iron is transferred between different pools such as dissolved and
particulate phases, and the processes that allow dissolved and particulate Fe to
become bioavailable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study will
contribute to education through the training of a postdoctoral associate, a
graduate student, and the involvement of undergraduate students in several
aspects of this work. Additionally, this project addresses questions of broad
oceanographic and scientific importance, potentially transforming our
understanding of the role that trace-metals and other nutrients play in
supporting life in the oceans and affecting global climate change