* 1235638
* Aerosol and Atmospheric Optics: Visibility and Air Pollution Conference; Whitefish, MT; September 24-28, 2012
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Philip Hopke, Air & Waste Management Association
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports a specialty conference entitled "Aerosol and Atmospheric
Optics: Visibility and Air Pollution" to be held from 24 to 28 September 2012 in
Whitefish, Montana. The conference will be convened under the auspices of the
Air and Waste Management Association. The primary objective of this meeting is
to provide a technical forum on advances in the scientific understanding of the
effects of atmospheric aerosols on urban-, regional-, continental-, and global-
scale haze and radiation balance. Specific sessions will focus on emission
sources, atmospheric conditions, and aerosol characteristics associated with
haze and urban visibility; regional haze; climate forcing; innovative aerosol,
haze, and radiation-balance monitoring assessments; and modeling
methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
advancing scientific understanding of the influences of aerosols on visibility,
radiative transfer, and climate. In addition, the conference will bring together
established researchers and early career scientists, providing invaluable
opportunities for professional interactions in a focused and productive forum.
The award will support transportation, registration, and/or per diem expenses
for young investigators, students, and participants from underrepresented groups
who would be unable to attend without financial assistance.