* 1235691
* Picowatt-Resolution Calorimetry for Probing Near-Field Radiative Thermal Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edgar Meyhofer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 326,944.00

CBET-1235691&lt;br/&gt;Sangi Reddy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge for
the 21th century, across diverse fields of engineering and science, is to
precisely understand how energy is transported and converted at the nanoscale,
with the ultimate goal of harnessing conversion and transport mechanisms for the
development of a wide range of novel technologies, including sustainable energy
generation. While radiative thermal transport between macroscopic objects
separated by large distances is well understood, radiative heat transfer in the
near-field the regime in which the spacing between two surfaces is smaller than
the peak wavelength predicted by Wien?s displacement law?is poorly understood.
This lack of knowledge is primarily due to experimental challenges in performing
accurate, quantitative measurements of near-field radiative heat transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to overcome critical obstacles to
near-field radiative heat transport experiments and develop a sensitive,
picowatt-resolution calorimetry based, experimental platform to provide the
first quantitative measurements of near field radiative heat transfer between
parallel surfaces with nanoscale gaps. Further, the experimental approaches
developed in this work will enable the utilization of near-field effects to
probe DC heat output of microscopic systems with unprecedented resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques and tools that will be developed as part of
this work will significantly enrich the field of micro/nanoscale energy
transport where the lack of experimental tools to probe near-field radiative
transport is a major impediment to progress. Further, this work will enable
several other applications such as near-field enabled nanopatterning, and novel
metrology measurements. In the long term, the proposed development of near-field
enabled DC picowatt resolution calorimetry can have a transformative effect on
the study of complex biological systems, particularly individual cells, and give
us a wealth of information that can not be obtained through other means. In
addition to addressing the technical questions described above, the proposal
also incorporates extensive outreach activities to engage undergraduate and
graduate students as well as underrepresented minorities in research. Toward
this goal the PIs will: 1) recruit three undergraduate students per year for
research training, 2) develop a graduate class on near-field thermal transport,
3) incorporate research results and novel heat transfer phenomena into an
undergraduate lab class taught by the PIs, and 4) create an educational video
based on our research for broader dissemination.