* 1235365
* Piezoresistive Nano-composite Sensors for Wide-range Strain: Applications in Biological Soft Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anton Bowden, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 256,983.00

The research objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that the
physics behind a new class of piezo-resistive nano-composites can be modeled
using a novel tunneling/percolation model, and that the resultant sensors can be
used for sensing large strains in biological tissue. This hypothesis will be
tested using various innovative characterization and modeling approaches applied
to an advanced nano-nickel conductive composite. Focused-ion beam and high-
frequency impedance analysis of quantum junctions will unveil the nano-level
structure while new nano-indentation techniques will extract quantum tunneling
parameters for elastomeric polymers that provide candidate matrix materials.
Finite element analysis will be used to track evolution of nano-junctions under
strain, and feed a dynamic percolation model that will capture the piezo-
resistive effect. The resultant state-of-the-art model will guide sensor design
for employment in the area of biological soft tissue. Two biological studies
will form the vehicle for application and validation of the scientific
investigation: characterization of ligament response in human spines, and
tracking of strain on athletes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project
will enable important insights into the material behavior of human tissue.
Additionally, the results will unlock the door to understanding a broad class of
novel nano-composite sensor materials that may be developed. The proposed wide-
range sensors will provide flexible and inexpensive measurement of the
nonlinear, large-strain motions of materials that have previously been difficult
or impossible to characterize. Potential applications in athletics, human-
machine interfaces, virtual reality, biomechanics, and medicine are envisioned.
Furthermore, the project will accomplish these goals while providing a strong
educational focus on mentoring undergraduate and women engineering students.