* 1235364
* Health System Modeling and Simulation: Coordinated Care Example
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Bernard Zeigler, RTSync Corp
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 01/31/2014
* USD 270,813.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a general modeling framework
for national health care that will enable simulations to study specific
approaches to improve care while reducing cost. For example, simulations will
allow Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) to study specific coordinated care
systems to fill the gap between hospital and doctor aimed at reducing re-
admissions and medication errors. ACOs will also be able to examine the tradeoff
between quality and cost of such coordinated care. A range of simulation tools
will be developed to support the design of coordination architectures and
predict important quality metrics that are applicable to diverse populations.
The modeling approach will integrate mathematical system and agent modeling
concepts extended to include human behavioral limitations. The overall model
will significantly extend an established coordinated care framework and will be
validated against data obtained from a successful program for women with high
risk pregnancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will show
how to systematically model the behaviors of patients who require coordinated
care interventions, thus rendering these behaviors amenable to health care
system design and engineering. The systems-level simulation models will identify
the various community partners and how they can be effectively coordinated using
emerging health information networks and electronic medical records. Beyond
impacting health care, the new methodology for system-level modeling and
simulation will support constructing and testing alternative architectures for
coordinating component systems prior to implementation in diverse societal
sectors such as engineering, defense, and agriculture. The tool set employed to
build the models will be widely distributed through the proposer?s software
distribution services. The model library will be promulgated by a collaborating
coordinated care institute to a wide network of organizations set up to provide
such care.