* 1235761
* Novel Single-Ion Conductors for Lithium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Qing Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 310,272.00

PI: Wang, Qing Proposal Number: 1235761 Institution: Pennsylvania State Univ
University Park Title: Novel Single-Ion Conductors for Lithium-Ion Batteries

In order to give a completely new direction in the development of high-
performance electrolytes for lithium-ion batteries, this project examines
single-ion conducting (SIC) electrolytes, a unique alternative to traditional
lithium-ion battery electrolytes. Expected lithium-ion-transference number of
unity can potentially eliminate electrolyte polarization losses in the cell that
develops in a binary salt system, resulting in an increase in power capacity.
The improvements are significant for applications where a high discharge rate is
desired, such as electric vehicles.

This project examines the properties of the SICs with systematic structural
variations by utilizing a comprehensive suite of characterization techniques
along with electrochemical measurements to gain fundamental insight into the how
the structure characteristics influence the film morphology, Li+ conduction,
mechanical and thermal stability, electrochemical properties, and mechanisms of
ion dissociation and transport that are desperately needed for this field to
advance. The battery performance will be examined to establish full pictures of
the structure-property-performance correlations. In addition, the influence of
the SIC membranes on the formation, composition and morphology of the solid-
electrolyte interface layer and their impacts on the cell performance will be
examined.

The project, if successful as planned, will open a completely new direction in
the development of high-performance electrolytes for lithium-ion batteries.
Moreover, it will shed light on the fundamental understanding of ion transport
and polymer electrolytes which are relevant for a range of advanced technologies
such as actuators, alternative battery membranes, and fuel cells. The project
will train scientists and engineers capable of working in the interdisciplinary
field of energy storage. Through the collaboration with Seoul National
University, the graduate students will gain valuable experience in the
international research and education. Particular attention will be given to
recruiting women and under-represented minority undergraduate research
assistants through the Penn State Minority Undergraduate Research Experience,
and Women in Science and Engineering Research programs.