* 1235552
* Turbulent mixing by nearshore internal bores
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2015
* USD 231,136.00

Intellectual Merit: The overall understanding of the larger-scale physics of the
inner shelf has advanced notably in the past few years, but there has been
little work on the shallow nearshore regions where stratified inner shelf waters
interact with the shore. Limited observations to date, including work in
Monterey Bay and Mamala Bay, suggest that transient mixing and stratification
events, presumably associated with the shoaling and breaking of internal wave
fields present offshore, dramatically alter the physical environment in this
ecologically important part of the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
detailed observations of periodic turbulent bores and fronts will be conducted
in 10 to 30 m water in southern Monterey Bay using a set of Acoustic Doppler
Velocimeters (ADV) and fast Conductivity/Temperature sensors to describe the
behavior of nearshore turbulent mixing and stratification events. The ADVs will
be mounted on an 8m high tower and cabled to shore, to measure turbulence
variables including Reynolds stresses, turbulence dissipation and buoyancy
fluxes. This tower will be supplemented by an array of Acoustic Doppler Current
Profilers and thermistor chains centered on it to provide a detailed spatial and
temporal view of these flows, including diagnosing their dynamics. An Automated
Underwater Vehicle will be used to map larger-scale variations in temperature
and salinity. The project is designed to accomplish two related goals that could
substantially advance current understanding of flows in the nearshore: (1) Show
how these bore-like features interact with topography and other (e.g. tidal)
flows, and (2) Examine the turbulence produced during this interaction in light
of existing dynamical frameworks of boundary layer and stratified shear
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The local dynamics of the
bore/relaxation front pattern that has been often reported in the literature can
be the dominant source of variability in an ecologically important class of
physical environments. This is significant for several reasons: (1) The
bores/fronts appears to be an important mechanism by which deeper offshore
waters are supplied to nearshore environments in shelf regions of coastal
upwelling systems. Because of the interaction between these bottom derived
waters and surface process affected waters in nearshore ecosystems, this is
important for understanding how climate change will affect these ecosystems
since these waters are low in dissolved oxygen and have high acidity. (2) These
bores/fronts are thought to be an important mechanism for the exchange of
organisms between the nearshore and the outermost regions of the inner shelf.
(3) Vertical turbulent mixing is critical to many ecological processes such as
benthic grazing and primary production by
phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's investigators will be
experimenting with how to best use coastal ocean observing systems and, through
their participation in Stanford's Center for Ocean Solutions, how to connect
their use with the data and information needs of policy makers as well as those
of other marine ecologists and geochemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From an
educational standpoint, the proposed work will be labor intensive and thus will
engage a number of Stanford graduate and undergraduate students. Besides the two
students directly involved in the project, at least four other graduate students
will likely be involved in the field work, including two women Ph.D. students
working with the investigators. As part of this project, a graduate field
methods class that will be built around the May 2013 experiment will be taught.
Finally, the investigators will also develop a microdocumentary (see
http://microdocs.org/) on the importance of internal bores to nutrient fluxes,
and nearshore ecosystem production. In conjunction with this video, they will
visit several local area high schools in largely underrepresented districts to
make short (30 min) presentations on oceanography, ocean health, and ocean
career opportunities during which the microdocumentary will be presented to the
classroom.