* 1235244
* A Computational Framework for Predicting Skeletal Muscle Adaptation Following Surgical Procedures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Shayn Peirce-Cottler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2016
* USD 395,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a novel computational
framework for predicting the adaptation of skeletal muscle to changes in
mechanical environment, as occurring after surgical procedures. Current
computational models are limited in their capacity to predict long-term muscle
adaptation because they lack a comprehensive formulation of the underlying
mechanobiological response mechanisms. Under this award, a novel computational
strategy will be developed to quantify the remodeling of muscle-tendon
morphology and function in response to surgically-induced mechanical changes by
integrating finite-element (FE) modeling and agent-based (AB) modeling
approaches. The computational strategy makes use of a practical multi-scale
modeling workflow that explicitly builds on a series of experiments that
characterize the response of muscle tissue in a rabbit model of muscle-tendon
transfer surgery.

If successful, these studies will add significantly to the understanding of the
feedback between mechanical stimuli and physiological processes that determines
skeletal muscle adaptation. Once developed, the models created under this award
can be applied to study a wide range of remodeling and adaptation responses of
muscle to loading, unloading, and disease, enabling new hypotheses that will
advance current research of musculoskeletal biology and mechanics. Similarly,
once fine-tuned to a particular surgical model, the computational models will
ultimately inform surgeons of the most effective approach, which will improve
the outcomes of surgeries, leading to better quality of life for patients. As
part of the research program, k-12 teachers will be hosted in the PIs? research
laboratories over the summer. The PIs, teachers, and students will collaborate
on teaching kits that will be delivered to the teachers? schools and published
on TeachEngineering.com so that they are available for the general population.