* 1235726
* Collaborative Research: Modifications of turbulent boundary layer structure by wall permeability and surface-subsurface interactions: an innovative experimental approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Brian Thurow, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 186,195.00

1236527/1235726&lt;br/&gt;Best/Thurow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent flows
moving over a porous, permeable, surface are ubiquitous in many environmental
and industrial flows, such as in rivers, over vegetated canopies, in heat
exchangers, membrane tube reactors and hydrocarbon wells. However, despite the
widespread importance of these flows in many branches of science, the physics of
turbulence across permeable boundaries remains poorly understood, and currently
hampers our ability to predict the movement of gases, particles, microbes and
pollutants into and out of such surfaces. This project will develop and utilize
the latest techniques in optical flow measurement to provide unique new data on
the structure of 3D flow above and within permeable surfaces, and critically the
interactions between these flows. The project is expected to transform the
understanding of surface-subsurface turbulent flow interactions, and enable
testing of several key questions concerning the nature of turbulence over such
surfaces, and how this flow structure changes as the type of permeable bed is
altered and the overlying flow velocity is varied. Laboratory experiments will
match the refractive index of the flow and sediment, thus permitting optical
measurements to be achieved above and within permeable sediment beds.
Additionally, new plenoptic camera techniques will be used for the
quantification of three-dimensional flow within a 3D volume, both within and
above the permeable surface. The combination of these techniques opens up the
possibility of quantitative information that has never been gained before within
such complex flows. The project will enable the training of two PhD students in
state-of-the-art experimental techniques within a collaborative and
interdisciplinary research environment. These unique data will allow development
of new conceptual models for flow over permeable surfaces and provide essential
data to guide subsequent numerical modelling of these flows. These data will be
used to explain how turbulent flows moving over a range of permeable surfaces
may be modified by the permeability, and thus examine the fluid dynamic controls
on the fate of fine particles moving across the fluid-sediment interface. For
instance, these results will be of direct relevance in interpreting the behavior
of natural river beds, where gravels can become infilled with fine-grained
sediment, and which can control the exchange of nanoparticulates and
contaminants between surface and subsurface flows.