* 1235544
* Colloborative Research: Assessing Climate Model Simulations of Last Glacial Maximum Ocean Circulation with Carbon Isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Andreas Schmittner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 95,391.00

One of the key premises in paleoclimatology is that understanding of past
climate can give us insight into present day and future climate. A corollary is
that the ability of climate models to faithfully simulate past climate,
particularly during extreme periods such as the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM;
~20,000 years ago), will help us improve these models and give us more
confidence in their projections of future climate change. Over the past few
decades scientists around the world have periodically carried out an
intercomparison of the latest model simulations of climate over the past few
centuries and the future. In its most recent iteration (the Intergovernmental
Panel of Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report, or IPCC AR5), this exercise
also includes simulations of climate during the last glacial period (the
Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project- Phase 3, or PMIP3).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project, a collaboration between
researchers from Columbia University's Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory and
Oregon State University, is to evaluate the ability of the AR5 and PMIP3 suite
of climate models to simulate the modern and LGM global ocean circulation. The
goal is to both assess the state-of-the-art models used to project future
climate change, as well as to contribute to a better understanding of climate
and ocean circulation during the LGM. Previous assessments have been hampered by
the lack of direct observations of past climates. Fortunately, the interaction
of ocean circulation with carbon dioxide and other biogeochemical trace material
leaves behind chemical signatures in ocean sediments that record the climate and
ocean circulation of that period. Unfortunately, while scientists have become
quite adept at measuring them, these chemical signatures are only indirect and
imprecise recorders of ambient climate. To get around this problem, the
researchers have developed a model capable of directly simulating biogeochemical
tracers and their interaction with ocean circulation. Coupled with a novel
computational technique, the researchers will simulate these tracers in the AR5
and PMIP3 models, and then compare them directly to the chemical signatures
measured in sediments. By analyzing the results the researchers will be able to
characterize the circulation of each model, identify the underlying factors
responsible, and assess its performance against observed data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is highly relevant to ongoing efforts to more
accurately constrain past climates, to project the future impact of human
activity on the climate system, and to develop models capable of simulating
different climate regimes. The work involves collaboration with climate modeling
groups around the world (Germany, Japan, France, and Australia).