* 1235975
* Thermal Rectification Enabled by Nanoscale Radiative Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Zhuomin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 04/30/2016
* USD 252,000.00

CBET-1235975 PI: Zhang

Solid-state thermal rectifiers have received much attention in recent years,
because controlling the direction of heat flow is critically important for
thermal management and energy-harvesting applications. While most solid-state
thermal rectifiers are based on the nonlinear phononic, electronic or mechanical
properties of materials near the interfaces, a photonic device may be
advantageous for obtaining large rectification factors over a broad temperature
range. It has been shown that near-field thermal radiation can achieve a heat
flux exceeding that predicted by the Stefan-Boltzmann law, which is the
conventional limit set forth by Planck's blackbody radiation theory. Much
attention has been paid to this research area lately, due to its promising
applications in near-field sensing and thermal imaging, nanomanufacturing, and
thermophotovoltaic devices. This project will use dissimilar materials with
temperature-dependent dielectric functions to enhance vacuum thermal
rectification. An innovative aspect of this research is the use of polymer pads
to create sub-micrometer vacuum gaps with reduced heat conduction. This will
allow the unambiguous determination of near-field radiative transfer through
large areas. Measurements of the spectral radiative properties of promising
materials at elevated temperatures will also be performed to elucidate the
underlying mechanisms of thermal rectification mediated by nanoscale radiative
heat transfer.

Measurements of nanoscale thermal radiation between large areas remain a
daunting challenge. This research will provide an experimental demonstration of
a vacuum thermal rectifier. The study of the radiative properties at high
temperatures and how they can affect near-field radiative transfer will enable a
deeper understanding of photon-matter interactions. The success of this research
will facilitate a number of other applications that use near-field thermal
radiation, including near-field thermophotovoltaic systems for energy
harvesting. Both theoretical and experimental advances are expected to result
from this project. The research findings will be broadly disseminated to
multidisciplinary journals and conferences. This project will make a significant
impact on engineering education. Students working on this project will gain
knowledge in the fundamental theory of thermal radiation as well as experience
in micro/nanofabrication and thermal/optical instrumentation. Underrepresented
students will be actively recruited to participate in this research as well as
encouraged to pursue advanced engineering degrees. Furthermore, the research
results will be integrated in a new graduate textbook on thermal radiation.