* 1235596
* Electrochemical Ion Exchange Regeneration (ELIXR) and Rapid Electrochemical Crystallization Softening (RECS) for Chemical and Waste-Free Water Softening and Reclamation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* James Baygents, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 209,509.00

1235596 (Farrell). This research is being pursued in direct response to the
growing concern of salt accumulation in public drinking water supplies and the
increasing need for communities to rely on water reuse. The research will test
the feasibility of two novel electrochemical processes for removing hardness
ions, silica and dissolved organic matter from potable and waste waters. The
ELIXR process utilizes an electrochemical cell for producing acids and bases for
the regeneration of ion exchange (IX) media. The acids and bases are produced
using the ions present in the water, and thereby does not require the use of any
chemicals. The RECS process is an electrochemical enhancement of pellet
softening, in which an electrochemical cell replaces the acids and bases used
for pH adjustment. The RECS process can also be used for removing dissolved
silica and organic matter as a pretreatment for reverse osmosis (RO), or as a
posttreatment process on RO concentrates. Combination of the ELIXR and RECS
processes can eliminate the production of brine solutions that are normally
generated during IX regeneration. Thus, in addition to water softening, the
ELIXR and RECS processes can be used to produce zero liquid discharge from water
reclamation operations. The objectives of this research are to test the proofs
of concept for the ELIXR and RECS processes. Achieving this objective will
require the following intellectual contributions: 1) proof of concept validation
for two new water treatment technologies; 2) development of methods to
concentrate ions in IX regenerant solutions; 3) determination of ionic
concentration and speciation effects on energy requirements for producing acid
regenerant solutions; 4) determination of current density, chloride and sulfate
concentration effects on the production hypochlorite and persulfate; 5)
determination of the effectiveness of block carbon filters on hypochlorite
removal; 6) determination of persulfate effects on conventional ion exchange
media and on polypropylene based ion exchange fibers; 7) determination of the
effectiveness of RECS for removing hardness ions, silica and dissolved organic
matter from ELIXR and RO concentrates; and 8) determination of the effectiveness
of direct anodic oxidation and anodically produced oxidant species for
destroying dissolved organic matter and biologically recalcitrant contaminants
in RO concentrates. The broadest impacts of this research are that it addresses
the two biggest issues with potable water in arid regions of the country,
namely: 1) the increasing salinification of the groundwater supplies; and 2) the
pretreatment and concentrate disposal issues associated with RO and water
reclamation activities. The ELIXR and RECS processes will have a direct impact
on water reuse processing as they are able to remove ions, dissolved solids and
organic matter from water without chemical addition or production of concentrate
streams. In addition, the ELIXR and RECS processes will alleviate the pollution
and natural resource requirements associated with the transport and storage of
large quantities of hazardous chemicals, reduce the footprint of traditional
treatment methods, and reduce the costs of purifying water. An education and
diversity plan focuses on recruiting students from under-represented groups and
integration of research results into the energy, water and the environment
component of the ENGR 102-High School course that the principal investigator is
currently managing.