* 1235549
* THE DRIVE TO SURVIVE: COPEPODS vs ICHTHYOPLANKTON
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Daniel Hartline, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2018
* USD 542,383.00

This study will experimentally elucidate the dynamics of predator evasion by
different species and life stages of copepod responding to a model larval fish
predator. The PIs will use standard and high-speed videographic and cutting-edge
holographic techniques. Predator-prey interactions within planktonic communities
are key to understanding how energy is transferred within complex marine food
webs. Of particular interest are those between the highly numerous copepods and
one of their more important predators, the ichthyoplankton (the planktonic
larval stages of fishes). The larvae of most fishes are planktivorous and
heavily dependent on copepods for food. In general, evasion success increases
with age in copepods and decreases with the age of the fish predator. How this
plays out in detail is critical in determining predatory attack outcomes and the
effect these have on predator and prey survival. To address this problem,
different copepod developmental stages will be tested against several levels of
predator competence, and the results examined for: 1) the success or failure of
attacks for different combinations of predator and prey age class; 2) the
kinematics (reaction latencies and trajectory orientation) for escape attempts,
successful and unsuccessful, for different age classes of copepod; 3) the
hydrodynamic cues generated by different ages and attack strategies of the
predator and the sensitivity of different prey stages to these cues; and 4) the
success or failure of the predatory approach and attack strategies at each prey
stage. The data obtained will be used to inform key issues of zooplankton
population dynamics. For the prey these include: predator-evasion capabilities
and importance of detection ability, reaction speed, escape speed, escape
orientation, and trajectory irregularity; for the predator they are:
capabilities and importance of mouth gape size, stealthiness, hydrodynamic
disturbance production, and lunge kinematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project will be 1) improved scientific insight into predator-
prey dynamics as they affect the world's fisheries; 2) training of
undergraduates, including underrepresented groups, in research (the University
of Hawaii at Manoa is a minority-serving institution, and the P.I. is co-
director of the UH Minority Access to Research Program, which provides ready
access to qualified undergraduates); 3) training undergraduates and graduate
students in outreach activities that educate K-12 age children in biodiversity
within marine systems, the role of nervous systems in animal behavior, and the
scientific method in their study; 4) a technology-oriented outreach and
undergraduate education project focused on drawing high-school and early
undergraduates into the appreciation of the wonders of animal behavior as
revealed by slow-motion (high-speed video) techniques.