* 1235592
* Engineered 3D Material Matrices with Embedded Semiconductor Micro/Nano-pillars for Radiation Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* M. Saif Islam, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 225,000.00

The research objective of this award is to study the radiation sensing mechanism
enabled by functional material matrices that combine highly efficient electron-
hole pair collecting materials with radiation sensitive materials. The approach
is based on the fabrication of semiconductor junction photodetectors in the
shape of vertically oriented pillars that will be embedded in functional
radiation sensitive materials such as enriched boron. The relation between the
detection efficiency and device parameters such as pillar dimensions, inter-
pillar distances, surface planarity and low resistance contacts for optimum
charge transfer at the interface of the pillars and the radiation sensing
materials will be established. The strain present in the material matrices under
different growth conditions will be studied to minimize the interface stresses.
The study will also include advanced surface passivation techniques such as
hydrothermal growth of enriched boron compounds around the pillar detectors to
simultaneously act as passivation coatings as well as neutron sensitive
materials.

The outcome of this research, if successful, will lead to highly efficient,
lightweight, low-cost and large area solid-state radiation sensors. Such devices
will offer alternatives to helium isotopes that are currently being used in
conventional neutron detectors and are facing a looming supply shortage, in
addition to the disadvantages such as susceptibility to microphonics, high
operational voltage, high pressure and poor fieldability due to large footprint.
Through the applications of manufacturing processes used by the semiconductor
industry, the research offers the potential to enable a new class of advanced
radiation sensing systems that can be integrated with high-speed read-out
electronics for applications in particle physics, homeland security, non-
proliferation, neutron radiography and material characterization. Educational
and outreach programs based on this research will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in science and technology and train future
multidisciplinary scientists and engineers through an active collaboration with
the National Laboratories.