* 1235848
* Understanding the Niche of Bioelectrochemical Systems for Water and Energy Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Zhiyong Ren, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2014
* USD 241,598.00

1235848 (Ren). Simultaneous wastewater treatment and energy generation has been
a primary focus in bioelectrochemical systems (BES) research, but system
performance is significantly reduced when using wastewater as the substrate
compared to refined chemical substrates. BESs use microorganisms to catalyze the
oxidization of organic and inorganic electron donors in the anode chamber and
deliver electrons to the anode. The electrons can be captured directly for
electricity generation (microbial fuel cells, MFCs) or supplemented by external
power input for producing hydrogen, methane, or value-added chemicals (microbial
electrolysis cells, MECs). The electrons can also be used in the cathode chamber
to remediate contaminants such as uranium, chlorinated solvents, and
perchlorate. The potential across the electrodes can also drive desalination
(microbial desalination cells, MDCs). This project will use a systems approach
to gain fundamental understanding of the unique features and mechanisms involved
in various BES functions. The project team will also characterize, assess, and
develop reactor systems to improve the applicability of the technology.
Specifically, the team will: 1) Systematically characterize the interactions of
different but complementary features for systems such as desalination and energy
production from wastewater (treatment efficiency, electrochemical performance,
ion transfer behavior, and microbial activity); 2) employ fundamental principles
and findings to guide the development of BES configurations that can be
integrated with current infrastructures for on-site wastewater treatment, energy
production, and desalination; and 3) establish a life cycle assessment framework
to provide quantitative analysis of the environmental impacts and energy
footprint of BES technology as compared to existing technologies and direct
system optimization and integration. Outcomes of this research should not only
provide quantitative guidelines to facilitate the transformation of BES into a
viable technology for wastewater infrastructure, but also advance the
understanding and development of this technology for other applications such as
bioremediation and biosensing. The work is targeted to address two crucial
challenges facing our society - water and energy. In addition to the advancement
of scientific understanding and development of bioelectrochemical systems, the
proposed work provides an attractive platform for educating students and society
to understand the Water-Energy Nexus and teaching them about interdisciplinary
tools available for science and technology exploration. The project will
academically and financially support graduate students focusing on the
engagement of underrepresented groups. Partnerships with local TV stations and
Denver Zoo have been established and will continue to be developed to educate
and demonstrate environmental sustainability technology to the general public.
The team will also use the research findings and system developments as
education tools to capture K-12 students' interests in energy and environmental
issues and encourage them to pursue careers in STEM areas.