* 1235092
* GOALI:  Understanding and Predicting Li Dendrite Formation in Li-ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Peng Lu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2017
* USD 521,186.00

The research objective of this grant is to fundamentally understand the
thermodynamic driving forces and kinetic mechanisms leading to the formation of
lithium metal dendrites in Li-batteries. One of the most significant challenges
for Li-ion battery design is the prevention of Li-dendrite growth, which would
allow faster charging for current Li-ion battery technology and the use of Li
metal anodes for future "beyond Li-ion batteries." A computational model based
on the phase-field method will be developed to predict the conditions for
dendrite growth and morphological changes with input thermodynamic, mechanical
and kinetic parameters from atomistic/first principles calculations and
experimental measurements. The proposed model will be based on a nonlinear
kinetics in which the dependence of the rate of changes of a phase-field
parameter is nonlinear with respect to the thermodynamic driving force, and
hence it is applicable to modeling the microstructure evolution under large
overpotentials or high charging rates. One of the key parameters is the Li
metal/electrolyte interface energy, which will be directly computed by
connecting DFT calculations and liquid thermodynamic data. This three-year grant
will lead to (1) fundamental understanding of the transport and chemical
kinetics of dendrite formation and growth and their relationships to their solid
electrolyte interphase (SEI) film properties and (2) the development of a
physics-based microstructure evolution model that does not rely on non-
transferable fitting parameters to predict the conditions for dendrite formation
and growth morphology. The ultimate goal for this work is to eliminate the
formation-- or at least to limit the growth-- of dendrites on Li metal
electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dendrite formation is the primary degradation
and failure mechanism and a safety concern in Li batteries, either because
dendrite pieces lose electrical contact with the rest of the Li electrode or
because growing dendrites penetrate the separator and lead to short circuits.
The fundamental understanding achieved from this research program is expected to
contribute to the Li ion battery safety improvement, a critical need for the
near-term development of hybrid and electric vehicles. The planned research,
both the methodology and the actual results, are designed to make significant
contributions to new battery technology by providing important fundamental
information about electrode materials behavior under various electrochemical
conditions. The direct involvement of GM scientists provides an important avenue
for disseminating the knowledge generated from this project. The primary
research results will be shared with the public on-line to the public at
http://lithiumbatteryresearch.com/ in addition to peer-reviewed publication and
conference proceedings. The graduate student and postdoc supported by this
project will spend extended periods of time in an industrial environment, which
will provide an important added dimension to their education. Both of these
individuals will thus be very well positioned for future work in battery-related
fields. In addition, undergraduate students will be integral to the program via
Penn State's MURE (Minority Undergraduate Research Experience) programs and
senior thesis projects in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at
Penn State.