* 1235671
* Advancing Offshore Wind Power Sitting through Multi-criteria Assessment Integration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Moore, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,933.00

1235671 (Kelly).This research has two major tasks. The first is to advance
offshore wind siting methods by creating a new multi-criteria assessment
framework that integrates life cycle assessment (LCA), geographic information
systems (GIS), viewshed modeling, aquatic ecology, and economics to analyze the
consequences of design, policy, and engineering decisions of offshore wind farm
siting. By accomplishing this task, offshore wind siting assessment can
integrate the many competing siting objectives within a cohesive evaluation
environment, and a general methodology will be developed for site evaluation.
The second task is to apply this multi-criteria methodology to the Great Lakes
region to explore how offshore wind farm siting locations will impact the
electric sector, environmental quality (through emissions reductions and aquatic
life impacts), and local viewsheds. The completion of this task will inform the
development of policy and technology with respect to offshore wind turbines, and
will provide tools for conducting these analyses. The research effort will
develop multi-criteria analyses that use GIS, LCA, and optimization methods to
analyze and visualize the economic, environmental, and social impacts of siting
offshore wind turbines. This model will incorporate data from numerous sources,
much of which is geographically unique (topography, bathymetry, wind resource,
population, demographics, food web), but the methods will be applicable to any
location. The integration and optimization of the economic, environmental, and
social impacts is a unique contribution to research in offshore wind. It allows
the simultaneous evaluation of these potentially disparate objectives, and
creates a means of identifying the tradeoffs that exist between them. One
globally identified challenge facing humanity is the reduction of greenhouse
gasses from the energy sector. Offshore wind represents a tremendous resource,
but the planning and deployment of offshore wind turbines has been met with much
social resistance. A more thorough and holistic approach to wind site analysis
may reduce such resistance and thereby streamline offshore wind siting. This
research will create a methodology for evaluating and supporting offshore wind
farm siting and development that better accounts for economic, social, and
environmental impacts. The multi-criteria assessment framework will be applied
to a siting project in Michigan, but the methodology will be applicable to other
offshore wind developments, and will enhance the understanding of tradeoffs
associated with offshore wind farms to key stakeholders (e.g., local
communities, developers, government agencies, investors). A teaching module on
integrated assessment of offshore wind siting will be developed and tested in
two Master's courses for the UM School of Natural Resources and Environment, and
then refined for widespread dissemination through the UM Center for Sustainable
Systems website. A professionally developed podcast or video short will be
produced, posted to social media sites for broad educational impacts from K to
grey, and provided to the Great Lakes Wind Collaborative for dissemination. The
educational impact of this project includes both graduate and undergraduate
students through independent research and course module integration. A PhD
student will work on advanced GIS research for offshore wind siting which will
include electricity grid and environmental modeling. This project will also
leverage the UM Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program to engage
undergraduates from numerous diverse backgrounds and cultures. The research team
will use the research findings to update and create Wikipedia pages on topics
such as ?offshore wind power?, ?electricity from wind?, and other relevant
topics. This research will be accomplished by an interdisciplinary team that
leverages expertise from several different and complementary communities
including mechanical engineering and optimization, LCA, environmental economics,
aquatic ecology and GIS.