* 1235958
* Beyond Boredom: Modeling and Promoting Engagement during Complex Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 01/27/2012,08/31/2016
* Sidney D'Mello, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,084,752.00

The core research question of this proposal is how interactions between learners
(i.e., individual differences), instructional materials (i.e., the text), and
learning activities (i.e., the task) modulate engagement during learning of
critical thinking skills and scientific reasoning. The proposed research will
address this goal by: (a) systematically investigating the mechanisms that
facilitate or hinder engagement, and (b) leveraging these insights towards the
development of interventions that promote persistent and productive engagement
trajectories during deep learning. The work will be conducted at the University
of Memphis. The research subjects will be undergraduate students.

The research design includes four experiments in which learning gains and self-
reported engagement, physiological arousal, eye gaze patterns, and facial
features will be tracked while learners study instructional texts. Comprehending
these texts for mastery requires active engagement as learners generate
inferences, understand causality, identify problems, discriminate the quality of
experimental designs, and ask diagnostic questions. Analyses will be conducted
using nonlinear time series analysis techniques, such as recurrence
quantification analysis. The project evaluation will include an expert advisory
committee that will be used to critically review the investigators' findings and
interpretations. In addition, the investigators will develop and validate a web-
based computer program that dynamically tailors both the instructional text and
the learning activity to the needs and learning styles of individual learners to
enhance engagement. The proposed research will balance the theoretical goal of
theory building and model testing via systematic experimentation with the
practical goal of developing innovative advanced learning technologies that
aspire to promote engagement and learning of difficult subject matter.

This research is important in the STEM education field's ongoing efforts to
increase engagement and the productivity of learning of STEM subject matter. If
the research is successful, the derivative knowledge and tools will be
significant contributions and could be applied widely in other intelligent
tutoring systems, other instructional technologies, and in our understanding of
student learning in general. This research is potentially transformative in two
ways. First, it will provide a detailed understanding in real time of engagement
at the micro, relational level of student, task, and materials. Second, the
creation of an intelligent tutoring system based on these findings holds the
possibility of being able to 'correct' low levels of student engagement on a
moment-to-moment basis and therefore boost learning productivity while
increasing student satisfaction and engagement with the experience.
Dissemination will include the public availability of the technological tools as
well as contributions to the scholarly literature.