* 1235305
* Mechanotransduction of Shear Stress and Genetic Response in the Embryonic Heart
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Deborah Garrity, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2017
* USD 380,000.00

The research objective of this award is to use complementary biomechanical and
genetic approaches to investigate how biomechanical stresses impact the
embryonic heart. As fluid and blood cells move through the forming embryonic
heart, they exert shear and normal stress upon the endocardial lining, and upon
the blood vessel endothelial walls. These stresses provide mechanical 'feedback'
sensed by the developing heart. Too much or too little stress can have
pathological effects that critically perturb cardiac structure and function both
before and after birth. Studies conducted under this award will apply a novel
quantitative imaging methodology to investigate the effects of normal and
pathological biomechanical forces in the embryonic heart on cardiac morphology
and function in live zebrafish embryos. In parallel, genetic experiments will
investigate how altered biomechanical forces translate into a genetic response
by defining the cohort of genes regulated by the Kruppel-like-factor2 (KLF2)
transcription factor, a known stress response gene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, these studies would help identify how and when epigenetic
biomechanical factors regulate the early morphogenesis of the vertebrate heart.
Identifying the KLF2 gene network will provide insight into which specific gene
products are altered in response to non-genetically encoded (biomechanical)
forces operating in the embryonic heart. Ultimately, this knowledge should lead
to improved in-utero diagnostics, treatments and interventions for congenital
heart disease. The educational plan focuses on training students in cardiac
biomechanics and genetics at the undergraduate and graduate level. New
quantitative imaging tools and methods will be applicable for study of multiple
cardiac mutants.