* 1235573
* Seismic Observatory for Community Resilience - A Program to Learn from Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jay Berger, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

Urban centers worldwide are threatened by earthquakes. The effects of an
earthquake on a community depend on the magnitude and location of the earthquake
as well as on how well the community has planned for the future earthquake.
Community resiliency to an earthquake depends on the capacity of individuals,
households, businesses, and region to survive and to recover after a disaster
strikes. The best lessons for earthquake resiliency can be obtained by the study
of what worked and didn't work in regions that are struck by earthquakes. This
proposal will design and conduct a focused earthquake reconnaissance effort to
accelerate learning about seismic resiliency, such that a significant leap in
knowledge can be made. The proposed research effort builds on the acclaimed
multi-decade and multi-disciplinary EERI Learning From Earthquakes (LFE)
program, but it proposes a major change and refocus of the LFE program to
achieve the target result of superior understanding of community
resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary Seismic Resilience Panel
will guide earthquake reconnaissance to maximize resilience learning relevant to
the U.S.; to conduct post-earthquake reconnaissance efforts focused on seismic
resilience; to develop methods for systematic data collection, archiving, and
dissemination of the findings; and to prepare a synthesis report summarizing the
principal findings of the project. The intellectual merit of the proposed
program lies in (a) defining the key physical and human elements that contribute
to, or inhibit, seismic resilience in U.S. communities, and (b) exploring those
elements through focused earthquake reconnaissance in the U.S. and worldwide, as
appropriate. In the process, better understanding of the physical, social,
economic, governance and institutional factors that facilitate or slow recovery
will be achieved. By understanding these complex conditions and their
interactions in the post-disaster environment, the grand challenges that need to
be addressed will emerge. Through the solution of these challenges advancement
in resilience knowledge will be gained. The ultimate goal is to improve the
seismic resilience of communities in advance of disasters.