* 1235263
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Biological and Engineering Approaches to Reveal the Principles of Flight Control in Hummingbirds
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Xinyan Deng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2015
* USD 245,877.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the dynamics and control of
hummingbird flight. Two species of hummingbirds of different sizes and two
species of insect (hawkmoth and wasps) will be used, and an integrative approach
based on animal experiments, mathematical modeling, theoretical analysis, and
engineering experiments will be performed. The goal of this work is to provide a
general theory for animal flight maneuverability, stability and control through
a series of targeted experiments. This research will directly contribute to the
development of new, improved models of flight mechanics, and it will
substantially advance our understanding of one of the major forms of animal
locomotion. Ultimately this scientific basis will not only advance the theory of
animal flight but also provide design guidelines for bio-inspired engineering
systems with superior stability and maneuverability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will enhance the infrastructure for research and education
through interdisciplinary research in biology and engineering. The research
results will be disseminated broadly to the biology, physics, and engineering
research communities. The theories developed in this work can potentially be
translated into other forms of locomotion. Advances in high performance flapping
wing micro aerial vehicles can be used in civilian and defense applications such
as search and rescue in collapsed buildings, or indoor surveillance such as in
crowded airports. Building upon their historically-successful outreach
activities including various television, film, radio, web-based and newspaper
reports, the PIs will continue on their active outreach effort with the goal of
engaging general public, pre-college students, K-12 students in scientific
research and generating scientific excitement and awareness through various
public activities and events.&lt;br/&gt;Abstract