* 1235693
* Collaborative Research:  Workshop on the Anticipatory Governance of Complex Engineered Nanomaterials, July 1, 2012 - June 30, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,06/30/2016
* David Guston, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2016
* USD 34,250.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Proposals: 1235693/1235706&lt;br/&gt;Guston,
David H. / &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop will help move
nanotechnology EHS research forward in order to more quickly assess the possible
impacts of nanomaterials on health and the environment by characterizing the
materials in question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of background papers will
address such topics as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To what extent can we identify
complex engineered nanomaterials (CENMs) and their trajectories in existing nano
literature, patents, and products?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. What do we know about
the materials that are being or might be used for CENMs, in terms of current and
anticipated functions, characterizations, toxicological properties, and life-
cycle knowledge?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. How do current leading scientific
researchers understand the medium-term future development, applications and
governing issues of CENMs that constitute the primary focus of this
group?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. What do we know about the ability of current
regulatory science and regulatory policy pathways (knowledge systems including
standards of evidence, decision support, etc.) to manage
CENMs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. To what extent can we anticipate current
approaches to predictive toxicology for nanomaterials to apply to
CENMs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
on the anticipatory governance of CENMs will take fulladvantage of the
dissemination abilities of the centers and groups involved. Background papers
and the draft report will be available on the websites of the centers and notice
of their availability sent to their multiple listservs with thousands of
subscribers. After revisions from the workshop vetting, the background papers
and the workshop report will be suitable for submission to journals such as
Journal of Nanoparticle Research or Nature Nanotechnology. The executive
committee may also arrange a briefing for the broader nano community following
the publication of the papers. The inclusion of public and private sector
participants in the workshop means that any perspectives and/or recommendations
derived there are more likely to find receptive audiences.