* 1235511
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Informal Recycling as a Livelihood Strategy Among Recent Rural-Urban Migrants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Timothy Oakes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 02/28/2014
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the ways in which rural migrants
establish livelihoods and gain access to urban space via informal recycling and
trash collecting. Although recycling contributes value by removing waste from
cities and channeling materials back into commodity production, new rural-urban
migrants in developing and emerging countries are often viewed as 'uncivilized'
by established urban residents. Thus, migrant recyclers are paradoxically
objectified as both paragons of entrepreneurial virtue and unsanitary urban
interlopers. In some countries tensions arise as state entities seek to control
flows of both urban waste and rural migrants within the city. Arguing that
access to urban space and waste is a crucial determinant for the success of
migrant recyclers, this project connects the shifting experiences and
conceptions of mobility, citizenship and identity with the structures impacting
their livelihoods. This project builds on the hypothesis that informal
recycling's creation of social and economic value represents a strategy of urban
citizenship, and reveals the contradictions underlying state and public visions
of modern urban development. By considering the case of urban recycling in
Shanghai, this research uses a mixed methodology of surveys, statistical and
discourse analysis, interviews, focus groups, and mobile ethnography, uniting
studies in urban development, migration, and the regional geography of China.
There are two research questions the project hopes to answer are: (1) how is
informal recycling structured in metropolitan Shanghai? (2) How is access to
urban space and resources for newly urban residents engaged in recycling as a
livelihood conditioned, limited, and enabled by these structures?

This research promotes cross-cultural and interdisciplinary research among China
and US scientists and policy-makers by demonstrating the benefits and values of
informal recycling networks and they in which these have the potential for
stabilizing newly urban populations. It argues for positive recognition of the
contributions of marginalized groups to sustainable urban development. The
resulting dissertation will be published in Mandarin Chinese and English, and
disseminated to local university departments and the Shanghai Academy of Social
Sciences (SASS). Scholarly articles produced from this research will be
submitted to US academic journals and presented at conferences of development,
migration, and China studies. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this project provides support to a promising student working towards
establishing a social science research career.