* 1235526
* Development and Validation of Performance Based Design Procedures for Kinematic Loading of Pile Foundations During Lateral Spreading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Kyle Rollins, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2017
* USD 220,492.00

Liquefaction of loose saturated sands results in significant damage to
buildings, transportation systems and lifelines in most large earthquake events.
Liquefaction commonly leads to lateral spreading which often impacts bridges and
ports, damaging these critical transportation links at a time when they are most
needed for rescue efforts and post-earthquake recovery. Despite significant
advancements in understanding the mechanics of lateral spreading and pile
response during the past 20 years, calibration and verification efforts have
largely been restricted to small-scale centrifuge tests and a very small set of
field case histories during earthquakes. To gain widespread acceptance in
engineering practice, these methods now need to be calibrated or verified using
well-documented case histories involving full-scale structures such as those
damaged during the Mw 8.8 Maule, Chile earthquake in 2010. As part of this
study, a geotechnical site investigation consisting of drill holes, SPT tests,
and seismic CPT soundings will be performed at three pier sites that experienced
various levels of damage from lateral spreading during the 2010 Maule, Chile
earthquake in order to develop and document new lateral spreading case
histories. The data from these new case histories, including geotechnical
properties, pier superstructure and foundation design plans, and earthquake
performance data will then be published on BYU and GEER web sites for access by
the earthquake hazard community. Following the development and documentation of
the new lateral spreading case histories, conventional deterministic methods
will be employed to compute free-field lateral spread displacements along with
pile foundation displacement and rotation for each case history. Comparisons
will be made with measured field performance and possible variations in the
procedure will be evaluated to improve agreement for this large magnitude event.
Finally, a probabilistic performance-based design (PBD) procedure will be
developed and employed to compute the free-field lateral spread displacements
and pile displacement as a function of annual rate of exceedance. Collaborators
at the Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile will assist in field work and
conduct parallel probabilistic procedures which they have developed
independently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical impact of this study
includes: (1) the compilation of new lateral spread case histories from a large-
magnitude earthquake, for which there is a scarcity in most lateral spreading
databases; (2) the development and calibration of deterministic and performance-
based design procedures for piles in laterally spreading soil that have the
potential to significantly reduce damage and subsequent economic losses to
society in the event of an earthquake; (3) improvement in the reliability of
lifelines during seismic events that will reduce both direct and indirect
losses; and (4) use of the verified and calibrated procedures developed in this
study will reduce unnecessary mitigation costs, while assuring that safety and
code performance requirements are satisfied. The broader impacts and educational
benefits of this study include: (1) the development of well-documented case
histories available to researchers world-wide through the established web sites,
(2) technology transfer of performance based design methods to Chilean engineers
through research collaboration and a earthquake seminar in Santiago, (3)
mentoring activities with graduate and undergraduate research students, and (4)
outreach to high school students through the well developed BYU balsa wood
bridge testing program.