* 1235852
* Graphene-SiC Interface: Effect of Atomic Bonding Type on Thermal Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

CBET - 1235852 PI: Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University

In this project, a novel technology based on steady-state joule heating and
simultaneous Raman spectroscopy will be developed to measure and distinguish the
temperature between graphene and its substrate. This technology enables
nanometer resolution in the out-of-plane direction for thermal mapping.
Systematic knowledge will be built about thermal transport between graphene and
SiC, and how this interface thermal resistance is affected by two typical
interfaces: interface featuring Van der Waal force and interface with covalent
bond. Atomistic modeling will be conducted to evaluate the graphene-interface
thermal resistance and complement the experimental data to provide a cross-
benchmarked and complemented in-depth and full-spectrum picture of the thermal
transport at graphene-SiC interface. For thermal design in graphene-based
devices and systems, this project will establish an important quantitative
knowledge base about the interface thermal resistance sustained by Van der Waals
and covalent bonds. Broader impacts. The results of the research will be
integrated into existing and new courses at Iowa State University. Undergraduate
participation in summer research will be facilitated through the PERUSE program
at ISU. Outreach to K-12 students is included, and will involve supervision of
independent study projects by top students from local high schools.