* 1235908
* Triboelectric charging of granular materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Daniel Lacks, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 309,759.00

1235908 PI: Sankaran

When granular materials flow, the particles rub against each other and can
become electrostatically charged. The charging of particles causes several
problems, such as disrupting the flow or even initiating explosions. While
?triboelectric charging? is one of the most well-known areas of science --
everyone notices it when they walk across a rug and get a shock as they touch a
doorknob, or when they rub a balloon on their hair and see how the balloon and
hair become charged -- its scientific basis is in essence completely unknown.
For example, it is not clear whether the species transferred between surfaces
are electrons, ions, or bits of material. This project will take a rational
approach to understanding triboelectric charging in granular materials by
developing simple model systems that focus on fundamental questions ? these
model systems include granular materials with particular properties and special
flow geometries, and bulk materials rubbed in controlled geometries to more
simply address issues relevant to granular systems. Our investigation will
consist of three thrusts: (1) particle flow experiments with specially chosen
particles and flow patterns, (2) asymmetric rubbing experiments as a model for
polydispersity effects in granular materials, and (3) experiments with well-
defined material surfaces that can be compared with theory/simulation.

Our experiments will elucidate several key questions, including what type of
species (e.g., electron, ion, or bits of material) are transferred during the
charging process, what is the role of the particle size distribution in the
charging of granular materials, and how does humidity (i.e. water adsorption on
surfaces) influence charge transfer. By understanding triboelectric charging
from a fundamental perspective, our work may help scientists and engineers
working in industry address problems related to this pervasive issue.