* 1235396
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: First-Principles Based Design of Spintronic Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* William Butler, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,135,495.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;First-principles theory (DFT and beyond)
will be used to screen thousands of half-metals and choose a set of
experimentally-accessible starting materials. We will also develop models based
on state-of-the-art Non-Equilibrium Green Functions to calculate their transport
characteristics. Experimentally, we will synthesize the candidate materials,
test their electrical, magnetic, and structural characteristics and compare to
theoretical predictions. The results of this characterization will then be fed
back to refine our theoretical methods. Promising materials will be tested with
more advanced techniques (such as spin-polarized tunneling and local-electrode
atom probe tomography), providing more detailed information for more advanced
modeling. The most promising materials will be used in prototype TMR and
(CIP/CPP)-GMR devices. A specific disruptive technology goal is the design,
fabrication and demonstration of a low moment half-metal with perpendicular
anisotropy and low magnetic damping ideally suited for STT-RAM. This will be
accomplished through the tight circular work flow among rational design,
computational verification, spin transport modeling, experimental
characterization and device fabrication. Several interdisciplinary courses at UA
and UVa will be developed to quickly incorporate lessons we have learned into
the classroom and provide students with cutting-edge training. Software
developed in the project will be deployed on the NSF
NanoHUB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;In
today's electronic devices electrons are manipulated through their electrical
charge. However, electrons have another property called "spin". Electrons behave
as if they were spinning about an axis. According to quantum mechanics the spin
axis of an electron can point in only one of two directions, i.e. either "up" or
"down". In most materials there are equal numbers of up and down electrons and
usually both types respond to an electric field in the same way. In magnetic
materials, however, the number of up and down spin electrons may be different
and the two types of electrons may respond to electric fields in different ways.
The most extreme example of this phenomenon is a "half-metal" - meaning that one
set of electrons is a metal and the other set is an insulator. A specific
technology goal is the design, fabrication and demonstration of a half-metal
with carefully controlled magnetic properties tailored to meet the requirements
of non-volatile magnetic memories (which aim to replace traditional RAM). We aim
to provide an improved understanding of half-metals and magnetic materials in
general, in particular how one can relate 'first-principles' calculations to
experimentally accessible and technologically relevant materials and device
parameters. This project will help to increase the STEM workforce by providing
research experiences for undergraduates and high school students and will
enhance its diversity through its composition and collaboration with HBCU
faculty. Several interdisciplinary courses at UA and UVa will be developed to
quickly incorporate lessons learned into the classroom and provide students with
cutting-edge training.