* 1235100
* Engineering Nano-Building Block Toolboxes for Programmable Self-Assembly of Nanostructures with Arbitary Shapes and Functions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Russell Deaton, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 417,789.00

This grant provides funding for research enabling the development of practical,
controllable, and repeatable methods for both modeling and implementing self-
assembled nanostructures, and to couple structure to the function of the
nanoassembly. The first goal is to develop a nano-building block toolbox termed
'Nano-Toolbox' for the programmable self-assembly of nanostructures with
arbitrary shapes and arbitrary functions. This is to be accomplished using an
aqueous-phase ligand replacement technique to control the number, placement, and
orientation of the DNA, which does the assembly, on various nanoparticles. The
second goal is to develop practical methods to design assemblies using the
building blocks, and to incorporate functional response into the design process.
Third, to demonstrate the controllability and scalability of our approach, the
resulting Nano-Toolbox will be used to construct multimodal and multifunctional
3D hybrid nanocomposites in different sizes and shapes with enhanced optical
response over several wavelength bands, allowing us to acquire more
comprehensive, accurate and reliable information using multiple imaging and
therapeutic modalities.

This research has the potential to translate a nanoscale design for a structure
into observable, macroscopic functions and material properties. Thus, the
research advances nanotechnology closer to the goal of bottom-up manufacture of
programmable materials and devices with new, enhanced properties and
functionality. In addition, it provides the capability for functional, reliable,
and scalable techniques for manufacturing more complicated and controlled
multifunctional nanostructures that incorporate diverse nanocomponents for
specific applications. If successful, the results of this research have the
potential to provide standardized design and laboratory procedures for 'second-
generation' multifunctional architectures at all scales and in all three
dimensions. Thus, this research has high potential to transform many fields of
research, including biology, chemistry, physics, medicine, and materials science
and engineering. For example, nanostructures with better plasmonic response and
multimodal characteristics might impact sensing applications in biology and
medicine, therapeutics, and photovoltaic devices.