* 1235900
* RUI: Influence of Wastewater Treatment on Fate, Transport, and Bioaccumulation of Antidepressant Pharmaceuticals in Terrestrial Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Stephanie Strand, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 04/30/2016
* USD 99,376.00

1235900&lt;br/&gt;Schultz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antidepressant pharmaceuticals
are one of the most heavily prescribed pharmaceutical products in the United
States. Human pharmaceuticals enter wastewater treatment and, subsequently, the
environment, primarily by way of domestic waste from human excretion or by
direct disposal of unused or expired drugs in toilets. Since antidepressants are
widely prescribed in the United States and are incompletely removed during
municipal wastewater treatment, it is not surprising that these chemicals are
being measured in our waterways. Antidepressants and select degradates have been
reported in wastewater effluent and in effluent-receiving surface waters at
nanogram to low microgram per liter range. The presence and potential
accumulation of pharmaceutically active compounds, including antidepressants,
poses a great threat to non-target organisms that live in environments that
receive continuous exposure of antidepressants via wastewater discharge.
Laboratory and field studies confirm that non-target organisms, such as fish
that live in wastewater effluent receiving waters, can accumulate
antidepressants in their tissues. Laboratory exposure studies report that there
are behavioral and physiological consequences of antidepressant exposure on
these non-target organisms. Most research regarding the fate and transport of
antidepressants in the environment has focused on aquatic systems. The primary
objectives of this research are to measure the fate, transport, and the
potential for bioaccumulation of antidepressants in terrestrial environments
considering wastewater treatment technologies that may remediate and reduce
their subsequent loads into the environment. Specific aims include: (i) to
determine the occurrence, distribution, and fate of antidepressants in biosolids
and biosolids-amended soils (ii) investigate the bioaccumulation of
antidepressants in earthworms living in biosolid-amended soils, and (iii)
explore the potential for remediation of antidepressants during sludge
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public and regulatory interest regarding the
presence of pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the environment is
increasing. Antidepressants are environmental contaminants of particular concern
because they are widely dispensed, are bioactive (including many of their
degradation products), are common wastewater contaminants, and have been shown
to cause adverse effects in organisms living in wastewater-impacted
environments. This project will investigate the role wastewater treatment plants
plays in introducing antidepressants to terrestrial environments, while
exploring wastewater treatment plants remediation technologies that could reduce
their environmental loads. Results from this study will assist our understanding
of the relationship between wastewater treatment and the fate, transport, and
possible bioaccumulation of antidepressants from biosolids to terrestrial
environments, an area of research that is currently understudied.