* 1235328
* US GEOTRACES Pacific section: Characterizing the redox environment of the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2017
* USD 414,427.00

The 2013 GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific Zonal Transect from Peru to Tahiti will cross
an entensive oxygen deficient zone typically described as "suboxic"; however,
measurements of sulfate reduction in this region suggest it may have some anoxic
characteristics due to the presence of free sulfide. Redox conditions influence
the solubility/stability of many trace elements which in turn affects their
vertical and horizontal transport. A scientist from Old Dominion University
plans to analyze water samples collected during the cruise for dissolved
iodate/iodide, arsenic [As(III)/As(V)], selenium [Se(IV, VI), particulate Se(0),
and nano- to picomolar hydrogen sulfide speciation (total, free/uncomplexed).
These measurements, along with nitrate/nitrite, nitrous oxide, and iron species
determined by other participants during the cruise, will be used to constrain
the range of redox conditions within the oxygen deficient zone, assess the
importance of in-situ reduction versus horizontal advection of the redox
species, and the changing redox conditions within the hydrothermal plume of the
East Pacific Rise. Availability of this data will also enable other researchers
to determine the behavior of other redox sensitive trace elements in the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards the broader impacts, in addition to
contributing to the overarching goals of the GEOTRACES Program, one postdoc, one
graduate student, and one undergraduate student would be supported and trained
as part of this project.