* 1235768
* Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Wave Energy Arrays -- Integrated Control/Array Design in Random Seas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alexandros Taflanidis, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 187,819.00

PI: Scruggs, Jeffrey / Taflanidis, Alexandros Proposal Number: 1235732 / 1235768
Institution: University of Michigan Ann Arbor / University of Notre Dame Title:
Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Wave Energy Arrays -- Integrated
Control/Array Design in Random Seas

In the transition of the US energy economy from traditional technologies to
renewables, ocean wave energy technology has a signi&#64257;cant role to play.
However, our understanding of how to best harness the resource is still
evolving. For Wave Energy Conversion (WEC) technologies to be relevant on a
utility scale, it will be necessary to distribute vast arrays of energy-
harvesting buoys across a wide expanse of ocean. Maximization of power
generation from large-scale WEC arrays requires a synthesis of optimal control
and optimal geometry techniques. The present state-of-understanding is limited
to single buoys and small array sizes. It also does not account for the
limitations of power conversion systems, or the fact that sea states are random
and uncertain phenomena. This collaborative project constitutes an e&#64256;ort
to rectify these issues, through a novel synthesis of two disparate research
threads: robust control theory and large-scale stochastic optimization.

The proposed work will focus on accurate techniques for assessing and optimizing
the power generation potential for a given geographic location and a given array
perimeter. This will provide answers to some necessary questions for this
technology to move forward: (i) Given an array perimeter, a probabilistic
characterization of the sea state, and a technological characterization of the
generators, what is the optimal number of WEC buoys, and how should they be
arranged? (ii) How do the optimal number of buoys and con&#64257;guration depend
on the conversion technology used? (iii) How does the buoy con&#64257;guration
depend on the e&#64259;ciency of energy storage and transmission systems that
interface the array with the grid? The PIs will integrate their respective
approaches (the optimal power generation control algorithm for a WEC system, and
stochastic sampling methods) into a single computationally-e&#64259;cient
framework, which simultaneously reshapes the array and redesigns the controller
upon each iteration. This will reduce the time necessary to accurately evaluate
the maximum power generation capability for a given array size by several orders
of magnitude. In this work the PIs will innovate generic techniques for large-
scale WEC array design using techniques from robust control theory and advances
in high-performance computing.

This collaborative project will provide a clear insight into the true potential
of large-scale WEC arrays to meet future energy needs. Also the project has the
potential to lift technology adoption barriers and to promote advocacy among the
public. This will be accomplished via di&#64256;usion mechanisms that enhance
ambassadorship among students and awareness among stakeholders. The PIs will
adopt a two-pronged strategy, involving: 1. development of open-access online
resource assessment software, and 2. educational outreach initiatives focused on
ocean energy. In the &#64257;rst component, the online application, supported by
a friendly user-interface, will assess the optimized annual power output and
array con&#64257;guration for a user-speci&#64257;ed geographic location and
array perimeter. A more technical o&#64260;ine version targeted at WEC
developers will also be made freely available. The second component will be
achieved through interdisciplinary REU initiatives that target underrepresented
groups and through the development of project-based learning modules, leveraging
the proposed online assessment tools. This will motivate and empower the student
participants to advance this research both within their profession and the
public at large, thus propagating the broader impacts of this research.