* 1235169
* Ecology of eukaryote microbes in the deep North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Alexander Bochdansky, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2018
* USD 539,945.00

In the microbial realm, one of the three domains of life -- the Eukarya -- has
received little attention in deep-sea research. This stands in contrast to the
fact that in all known aquatic environments, and measured by the amount of
material and energy transferred, the link between prokaryotic and eukaryotic
cells is one of the most significant trophic interactions on Earth. In terms of
volume, the deep sea is the largest biome, and despite its tremendous role in
long-term biogeochemical cycles, it has largely been neglected. Biological
activity in the deep sea is neither negligible nor homogeneous in space and
time. Recent data suggest that biological activity in the dark ocean (as
evidenced by respiration rates, bacterial secondary production and a variety of
other metrics) is much higher than anticipated from all known organic carbon
fuel sources combined (i.e., POC flux, DOC convection, in situ production and
active transport by zooplankton). Water masses in the deep ocean represent
highly-diverse biogeographic regions with distinct communities and particle
distributions. Moreover, because of feeding thresholds, cold temperatures,
extreme pressures and unique adaptations that deep-sea microbes exhibit,
biological activity rules cannot simply be extrapolated from laboratory cultures
and from experiments with surface-dwelling microbes. This study focuses on the
fundamental role of eukaryotic microbial communities in deep-sea ecology with
the overarching hypothesis that protists represent sensitive biological
indicators of utilizable organic carbon. There is good reason to believe that
microbial eukaryotes and their activities are better indicators of "new" sources
of organic carbon than particle inventories, sediment traps, isotope ratios, or
models based on surface production and theoretical flux attenuation. For these
new biological indicators to work, however, one needs to separate live from the
moribund and dead cells, the bacterivores from saprotrophs, the inactive resting
stages from those actively feeding on prokaryotes, the gametes and zoospores
from vegetative and feeding stages, and those located on particles from the ones
freely suspended in the water column. Each of these groups represents different
levels of per-cell energy and carbon requirements. Intellectual merit: This
study determines the ecological role of eukaryotic microbes in the deep North
Atlantic over large geographic regions. The research incorporates two
fundamentally different experimental designs that capitalize on different time
scales: 1) Short-term incubations (~72 hours) of respiratory activity and
bacterivory combined with a high resolution sampling of abundances across large
geographic regions performed from a research vessel, and 2) Long-term
incubations (=/&gt; 4 weeks) measuring colonization of sinking particles and
growth of eukaryotic microbes using free-falling (untethered) vehicles
representing the first attempt of physiological rate measurements directly in
the deep sea. Methods include new tracers for bacterivory, incubations for
single-cell respiration, taxonomic identification using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, single-cell genomics, and the first of its kind deep-sea
holographic microscope capturing images to a maximum depth of 6000 m at 5
micrometer resolution. Broader Impacts: This project supports undergraduate and
graduate research and enhances undergraduate curriculum in biological
oceanography courses held by the PI. Workshops for underrepresented groups will
be held in Puerto Rico. A permanent exhibit on the role of microbes in the ocean
will be installed at a major museum and interpretation center in Hampton Roads.
This research contributes significantly to the development of new technology for
oceanographic research with emphasis on deep-sea environments and supports
international scientific research collaborations.