* 1235714
* Design of a bacterial consortium for consolidated bioprocessing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Claudia Schmidt-Dannert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 340,146.00

PI: Schmidt-Dannert, Claudia&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1235714&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;Title: Design of a bacterial consortium for consolidated
bioprocessing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biotechnological bioprocesses typically use
pure cultures of metabolically engineered microbial strains. In contrast,
environmental processes generally utilize the metabolic diversity present in
native microbial consortia to accomplish tasks that not one single organism can
do alone. The quest for the development of consolidated bioprocesses for biofuel
production, where hydrolysis of recalcitrant lignocellulosic biomass and
subsequent sugar conversion into biofuels are combined, has reinvigorated
investigations into the use of mixed cultures. Currently different strategies
are being pursued to obtain strains that are both lignocellulolytic and advanced
biofuel producers, but so far none of the engineered strains is efficient at
both tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering of biological networks with new
emergent properties employed in the field of synthetic biology has provided
tools and strategies with which it becomes possible to design and investigate
synthetic microbial consortia. By compartmentalizing metabolic functions into
separate microbial populations, the metabolic network of each strain can be
optimized for distinct tasks that together result in the production of a desired
compound. The different engineered microbial strains co-cultured in a bioprocess
can therefore be considered as individual metabolic modules that may be
exchanged or augmented with additional modules. Prerequisite for the engineering
of such mixed microbial communities, however, is the establishment of population
control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design a prototype
synthetic microbial community as a proof-of-concept for consolidated
bioprocessing. Results from the proposed research can guide the development of
other bioprocesses using engineered microbial consortia. Specifically, this
project will engineer a mixed culture consisting of B. subtilis, Rhodococcus
opacus and E. coli for de novo biodiesel production. The industrial protein
expression host B. subtilis will be engineered to secrete cellulolytic enzymes
for sugar release from biomass, while the oleaginous R. opacus and the
ethanologenic E. coli strain together will convert sugars into fatty acid ethyl
esters (biodiesel). Key to the development of such a consortium is the
engineering and configuration of adequate systems to control growth of each
consortium member in accordance to the requirements of the process. The project
will design such population control systems using components of bacterial quorum
sensing systems. A system simulation model will be built to guide us in the
design these control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a
proof-of-concept for the development and application of engineered microbial
consortia for bioprocessing. The use of mixed cultures for biotechnology may
thus be revitalized and moved from the pre-DNA technology into the synthetic
biology area. Results from this application will provide insights and a model
for the design of population control systems needed to adjust population sizes
to the requirements of a specific process. The proposed research will impact the
field of biotechnology and synthetic biology. Findings of this research may lead
to new and more efficient approaches for biofuel production and other
bioproduction processes. The proposed research will provide training in genetic
and metabolic engineering for one postdoctoral researcher and four undergraduate
students.