* 1235317
* Collaborative Research: Geospatial Modeling for Pro-active Flood Mitigation in the Rural Midwest
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Nicholas Pinter, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 10/31/2015
* USD 164,732.00

Repetitive flooding severely affects rural communities in the Midwest and
nationwide. "The crucial point about understanding why disasters happen is that
it is not only natural events that cause them. They are also the product of
social, political, and economic environments" (Wisner et al., 2004). This
project will evaluate relationships between: 1) flood risk; 2) local attitudes
towards mitigation; 3) responses of local leadership; and 4) institutional
regulations and policies in order to create an integrated physical-social GIS
model of vulnerability to catastrophic flooding and use it to select 30 rural
communities suitable for large-scale flood risk mitigation such as through
community relocation. We will survey residents in the 30 communities and use
these data to answer questions about rural communities' attitudes towards living
with catastrophic flood risk and mechanisms for promoting community-driven
reductions in flood risk. We will also map institutional, regulatory, and legal
policies that local leaders must navigate to implement proactive mitigation. We
will conduct a controlled experiment in 10 communities, assigned in equal number
to experimental intervention or to a control group. Intervention in the five
communities will consist of engaging leaders and residents in multifaceted
discussion of the obstacles, opportunities, and incentives for reducing exposure
to catastrophic flood damage. Ethnographic analysis of the interventions will
allow us to qualitatively test how local leaders negotiate potential conflicts
between community attitudes, flood risk, and governmental structures and
programs. These results will be used to further refine the GIS model and shape
it as a tool for flood mitigation and mitigation research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The goal of this project is to analyze the physical, hydrological, economic,
social and institutional landscape of rural floodplains of the Mississippi,
Ohio, and Illinois Rivers to identify ? and begin implementing ? strategies for
increasing rural community resilience. The practical goals of this project are
to assess the vulnerability of rural floodplain communities, their capacity to
recover from catastrophic flooding, and local attitudes that present both
opportunities and challenges to meaningful mitigation of flood hazard. Many U.S.
floodplain residents live in a virtual state-of-denial regarding the long-term
risk of flooding, and many vociferously resist buyouts and other mitigation
measures that could meaningfully reduce future flood damages. We assert that
many obstacles to effective risk reduction could be dramatically reduced by (1)
proactive planning ahead of major disasters, and (2) community-scale mitigation
projects, rather than piecemeal removal of structures and slow erosion of
affected communities. This project seeks to create a socio-hydrological
framework and practical foundation to reenergize flood mitigation efforts on
rural U.S. floodplains. The project will promote public awareness of flood risk
and foster coordinated mitigation efforts in some of the nation's most at-risk
communities along the Mississippi, Illinois, and Ohio Rivers and guide hazard
and mitigation research and applications throughout the U.S.