* 1235651
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Study of the Instabilities, Transport, and Self Assembly of Nanoscale Metallic Thin Films and Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Philip Rack, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 196,606.00

1235710/1235651 Kondic/Rack

The project focuses on stability of liquid metal films and other structures on
nanoscale. Nanosecond pulsed laser melting can produce spatially correlated
nanoparticle assemblies, and the main goal is to explore the fundamental
mechanisms driving this process. The distinguishing feature of this project is
synergetic approach including modeling based on continuum fluid mechanics,
targeted experiments, and supporting molecular dynamics simulations. The central
goal is to leverage careful and thorough experimental investigations and state
of the art theoretical and computational modeling of nanoscale liquid metal
films to address several basic scientific questions such as: How to develop
reasonably simple but predictive models to describe the forces relevant to
liquid metals on nanoscale? To which degree can multi-scale modeling (molecular
dynamics and continuum fluid dynamics) approaches be used to bridge experimental
length scales? How to use the interactions characterizing molten liquid metals
to promote self-assembly and self-organization at the nanoscale?

To address these questions, the platinum-ruthenium binary metal system on
graphite substrates will be investigated. The system was carefully chosen so
complementary continuum fluid dynamics and molecular dynamics simulations can be
performed to understand the relevant interface potentials as well as competing
interfacial mixing and solidification dynamics. Thin films and other geometries
will be synthesized to investigate solid-liquid-vapor interactions relevant to
instabilities leading to nanoparticle assemblies, study the effects that the
solidification dynamics has on synthesis of multi-functional nano particles, and
to explore imposed thermal instabilities as a route to directed assembly.
Experimental efforts will be complemented by theoretical and computational work,
involving multi-dimensional nonlinear simulations including liquid-solid
interaction potentials, thermal and phase change effects, and diffusive mixing,
among other effects.

Successful completion of the project will allow for significant advancement in
under- standing of fundamental liquid phase assembly of metallic nanostructures.
One example of an application where self- and directed assembly of nano
particles is of significant importance is the design of solar cell devices where
it is known that the size and distribution of metallic particles is related to
plasmon coupling to incident energy, with the huge potential in increasing the
yield. More generally, nano-assembly is of importance in a variety of fields,
ranging from energy related to DNA sequencing. The project also includes
development of complementary continuous and molecular dynamics simulations which
will allow for bridging of relevant spatial and temporal scales, providing
general insight regarding limits and applicability of continuum modeling on
nanoscale. The project will include graduate and undergraduate students from
multiple STEM disciplines and will involve international collaboration with a
research group in Argentina.