* 1235779
* GOALI: Response of Premixed Swirling Flames to Transverse Acoustic Excitation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Shiva Srinivasan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 246,483.00

Combustion instabilities have emerged as the single largest challenge in the
development of clean combustion systems for power generation, aircraft engines,
and other industrial heating applications. These instabilities cause significant
damage to engine hardware, reduce engine operability, and increase production of
harmful pollutants. Understanding how flame's respond to acoustic oscillations
is a critical, but poorly understood, problem at the root of the instabilities
and the focus of this work. This work will utilize state of the art, high speed
laser diagnostics to probe the unsteady flow and flame during oscillatory
combustion and compare these results to predictive models. The project will
directly support one graduate student, while also leveraging other funds to
support additional project participants, including undergraduate students and a
summer high school teacher. The program has been structured such that research,
education, and service are simultaneously performed. For example, the PI will
organize opportunities for graduate students to present their research to high
school classes and explain the exciting applications of science and mathematics.
This program encourages high school students to pursue careers in science and
provides the graduate students with teaching experience and community exposure.

The knowledge gained from this work will lead to improved understanding of the
unsteady fluid mechanics of combusting flows, and how the flames in these
devices respond to acoustic excitation. In turn, this fundamental knowledge will
enable the design of robust, long lasting energy systems that are low emissions.
This work has the strong endorsement and financial support from its industrial
partner. The collaboration is structured such that the NSF program will be used
to develop diagnostic tools, analysis approaches, and physical constructs for
key flame and flow processes. The industrial partner and the PI will work in a
parallel program to apply these diagnostic techniques, analysis approaches, and
physical insight to actual low emissions hardware.