* 1235427
* From Inspiration to Creation - Extraction and Reuse of Shape Characteristics to Support Product Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Levent Kara, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 370,000.00

This award provides funding for the development of a computational technique to
allow the identification and reuse of the characteristic shape identities of
products from their computer models. The developed algorithms will extract
styling information embodied in the geometry and make its elements available for
use in future products. This will be accomplished using an identity-preserving
hierarchical shape abstraction technique that allows 3D models to be represented
with progressively simpler variants involving a suite of base and detail
geometries. The identified characteristics will serve as manipulable shape
representations comprised of volumes, surfaces, and curves. The algorithm will
be implemented and deployed in a geometric design software that allows
individual pieces of the deciphered geometries to be assembled, transferred, and
blended in innovative ways to facilitate the creation of novel product
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
lead to new computer-aided design methods that enable inspirational past designs
to inform future designs. The developed techniques will help designers
concurrently study large groups of models to reveal historical trends and make
future projections. It will also allow companies establish brand identities much
more effectively, thereby enhancing style consistency across product families.
The shape knowledge computed using the new approach will allow the development
of quantitative metrics to measure the strength of analogy between designs. This
capability will advance the boundaries of future search algorithms, allowing
analogy-based descriptors to facilitate 3D shape retrieval. The outcomes of this
award will also enhance design education by allowing experts to better
illustrate their thought processes to others, and to quantitatively guide and
assess trainees.