* 1235878
* Trace Metal Interactions with Fly Ash in Combustion Flue Gas
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Gordon Brown, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2015
* USD 327,001.00

Arsenic, mercury, and selenium exist as trace metals (TMs) in minerals and
organic matter in coal and may be emitted to the environment during coal
conversion processes. The ultimate goals of the proposed research efforts are to
understand heterogeneous TM speciation on mineral surfaces in contact with flue
gases as a function of the size and chemical phase of the fly ash particles,
with broader impacts toward understanding their life cycle throughout the
environment in addition to their potential toxicity. Foundational knowledge from
catalysis, geochemistry, surface chemistry, and fuel combustion science will be
compiled, applied, and advanced in the proposed work. The synergistic coupling
of geological and fuel chemistry perspectives can be highlighted by considering
the commonalities and differences of the TMs-interface systems relevant to both
ground water and fuel exhaust systems. Geochemical studies of well-characterized
single crystal surfaces of metal oxides will provide the required framework for
understanding fuel combustion particle-bound TM emissions. In addition, the
integration of experimental and theoretical approaches to the interaction of TMs
with fly ash particles under a broad range of relevant conditions will result in
new information on sequestration mechanisms and stability of reaction
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit will be achieved since the
proposed investigations will be the first of their kind focusing on high-level
fly ash characterization and testing closely coupled with theoretical models to
determine heterogeneous TM reactivity in simulated combustion flue gas.
Additionally, the PIs are using a novel self-designed experimental technique
based on mass spectrometry to directly speciate the various forms of TM in flue
gas. In this way, both redox and sorption activity of the fly ash particles will
be determined. The Broader Impacts of the proposed efforts are evident through
the use of software packages based upon results of this work by major utility
companies and technology developers worldwide to determine the most effective
strategies of minimizing the release of toxic TMs into the atmosphere.
Additionally, the PIs have direct links to industry through collaborations,
which will facilitate summer internships for students involved in the research.
Results of the proposed work will also provide indication of the TM life cycle
once these species enter the environment.