* 1235974
* Bridging Particle-Resolved and Point-Particle Based Simulation for Turbulent Particle-Laden Flow Using New Heterogeneous High-Performance Computer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Lian-Ping Wang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 11/30/2017
* USD 365,861.00

1235974&lt;br/&gt;PI: Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent flows laden with solid
particles, small droplets, and gas microbubbles are ubiquitous in engineering,
biological and environmental applications. In these applications, particles are
usually suspended in a turbulent carrier fluid. The interactions between the
dispersed phase and the carrier fluid phase impact the dynamics of suspended
particles (e.g., dispersion, deposition rate, collision rate, settling velocity)
and the bulk properties of the multiphase flow (e.g., wall or surface drag,
turbulence intensity). Understanding turbulent particle-laden flows can help
improve engineering devices such as coal combustors and better predict natural
phenomena such as warm rain and hurricane. In the last 20 years, computational
methods have been developed to address these complex multiscale flows, primarily
using the point-particle based simulations where the effect of finite particle
sizes has been ignored. However, in many applications where the particle size
overlaps with turbulent flow scales, a better approach known as particle-
resolved simulations is necessary to fully address the coupling between the
dispersed phase and the fluid phase. The overall goal of this research is to
develop an efficient particle-resolved simulation approach to study a range of
important physical issues from the particle size and flow dissipation scales to
coarse-grained system scales. The study will make use of the mesoscopic lattice
Boltzmann approach to efficiently map its data locality and algorithmic
scalability to heterogeneous PetaScale computers equipped with both multicore
CPUs and high-performance GPUs. The flexibility of the lattice Boltzmann
algorithm in treating interfacial interaction between the phases will be
exploited. Several benchmark cases will be simulated to validate the approach
and the codes. The effects of particle size, particle-to-fluid density ratio,
volume fraction, and gravity on the interaction dynamics of both phases will be
systematically studied. These codes will then be ported to different high-
performance computers to achieve a consistent sustained scalability. Through
extended collaborations, the approach will be used to address particle-rough
wall impact dynamics in industrial devices and surface drag modulation by sea
sprays in marine atmospheric boundary layer. The developed codes will be
converted to public-domain software to allow others to use the approach for many
other engineering, biological and environmental applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational tool can potentially be used to address
many applications involving moving objects in a turbulent carrier flow, such as
fluidized bed, sediment transport, sea sprays, and warm rain development. The
research will help move the computation of complex turbulent multiphase flow to
the mainstream high-performance, GPU-accelerated, multicore heterogeneous
computers. These capabilities will impact future research directions in both
turbulent multiphase flows and parallel computation. The project provides an
interdisciplinary training and mentoring ground for one graduate student, one
postdoc, and two early-career collaborators. The project will contribute to a
new multidisciplinary graduate certificate program in Computational Science and
Engineering at the University of Delaware, which could impact a few dozens of
students each year.