* 1235496
* Pre/Post Earthquake Damage Assessment for Infilled RC Frame Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Babak Moaveni, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 366,151.00

This project plans to dynamically test in the field an existing two-story
reinforced concrete frame building infilled with unreinforced masonry walls. The
building, located in El Centro, CA, was built in the 1920s and it is typical of
the construction practice in California in that era. Buildings with similar
characteristics are located in regions with high seismicity such as Los Angeles,
San Francisco, the Mediterranean region, and Latin America. Such buildings often
have historical significance but they have proved vulnerable to earthquakes.
Understanding and improving their behavior has been a challenging task for
engineers. The building selected in this study has sustained damage during
earthquakes of 1940, 1979, and 1987 and 2010 which have been recorded in close
proximity. The building was repaired and retrofitted after the first three
earthquakes; however, the damage induced during the 2010 event cannot be
repaired cost-effectively considering the economy in the area. Hence, the
structure is scheduled to be demolished. This provides a unique opportunity to
test a real life building using mobile shakers. The testing will be incremental
and it is expected to bring the building on the verge of collapse. The unique
experimental data from the field will enhance our understanding of the complex
behavior of these structures and their failure mechanisms, and it will be useful
for future analytical, as well as laboratory shake-table studies since it will
provide benchmark data for researchers and practitioners involved with
earthquake engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed research
is to develop a framework for the reliable assessment of damage in existing
reinforced concrete frames infilled with masonry walls. The data obtained from
field testing will be used to validate finite element models and damage
identification techniques. The combination of the two tools will allow the
derivation of a damage index that can be used to identify the state of a
structure prior or after an extreme event. Emphasis will be given in modeling
the three-dimensional behavior of the structure including the out-of-plane
behavior of the infill walls. Moreover, simplified models will be developed and
validated with the results of the detailed analytical models. The building that
will be the focal point of this experimental and analytical study was selected
because it has sustained considerable damage due to four historical earthquakes
that have been recorded in close proximity. The data obtained from the forced
vibrations of the building will be also used for the validation of the
analytical tools. In summary, the proposed research includes full-scale tests
that will push a damaged structure further into the nonlinear behavior; finite
element models to capture the in- and out-of-plane interactions between the
infills and the bounding frame; validation of the model with data obtained from
the tests, as well as validation with data from previous earthquakes; and
development and validation of a system and damage identification techniques for
the quantification of damage in a real structure.