* 1235480
* DMREF: A Fundamental Approach to Study the Effect of Structural and Chemical Composition in Functionalized Graphene Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Shuyou Li, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 758,341.00

The central goal of this project is to establish a paradigm shift in material
design by combining theory, modeling, and experimentation in a multiscale and
synergistic manner to maximize the strength and toughness of nanocomposite
materials that emulate the performance of natural nacre using graphene oxide. It
is expected that graphene oxide sheets with optimal overlap geometry, bonded
together by tunable chemistry, will mimic nacre. Specifically, this research
will lead to characterization of the deformation mechanisms of multilayer
nanocomposite systems through studies of the strength and stiffness of both the
individual atomically thin sheets as well as their crosslinking elements. This
project aims to develop a fundamental understanding of the roles that van der
Waals interactions, hydrogen bonds, and chemical crosslinking, conformation, and
geometrical assembly play in modulating the mechanical behavior of nanocomposite
materials based on graphene oxide. The mechanical performance of functionalized
graphene sheets and macroscopic oxidized-graphene materials will be optimized
through a series of iterative synthesis-assembly-modeling cycles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel nanoscale mechanical testing methods based on MEMS
technologies and AFM will be applied to measure the mechanical behavior of few-
layer graphene oxide materials with "brick-and-mortar" like hierarchical
structures. New crosslinking chemistries, such as thiol-amines, will be explored
to impart significant improvements in controlling shear interactions through
covalent bond breaking and reformation. Varying geometrical overlap between
layers and conformations of the sheets will be explored. In-situ electron
microscopy mechanical testing, to yield atomic and micro-scale characteristics
on multiple length scales, coupled with computational modeling using ab initio
and semi-empirical methods, will quantify the interface strength and deformation
governing load-transfer mechanisms. The developed insight will then be used to
guide the synthesis of a macroscopic nanocomposite material that takes advantage
of the strength of graphene and the hierarchically assembled structures inspired
by Nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the development of criteria
for predicting and tailoring the mechanical properties of graphene oxide-based
nanocomposite materials will be transferable to a wide range of nanocomposites
and will optimize the design process of materials with hierarchical structure
that incorporate stiff building blocks and ductile crosslinking elements. These
next-generation synthetic materials are essential for advances in the aerospace,
satellite, automotive, military, and healthcare industries. The research also
will serve as an excellent training platform for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in the critical frontier of structure-based material design
and in the art of interdisciplinary scientific research in the areas of
synthesis, modeling, and hierarchical measurements.