* 1235248
* Collaborative Research: Suspended particle geochemistry along the US GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific Zonal Transect, from high productivity ocean margin to deep sea hydrothermal plume
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Chris German, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2016
* USD 101,316.00

During the 2013 GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific cruise a diverse range of oceanic
environments will be encountered from the high productivity/high particle flux
waters off Peru to the Peru-Chile oxygen minimum zone, the hydrothermal plume of
the East Pacific Rise, and finally to some of the most oligotrophic waters
around Tahiti. Scientists from Rutgers University and Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution will sample suspended particulates from the same GO-Flo bottles that
will be used to sample dissolved trace metals and their isotopes (TEIs) across
this entire transect. The suspended matter samples will be analyzed for 42
elements, including the particle-reactive rare earth elements. In addition,
core-top sediments will be collected at every water-column sampling station and
analyzed for both bulk composition (i.e., relative % content of organic carbon,
opal, biogenic carbonate and lithogenic components) and the same 42 elements to
be analyzed in the suspended particulates. Results from this study will be used
to assess the role of suspended particulates in the biogeochemical cycling of
TEIs across the Eastern Pacific by addressing three key sets of questions: (1)
How does uptake of TEIs into phytoplankton and non-living particles in the upper
ocean drive the suspended particulate composition through the deeper water
column, along the substantial gradient from the high productivity Peru margin to
the oligotrophic ocean interior?; (2) How faithfully is the along-transect
variability in the upper ocean transmitted to the sediment (paleo) record?; (3)
What are the relative influences of vertical recycling versus lateral advection
in generating the distributions of dissolved and particulate TEIs observed in
the Peru-Chile OMZ?; (4) Is there a characteristic signature of OMZ activity
that is preserved in core-top sediments?; (5) What dominates TEI uptake
onto/into authigenic particles in hydrothermal plumes and to what extent are
these processes augmented by continuing uptake in core-top sediments?; and (6)
What is the net effect from submarine venting on global TEI
budgets?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, the scientist from
Rutgers University is collaborating with the Education Director of the Centers
for Ocean Science Education Excellence Networked Ocean World (COSEE-NOW) to
contribute to the MARE (Marine Activities, Resources, and Education) program by
inviting teachers and high school students to workshops and presentations on
climate and ocean sciences. With the help of COSEE-NOW, he also plans to create
educational video clips during the Pacific cruise and the subsequent laboratory
based analytical work to educate them on the use of geochemistry to understand
how the ocean works. Both scientists also plan to develop a teaching module
entitled "Particles, Metals, and Carbon" for an Introduction to Oceanography
class taught by the Rutgers scientist. One postdoc from Rutgers University would
be supported and trained as part of this project.