* 1235863
* Development of a thermodynamically consistent, robust model for thixotropic suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Antony Beris, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,898.00

1235863&lt;br/&gt;Wagner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenging scientific and
engineering problem is accurately predicting the flow of complex fluids
containing solid particles, such as nanoparticles, colloids, crystals and larger
particulates. Such suspensions are encountered in a wide array of consumer
products (e.g. paints, cosmetics, and foods), in nature (e.g. sediments,
concentrated protein solutions and blood), as well as multiphase fluids of
significant national concern (e.g. transuranic tank sludge), and as critical
components in emerging devices for energy storage (flow batteries). The flow of
such suspensions are often thixotropic, whereby the material's rheological
properties are time and flow history dependent. The proposed research addresses
this challenge though a transformative approach, namely developing a multiscale
microstructure-based framework that will be thermodynamically consistent and
generally applicable for all flows. A key component will be to identify the
internal variables that properly define the microstructure. Validation of the
theory and modeling will be accomplished by leveraging a complementary
development of new experimental techniques to simultaneous measure the rheology
and microstructure of such systems. Thus, a systematic, combined
theoretical/experimental investigation on well-defined, model thixotropic
systems is an important component of the research plan. The intellectual merits
of the research include the development of a robust, theoretically rigorous
framework for modeling the general, time dependent flow of concentrated
suspensions. This systematic and integrated effort will lead to a new capability
in the modeling and understanding of complex thixotropic systems that can
significantly aid in the rational engineering of many materials of industrial
and national importance. The broader impacts of this work include educating PhDs
and BCHEs in suspension rheology necessary for careers in industry and academic
research. Modules are to be developed for K-12 education by building on and
improving current laboratory demonstrations. The models and knowledge developed
in this research have potential to improve many industries as the processing and
flow of thixotropic suspensions is critical to chemicals, materials, and
pharmaceutical manufacturing and handling. As an application of particular
importance, the PIs will be working with partners at Sandia National Laboratory
to address the national challenge of processing suspensions of radioactive tank
sludge at Hanford and other critical issues concerning nuclear waste management.