* 1235005
* Collaborative Research: A dual-dye approach to measuring in situ light fields: development and preliminary field testing
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Kenneth Mopper, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2015
* USD 83,621.00

A lot of attention has been focused on light measurements and models of light
fields because of light?s significant role in primary and secondary production
and photochemical reactions of natural organic matter in aquatic ecosystems.
However, these studies have relied upon Eulerian measurements rather than
Lagrangian ones and have not taken into account the effect of currents and other
physical processes on light-particle interactions. Researchers from the
University of Minnesota, Duluth and Old Dominion University plan to develop and
test light integrators that will measure the light exposure/light history of
parcels of water in a Lagrangian sense by deploying two fluorescent dyes in a
known ratio within freshwater and seawater. One of the dyes to be deployed will
be light sensitive and decay in the presence of photosynthetically active
radiation (fluorescein or amino-G) while the other one will be photostable
(rhodamine-WT). Laboratory experiments will be carried out to characterize the
dyes in fresh, brackish, and salt water to (1) establish the wavelengths that
are responsible for fluorescein and rhodamine-WT decay in sunlight; (2) assess
whether the dyes are subject to loss due to biological processes and/or
adsorption of the dyes onto particles; (3) determine the effects of temperature,
pH, ionic strength, and light dose/intensity; and (4) ascertain the feasibility
of the dual dye method for describing the light field in the water column mixed
layer. The result of this project will be the development of a potentially
transformative new technique for quantifying the water-column light history that
impacts light sensitive organisms and chemical species. With dual-dye pairs
within the oceanographic and limnological tool box, we can develop a more
predictive understanding of the relationships between light and primary
production, photoinhibition, CDOM photobleaching and the photochemical fate of
anthropogenic compounds in the aquatic environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
regards broader impacts, results from the study would be presented to
"Freshwater Folks", a meeting attended by members of the water research and
water management community of Northern Minnesota and disseminated via a website
that would be created. The new analytical technique would be included into
advanced chemistry courses. One graduate and one undergraduate student from the
University of Minnesota, Duluth (UMD) and one graduate student from Old Dominion
University would be supported and trained as part of this project. Undergraduate
students would also participate in the study and would be supported by the
Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP) at UMD. High school seniors and
K-12 science teachers would be involved in the laboratory work