* 1235166
* Method Development for Quantification of Physicochemical Properties of Engineered Nanoparticles and Their Local-Scale Biological Effects
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Yongsheng Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

1235166 Chen

This NSF award supports work to investigate the impacts of engineered
nanomaterials on local scale surface physicochemical properties of cells. It is
important to the general public by providing the fundamental knowledge about the
toxic impacts of nanomaterials at nanometer scale and help understand and
differentiate risks of bulk or aggregated and nanoscale materials. Intellectual
Merit: Many traditional toxicological experiments on nanomaterials have not
ended up with real nano-sized materials in aqueous media, largely because most
nanomaterials are subject to slow or fast aggregation in the testing systems.
The observed toxicity and related mechanisms are likely associated with the
properties of aggregated clusters and their enlarged sizes. However, un-
aggregated nanoscale engineered nanoparticles (NPs) and their local interactions
with heterogeneous cell surfaces influence their subsequent toxic effects, which
are not well documented yet. Thus, the toxicity mechanisms of engineered NPs are
not clear yet. Our hypothesis to be tested is that local interactions between
single NPs and cells inevitably result in changes in the physicochemical
properties of cells at nanoscale. To perform quantitative measurements of
heterogeneous surface properties of cells with and without exposure to NPs, we
will develop novel experimental methods with the unique advantages of atomic
force microscopy (AFM). The project objectives include the quantification of: 1)
biomechanical (i.e., hardness and elasticity) properties of microbial cells at
local-scale, which affect cellular integrity, flexibility, and motility; 2)
adhesiveness, which influences cell adhesion to environmental surfaces; 3)
hydrophobicity, which affects the interfacial energy and surface interactions;
and 4) local surface electrostatic potential, which influences the stability of
cell systems and interaction energy. Moreover, at the genetic level, we will
also study NP-DNA interactions via imaging in liquid to show the dynamic binding
between NPs and DNA, structural conformational changes in DNA upon exposure to
NPs, and DNA transcription under the potential influence of NP binding. Broader
Impacts: If successful, the proposed research will establish AFM-based scanning
probe approaches that can quantify the local-scale surface physicochemical
properties during the interactions between NPs and biological systems (cells and
DNA molecules) and provide a unique angle for exploring the toxic effects of
engineered nanomaterials. It will fill a data gap in the impacts of local scale
NP interactions and improve our fundamental knowledge in toxicity of engineered
nanomaterials. These findings will ultimately produce broader impacts on
industrial manufacturers, regulatory authorities, and researchers for
sustainable nanomaterial design, regulation formulation, and eco-responsible
management in use, handling, and disposal. In addition, we will establish
synergies between the project research and college education by motivating
undergraduates and graduates in STEM research areas, and navigating them to the
frontiers of nanoscience and nanotechnology. The PIs will provide funding to get
underrepresented undergraduate researchers involved in the research project.