* 1235750
* Increasing Solar Energy Conversion Efficiency in Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon Photovoltaic Devices with Plasmonic Perfect Meta-Absorbers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Costas Soukoulis, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 313,631.00

PI: Guney, Durdu Proposal Number: 1235750 Institution: Michigan Technological
University Title: Increasing Solar Energy Conversion Efficiency in Hydrogenated
Amorphous Silicon Photovoltaic Devices with Plasmonic Perfect Meta-Absorbers

Solar photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion is a technically viable and
sustainable solution to society's energy needs, but the costs must be further
reduced for widespread adoption. Hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) is an
inexpensive and readily available earth abundant solar cell material, which
stands to revolutionize our capability for generating clean sustainable energy.
PV cells made with a-Si:H have the fastest energy payback time of any commercial
PV device and are therefore the most useful for combating climate change.
Unfortunately, the light induced degradation of the electronic properties of
a-Si:H limits their overall efficiency.

This project envisions that the metamaterial paradigm will allow for managing
light from the sun for photovoltaic conversion more efficiently than is
theoretically possible with traditional optical enhancement. For example, solar
light impinging on a metal surface produces waves along the surface when it
interacts with the collective oscillations of free electrons in the metal. These
surface waves referred to as surface plasmon polaritons, can be exploited to
make plasmonic metamaterial ?perfect absorbers? (plasmonic perfect meta-
absorbers) to enhance the efficiency of solar PV devices. Perfect meta-absorbers
can be designed with broadband, polarization-independent, and wide-angle optical
absorption features. These critical features, lacking in most optical
enhancement schemes for solar cell designs, are ideally required to maximize the
efficiency of solar cells. Wide-angle reception, for example, is particularly
important to increase solar energy conversion efficiency for curved surfaces,
and for maximized temporal and spatial response of the panels to solar light.

In this project, a plasmonic perfect meta-absorber will be optimized for maximum
solar energy conversion efficiency. High conversion efficiency will be derived
from polarization-independent operation over the entire solar spectrum with a
wide-angle reception. This absorber will be integrated with a-Si:H PV device and
shown how to focus the optical absorption to the desired semiconducting regions
to significantly enhance the overall conversion efficiency. Additionally, it
will be possible to make ultra-thin solar cells using these absorbers.

The optical enhancement will directly reduce the effects of Staebler-Wronski
Effect in the cells by allowing their thicknesses to be decreased. This will
result in the reduction in the levelized cost of electricity of a-Si:H PV by two
means: 1) reduction in initial cost because of higher throughput from thinner
i-layers and 2) improved energy conversion efficiency from enhanced light
capturing. The concept in this proposal can be also extrapolated to ultra-high
efficient/sensitive photodetectors/sensors tunable over THz through UV
frequencies. Additionally, this project will provide professional and
intellectual training for two graduate students in an academic and industrial
collaborative environment.