* 1235288
* Photochemical Formation of Hydroxyl Radical from Effluent Organic Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Fernando Rosario-Ortiz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/29/2016
* USD 295,630.00

1235288&lt;br/&gt;Rosario-Ortiz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of emerging trace
organic contaminants (TrOC) has gained widespread attention from the scientific
community and the public over the past ten years. These TrOC are associated with
anthropogenic activities and include endocrine disruptor compounds,
pharmaceuticals and personal care products, industrial chemicals, and others.
Numerous studies have been conducted on the source, occurrence and removal of
these compounds from wastewater effluents (mostly focusing on the efficacy of
engineered systems such as advanced oxidation and membranes). These TrOC enter
the environment via wastewater discharges, where significant ecological effects
are being observed. However, the role of natural decay processes within
wastewater-impacted streams has received less attention. Within these decay
processes, the role of indirect photolysis through the hydroxyl radical (HO-) is
of interest due to the high reactivity of this species, which will result in
significant degradation of TrOCs. Recently, the role of organic matter as an
important contributor to the photochemical formation of HO- has been recognized.
However, there is no information on the capacity of wastewater-derived effluent
organic matter (EfOM) to form HO- or potential variability as a function of EfOM
sub-components. Therefore, the main objective of this proposal is to examine the
photochemical formation of HO- from EfOM. To accomplish this objective, the PI
will study the fundamental processes by which EfOM form HO- and the impact of
environmental factors and composition of EfOM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will expand the basic understanding of how wastewater
discharge affect photolytic processes involving TrOC, which will allow engineers
and scientists to improve the understanding of natural decay processes. In
addition, the results could be used to enhance water quality models related to
fate of TrOC in urban watersheds. The PI will also work to increase the
participation of underrepresented minorities (URM) in engineering degrees by
leveraging the universal appeal of the issue of water sustainability. To
accomplish this, the PI will develop a seminar series, which will target
undergraduate students at the University of Colorado, Boulder (CU Boulder).
These seminars will be developed in collaboration with the Gold Shirt program at
CU Boulder and will help prepare students for participation in research
activities. In addition, the educational plan will include the participation of
one graduate student in an ongoing GK-12 program.