* 1235881
* Convective Thermal Transport at Superhydrophobic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Julie Crockett, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2017
* USD 324,823.00

&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1235881&lt;br/&gt;Maynes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superhydrophobic
surfaces are highly water repellent surfaces and are generated by combining
microscale structuring and a hydrophobic coating such that liquids will only be
in contact with a fraction of the solid surface. Their use in engineering
devices occurs anywhere non-wetting surfaces are desired, although future uses
are likely to be more expansive. The decrease in surface contact area between
the liquid and solid phases, and thus increase in contact with a trapped gas,
leads to distinct alterations of the thermal boundary conditions at the plane of
the surface. Consequently, the fundamental convection physics for liquid flow
over these surfaces differs drastically from classical behavior. A comprehensive
understanding of the local thermal transport physics is necessary to utilize
such surfaces in emerging technologies and is the primary goal of this research
project. In general, it is expected that convective heat transfer coefficients
will be reduced, droplets will change phase slower, and the boiling curve will
be significantly altered for liquid in contact with such surfaces. The
objectives of this research project are to characterize the departure from
classical transport behavior due to the superhydrophobic nature of a surface.
Specifically convective heat transfer is explored for: 1) Heat transfer to
static liquid droplets resting on superhydrophobic surfaces, 2) Mini- and
microchannel, developing and developed transport in channels with SH walls, 3)
Influence on free convection dynamics for vertical SH surfaces adjacent to a
liquid layer, and 4) Alteration of the classical boiling curve for liquids on SH
surfaces. The research is conducted using complementary laboratory based
experimental and analytical approaches to explore these topics for a range of
typical superhydrophobic surface topologies. The results will be a knowledge
base allowing prediction of convective heat transfer coefficients for the
scenarios explored and as a function of the superhydrophobic surface
topologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
influence of superhydrophobicity on convective heat transfer at liquid-solid
surface interfaces. Uses of superhydrophobic surfaces include self-cleaning
surfaces, drag reducing surfaces, non-wetting surfaces in condensers,
microfluidic manipulators in lab-on-a-chip concepts, microscale heat exchangers,
and many more. For many of these, and a wide range of other potential
applications, the issue of thermal transport at superhydrophobic surfaces is of
fundamental importance for their implementation into high performance thermal
systems. This project will advance basic knowledge related to heat transfer at
superhydrophobic surfaces and provide increased understanding for implementation
of such surfaces into optimized engineering devices.