* 1235806
* A Novel Safer Formulation Concept for Flame Generated Engineered Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Philip Demokritou, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,999.00

1235806&lt;br/&gt;Demokritou&lt;br/&gt;The global nanotechnology industry
reached over 1.5 trillion USD last year and has become a major economic force in
the 21st century with enormous benefits to our society. Engineered nanomaterials
are by far the largest segment of the nanotechnology market,accounting for 80%
of all revenues and prevalent in numerous consumer products. Consequently, nano-
EHS research investigating the toxicity of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) has
gained much importance over the last decade. However, the underlying mechanisms
for toxicity are currently not well understood, with most efforts focusing on
the development of in-vitro screening assays. Surprisingly, very limited
research has been done in terms of developing safer ENM formulation concepts
that can be adopted and used by the nanotechnology industry in the synthesis of
ENMs in order to minimize nano-EHS implications. We believe that this is a
research area of great importance for the nanotechnology industry and its quest
towards synthesis of "green" ENM's and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Here, we propose a systematic, integrated, multidisciplinary approach
to study a novel safer formulation concept for one of the largest ENM families
by production volume, the flame generated nanometals. Flame-synthesis of ENMs is
the preferred route for scalable ENM synthesis, as it does not create liquid by-
products, offers easier particle collection from gases than liquids, and results
in high purity materials. We plan to study and optimize the concept of adding
in-flight, in one step approach, a nano-thin layer of amorphous SiO2 and
hermetically coat flame generated ENMs during their flame synthesis. Amorphous
SiO2 is considered a biologically and environmentally inert material, and ideal
to shield otherwise potentially toxic core-materials from any interactions with
environment and biological media. We therefore propose to study and understand
the material-dependent fundamentals of the proposed in-flight coating process
and apply it to a wide range of widely-used ENMs such as Ag, ZnO,CeO2, Fe2O3 and
TiO2.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the ENM-biological and environmental
interactions will be thoroughly investigated in order to assess the validity of
the proposed safer formulation concept. This includes the comparative assessment
of the nano-bio interactions at the cellular and organismal level using a
variety of physiologically relevant bioassays. The physico-chemical and
morphological ENM properties and surface coating efficiency will also be
validated using state of the art analytical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research combines
excellence in material science and particle technology with nanotoxicology and
nano-biology. By developing and validating a safer formulation concept for the
largest by production volume family of ENMS, we will further enhance our
understanding on the fundamentals related to surface coatings and flame
synthesis of materials in general. More importantly, we will better understand
the nano-bio and environment interactions related to commonly used ENMs and the
impact of surface functionalization in general. Furthermore, by comparing data
from cellular and in-vivo bioassays,we will be able to assess how biological
outcomes are influenced by the nature of the bioassay system. The results will
be able to enhance the development and biologic evaluation of "green" ENMs and
at the same time advance the methods and strategies needed to evaluate the
health and safety of nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
proposed safer formulation concept, if validated successfully, can be scaled up
and utilized by the industry in the synthesis of flame-generated ENMs for a wide
range of applications. The project also involves an integrated plan of research
and educational activities. It will generate opportunities for independent
research for post-doctoral fellows and graduate-level students from various
disciplines within Harvard University. It will also initiate collaborative
partnerships between the HSPH Center for Nanotechnology and Nanotoxicology,
government agencies (NIOSH), the industry and European research institutions.
Results will be disseminated to relevant stakeholders through peer review
publications and conference presentations and other outreach activities.