* 1235109
* DMREF/GOALI:  Computational and Experimental Discovery and Development of Additives for Novel Polymer Morphology and Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gregory Rutledge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

This project is a collaboration between academia and industry sponsored by the
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) and Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) programs. Its objective
is to prototype a new paradigm for materials research based on the synergistic
application of molecular level simulation and experimental testing, to identify
the essential relationships between molecular structure, morphology and
performance. In the program proposed here, this paradigm will be realized
through the discovery and development of additives (e.g. nucleating agents,
clarifiers) that alter the morphology and properties of plastics. Molecular
simulations will be used to survey existing and hypothetical additives, to
demonstrate speed-up and to identify sensible trends in crystallization
kinetics. In-depth evaluation of selected additives will be used to demonstrate
refinement of the process of discovery and to identify the precision with which
current simulations can distinguish the effects of different additives.
Experimental rheological and structural characterization will be used to
validate heuristics and to establish the connection between crystallization
kinetics and ultimate morphologies and properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
competitiveness in advanced materials and their manufacture is essential to
economic development and national security. It relies increasingly on shorter
discovery and development cycles. Plastics, particularly polyolefins, are
important advanced materials, due to their unique combination of processability,
mechanical, thermal, optical and even electronic properties. One outcome of the
current project may be newly tailored additives that provide materials with
exceptional property combinations, such as lightweight polyolefins that are both
stiff and tough. More broadly, by advancing a new paradigm that shortens the
cycle for materials discovery and development, this program contributes to
United States competitiveness. Increased competitiveness and innovative
practices translate into job creation within the United States manufacturing
economy, in accordance with the goals of the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership
and the Materials Genome Initiative.