* 1235759
* Collaborative Research: Wetting of Liquid Metals on Rough Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dusan Sekulic, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 183,401.00

1235757 / 1234581 PI: Sekulic / Mesarovic

Spreading of liquids over solid surfaces is ubiquitous in nature and is the key
aspect of many industrial processes, such as low temperature soldering, high
temperature brazing, de-icing, organic liquid imbibing, etc. For example, in the
case of brazing/soldering, the tight time scheduling of the processing combined
with dissimilar wetting properties of materials being joined and a possible
variability of temperature during spreading, require a precise control, which in
turn requires quantitative prediction tools. The major difficulties in
predicting such a complex flow include: (1) roughness of the spreading surface,
(2) chemical reactions between the liquid/melt and the substrate, and, (3)
inadequate models of the physical mechanism by which the triple line (a locus of
points where solid, liquid and vapor/gas meet) propagates. This project will
integrate experimental and modeling strategy through: (i) experiments on
characterized virgin and designed surfaces, with in situ monitoring and
measurements of the triple line motion, (ii) advances in theory and modeling
based on the diffuse interface (phase-field) models, capable of representing
propagation of phase- and chemical reaction fronts, as well as the diffusive
nature of the triple line motion, and, (iii) integration of modeling and
experiments. Real time in situ monitoring of the spreading at the micro scale
around the triple line will be the source of data on kinetics of the liquid
front propagation. To achieve projects objectives, the phase-field modeling for
reactive and non-reactive spreading will be implemented within a versatile
computational finite element framework, thus enabling studies of variety of
problems with different geometries. The major experimental challenges are
related to the fast evolution of the triple line and the presence of reactive
substrates. The required time resolution will be achieved by developing hot
stage microscopy techniques for in situ monitoring of the moving liquid front
and the dynamics of the contact angle. Suppression of a chemical reaction will
be accomplished by formation of intermetallics prior to spreading of a liquid
metal. The major modeling challenges include: (a) implementation of the surface
diffusion kinetics governing the motion of the triple line for the non-reactive
model into the finite element framework to model rough surfaces, and, (b)
implementation of the combined liquid-gas phase-field and the chemical reaction
phase-field into the finite element framework.

The impact of this investigation will be felt in a broad set of applications,
related to industrial and natural processes. The transformative nature of the
research is that it will results in the ability to effectively control wetting
by surface alterations and the selection of liquid system and solid substrates.
This will enable rational design of industrial processes which depend on liquid
spreading, and products whose function depends on wetting.