* 1235684
* The Technology, Energy, Economy, and Environment (TEEE) Chain: Integrated Modeling for Technology Transition in Energy Rich Regions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Randall Jackson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2015
* USD 335,930.00

1235684 (Ghadimi). The transition to a sustainable clean energy future is one of
the greatest challenges of this new century. Major economies are competing to
dominate the emerging energy economy and governments, regardless of their
position on the plan-market spectrum, play a critical and distinctive role in
driving technology development and adoption. In an increasingly interdependent
world, the technology-energy-environment-economy (TEEE) interplay has profound
implications for the world economy and presents very distinct analytical
challenges both to engineers and social scientists. A thorough understanding of
this complex system is vital for sustainable development at regional, national
and global levels, and there is an urgent need for a comprehensive integrated
framework for analyzing such engineering-economic systems. The proposed TEEE
framework analyzes technology, energy, environment, and the economy in two
important energy rich regions (ERRs) - West Virginia and Shanxi Province, China
- and is targeted to provide a comprehensive set of analytical tools for
understanding the national and global consequences of interactions among these
complex systems. Both of these ERRs are key coal-producing regions, representing
very different economic and social governance systems and states of development.
The goal of this research is to establish an engineering-based economic
framework for an integrated analysis of the TEEE system by a multidisciplinary
research team. The specific objectives of the project are (1) to develop the
existing engineering-based micro-level structural decomposition analysis (SDA)
and input-output process model (IOPM) along with the macro-level optimal
depletion computable general equilibrium (CGE) model into a unified and
comprehensive framework to analyze the TEEE chain; (2) to calibrate the model
for two ERRs and simulate a range of technology-energy-environment-economy
policy scenarios in these regions, each case representing a quite distinctive
economic structure; (3) to conduct two regional online surveys of key
stakeholders and use a non-market valuation method (i.e., a choice experiment)
to assess the broader economic and environmental implications of transitioning
to a diversified and clean energy economy in these energy rich regions; and (4)
to identify critical characteristics for generalizing the integrated model to
make it applicable in other ERRs. Implementation of the model will involve the
participation of graduate research assistants, and descriptions and
demonstrations of the model will be offered to interested and cognate
disciplines as teaching modules in a range of multidisciplinary undergraduate
and graduate level courses.