* 1235145
* Augmented Surface Acoustic Wave Devices for Microbial Cell Separation Based on Physiological Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kelvin Gregory, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2016
* USD 366,289.00

The research objective of this award is to design, fabricate, and test flow-
through microfluidic devices that will enable the selection and separation of
biological cells based on their physiological properties using augmented surface
acoustic wave technology. The approach will be to utilize surface acoustic wave
energy as an initial separation and alignment tool and then enhance separation
and selectivity through secondary and tertiary separation technologies
downstream. Transverse waves as well as electrophoresis and chemical gradients
will be utilized to enhance selectivity and separation of cells. The separation
technologies will initially be studied using manufactured particles with
different surface-chemical and physical properties as models for biological
cells. These initial studies will feed data for modeling and iterating the
design of microfluidic channels and surface acoustic wave devices for subsequent
work with living biological cells . Studies with cells will proceed with pure
cultures of cells and continue with co-cultures of cells in mixed microbial
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Separation of biological cells from complex
mixtures is important for emergent biotechnology, human health research and
national security. Currently, techniques for the selection and isolation of
microbes requires ad hoc knowledge about proteins on the cells or rely on random
isolation and the hopes that the desired cell has become entrapped in a micro-
well or isolated by serial dilution. If successful, this body of research can
transform the paradigm for separation of biological cells into one in which
future researchers may sort cells based on the physiology of the desired cell
rather than luck. This work will result in an understandings about how cell
physiology is related to motion in surface acoustic wave energy, about the
impact of water quality parameters on cellular motion in surface acoustic wave
energy, and which physiological properties of biological cells are best
exploited for specific separation of individuals from the mixed communities of
cells. This body of work enhances the education and training pipeline that
prepares the future leaders in engineering and science.