* 1235885
* Synthesizing Polyhydroxyalkanoates from Fermented Dairy Manure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Erik Coats, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 407,939.00

1235885 (Coats). This research will systematically integrate proteomic methods
with environmental engineering principles to advance a ?waste-to-products?
process to upcycle organic waste to a biodegradable plastic,
polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs). Not only will the process sequester carbon that
would otherwise be emitted as a greenhouse gas, the high-value product (PHA)
will displace petroleum usage. The PHA technology represents opportunities for
industries to generate products of economic value while reducing waste
management costs. The overarching fundamental research question this proposed
study seeks to answer is as follows: ?What are the controlling
metabolisms/proteins associated with feast/famine PHA synthesis by mixed
microbial consortia and how can they be functionally manipulated using standard
bioreactor operating criteria to maximize conversion of VFAs to PHA?? The
following research questions will guide the project. RQ 1: What are the
potential effects of dairy cow nutrition on volatile fatty acid synthesis? RQ 2:
What are the metabolism-specific proteins associated with aerobic feast/famine
PHA synthesis? What are the underlying genetic regulators? RQ 3: Are the
metabolism-specific proteins and regulators identical, or similar, across
different microbial species performing feast/famine PHA synthesis? RQ 4: How do
we apply and manipulate traditional bioreactor operating criteria to maximize
enrichment of feast/famine PHA microbes and induce necessary metabolisms to
yield maximum VFA sequestration as PHA? An overview of the research approach is
as follows. Obj. 1 activities will evaluate and establish the effects of manure
characteristics on VFA synthesis. Obj. 2 and 3 activities are the core focus of
this research that will respond to RQs 2-4. The research will integrate to exact
macro/micro structure-function relationships on mixed microbial consortia
performing feast/famine PHA synthesis. Results from Obj. 2 and 3 will identify
and explain at a molecular structure/function level the bioreactor operating
criteria necessary to maximize PHA synthesis in a manner and at a level that
traditional ?black box? methods could not define. An important culmination of
this research will be the pilot-scale process validation investigations under
Obj. 4. This research will advance both fundamental and practical knowledge to
bio-convert dairy manure to high economic value bioplastic (PHA). The project
will educate Hispanic high school students and provide research opportunities to
undergraduate Hispanic students.