* 1235310
* A Vortex Census from Lagrangian Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Lilly, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 720,034.00

Three key issues motivate a systematic re-examination of coherent vortex
structures in Lagrangian float data: (i) a pressing need for detailed comparison
of eddy parameterization schemes, as well as of eddy-resolving numerical models,
against in situ observations; (ii) the recent recognition, based on satellite
altimetry, that a large swath of variability previously attributed to Rossby
waves instead appears due to an energetic nonlinear mesoscale eddy field, the
interior signature of which is as yet largely unknown; and (iii) an increasing
appreciation of the important but multifaceted role coherent eddies play in
fluid transport and mixing, including eddies at scales too small to be
accurately resolved by altimetry. These issues all point to the need for a
quantitative and integrated study of the coherent eddy field and its large-scale
impacts. At the same time, turbulence studies emphasize that the current ability
to understand the oceanic vortex field is hampered by the lack of an objective
and theoretically compelling avenue for inferring Eulerian "truths" from
available Lagrangian data - that is, the inability to currently perform a formal
census of vortex properties and populations from the Lagrangian platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify vortex characteristics,
populations, and dynamical impacts across a broad range of scales using the
historical set of deep Lagrangian acoustically tracked floats. A series of
recent advances by the PI and collaborators make such a study possible,
providing a new and particularly direct link between Lagrangian observations and
vortex dynamics. The starting point for the study is the ability to extract,
objectively and with uncertainty estimates, detailed time-varying aspects of
coherent eddies from individual Lagrangian trajectories. The first phase of this
project utilizes this method to describe vortex currents as they appear in the
data. In this second phase, inhomogenous Lagrangian observations will be used to
form estimates of underlying Eulerian fields, via statistical inference backed
by extensive testing within idealized quasigeostrophic simulations. The goal is
to describe the vortex distribution as a geographically-varying random field
controlled by a small number of parameters. The third and final phase quantifies
impacts of the vortex field on the large-scale flow - by estimating the velocity
and vorticity distributions as well as particle and vorticity transport
associated with the eddies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This study
will substantially extend and refine our understanding of the role of coherent
eddies in the ocean. It will be an important step towards the larger goal of
understanding and quantifying the impact of small-scale "eddy" processes on the
large-scale circulation, by isolating one of the processes that make up the
general phenomenon of "eddy fluxes". Addressing the connection to observations
from satellite altimetry is particularly timely. The construction and testing of
a Lagrangian vortex census statistical methodology is itself an important
contribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A primary societal impact of
this work is its potential impact on our ability to predict long-term climate
variability by immediately increasing our ability to assess the fidelity of both
eddy-resolving and non-eddy-resolving numerical models against in situ data. The
postdoctoral researcher working on the project will benefit from exposure to
novel analysis techniques and an important Lagrangian data set. Value-added
versions of the float dataset, and all analysis software developed during this
project, will be freely distributed to the community as described in the
attached Data Management Plan; these open a new window into ocean dynamics.