* 1235459
* ADSORPTION OF IONIC AND IONOGENIC COMPOUNDS BY CARBONACEOUS SUBSTANCES:  pKa SHIFTS AND NOVEL INTERACTIONS AT THE SURFACE
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Joseph Pignatello, Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2015
* USD 326,219.00

1235459&lt;br/&gt;Pignatello&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adsorption plays a critical
role in the mobility, biological availability and reactivity of organic
pollutants in soil, sediment and atmospheric aerosols, and often forms the
strategic basis for remediation technologies. Among the strongest of
environmental adsorbents is the carbonaceous substance remaining after pyrolysis
or incomplete burning of organic material known as black carbon. Closely related
structurally to black carbon are a number of manufactured substances, such as
biochar, activated carbon and carbon nanotubes prescribed to improve soil
fertility or to assist in the sensing or removal of pollutants in water and
stabilization of contaminated soil and sediment. Many contaminants of emerging
concern are ionic or become ionic under conditions normally encountered in
nature or in treatment systems. The molecular mechanisms by which ionic and
ionizable compounds adsorb to black carbon are poorly understood, however. This
project addresses adsorption of ionic and ionizable compounds selected among
pharmaceuticals, personal care products, pesticides, industrial solvents and
endocrine-disrupting compounds. It will explore novel bonding interactions with
the polyaromatic surface, which is characteristic of environmental and
manufactured carbons. The first type of interaction applies to weak organic
acids which are postulated to form exceptionally strong H-bonds, known as
negative charge-assisted hydrogen bonds (CAHB), with surface carboxyl and
phenoxyl groups. The second type of interaction applies to positively-charged
aromatic amines and heteroaromatic amines. Because these aromatic cations are
electron-poor they are capable of undergoing pi-pi electron donor-acceptor
interactions, assisted by cation-pi interactions, with the electron-rich
polyaromatic surface of black carbon, a bond known as pi+-pi EDA. To enable
formation of a CAHB or pi+-pi EDA it is postulated that a compound will undergo
proton exchange with water, releasing hydroxide ion into solution, and resulting
in a positive shift of its pKa on the surface relative to its pKa in solution. A
number of thermodynamic and spectroscopic experiments will be carried out to
test these hypotheses, determine reaction scope, and provide parameterization
useful in constructing structure-property free energy relationships of
adsorption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A deep, molecular-level understanding of
adsorption of pollutant molecules to the surfaces of environmental particles is
a key to predicting the fate and movement of pollutants in the environment,
contributes to the knowledge base underlying public health regulations, and is a
prerequisite to technological control. This project will investigate novel
bonding interactions of positively and negatively charged emerging contaminants
with the surfaces of environmental black carbon and related commercial products
that contact pollutants through their intended use. Such interactions have so
far received little attention by environmental scientists. It will lead to
scientific advances of both theoretical and practical importance for scientists
interested in the fate and risk of such compounds. Other constituencies that
will benefit from advances made in this project include regulatory agencies and
the remediation, water purification, and agricultural industries and their
stakeholders. The project will link smoothly with other projects now underway in
the researcher?s laboratory and will foster collaboration with other
institutions. The project will help train graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and visiting scholars, and will influence the course of high school,
college and graduate-level educational outreach. The results will be
disseminated in both public and scientific forums.