* 1235316
* PESO:  Engineered Platforms to Investigate Molecular Determinants of Tumor Metastasis to Targeted Niche Sites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joyce Wong, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 748,250.00

This PESO award to Boston University by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research is cofounded by the Materials and Surface Engineering
program (ENG/CMMI); and the Office of Physical Sciences-Oncology (OPSO) of the
National Cancer Institute. This award is for the development of a biologically
relevant heterotypic co-culture system as a model for tumor tissue growth and
progression. The project will implement an integrated experimental and
theoretical approach for developing a platform to obtain unique sets of physical
measurements that can provide insight into the mechanisms in which tumors
metastasize to specific sites in the body. The major aims of this work are to:
1) develop a novel method of forming tissue units by encapsulating cells into
3-D photopolymerizable hydrogels; 2) evaluate the interactions between the tumor
cells with a specific 'metastatic niche' cell type; 3) isolate and recover each
cell population for biochemical and molecular analysis; and 4) develop a
theoretical approach to analyze the physical data obtained from the engineered
system to develop theoretical models that can be validated experimentally in the
system. The proposed studies are expected to provide insight into the mechanisms
by which tumors metastasize to specific niche sites. The potential scientific
broader impacts of this award could be: 1) elucidation of the mechanisms of
metastasis; 2) development of surrogate physical measurements to quantify
metastasis; and 3) development of potential cancer treatment strategies. The
proposed project features an integrated research and education program that
seeks to increase the pipeline of women and underrepresented minority
researchers into the workforce. To achieve these objectives, the project will
target K-12 students through Boston University's Technology Innovation Scholars
program, which will implement the curriculum developed by the research team for
the Boston area schools that have more than 70% underrepresented minority
students.

The key contribution of this project would be the development of a
physiologically relevant model of metastasis that integrates engineering,
physical sciences and applied mathematical approaches. The potential impact of
this work would be the development of high-throughput screening for agents
modulating tumor-microenvironment interactions, and eventually, the metastatic
process itself. One of the outcomes of this award would be in providing insight
into the mechanisms by which tumors metastasize to specific sites in the body.
The ultimate goal of this award will be to design the assembled tissue units
such that they disassemble in a controlled manner, thereby enabling isolation
and recovery of each cell population for morphological, behavioral, biochemical,
and molecular analyses. The scientific broader impacts of this award would be in
the elucidation of the mechanisms of metastasis, development of surrogate
physical measurements of metastasis, and development of new cancer therapeutics.
The proposed work features an integrated research and education program that
includes the development of curriculum for Boston University's CityLab, which
targets local area middle school and high school students and teachers. This
program will develop modules that will demonstrate concepts, applications and
hands-on experience in working with biomaterials. The development of modules
will also be used to stress the importance of theoretical and experimental
models systems. The graduate and undergraduate students will be actively
involved in these outreach activities, and these students would gain additional
experience in teaching and training. This program will also leverage Boston
University's 'Engineering Ambassadors' program in the College of Engineering to
engage undergraduate students in reaching out to local public schools.