* 1235654
* Collaborative Research: Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to Small Organic Fuels on Encapsulated Metal Catalysts in Gas Diffusion Electrode Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Christopher Williams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

PI: Li, Wenzhen / Williams, Christopher Proposal Number: 1235982 / 1235654
Institution: Michigan Technological University / University of South Carolina at
Columbia Title: Collaborative Research: Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to
Small Organic Fuels on Encapsulated Metal Catalysts in Gas Diffusion Electrode
Environment

The increase of the greenhouse gas CO2 in the atmosphere has resulted in serious
global warming issues. The electroreduction of CO2 to organic molecules is a
critical goal that would positively impact the global carbon balance by
recycling CO2 back into usable fuels. However, an electroreduction that is fast
enough and can operate to full capacity remains a great scientific challenge.
This collaborative team proposes to investigate a novel class of carbon nanotube
(CNT) encapsulated Cu-based nanostructures for efficient electrocatalytic
reduction of CO2 in gas diffusion phase, based on their extensive research
expertise in catalysis, spectroscopy and electrochemical engineering. The
research hypotheses are: 1) that inside CNT channels, CO2 and H species
transport and charge transfer can be effectively tuned through optimizing the
diameter and length of CNTs and distribution of metal nanoparticles; 2) that the
spatial restriction of CNT channels can enhance chain growth probability (to
form C2+ fuels); 3) that the cation exchange ionomer can effectively adjust the
local pH of reaction sites close to neutral in order to facilitate CO2
reduction. The project will focus on three research tasks: 1) rationally design,
accurately synthesize and fully characterize CNTs encapsulated Cu- based
bimetallic (Fe, Ag, Pd, etc) nanoparticles having alloy or core-shell structure;
2) investigate mechanistic steps of CO2 reduction at the encapsulated catalyst-
cation exchange membrane ionomer interface using in-situ electrochemical FTIR,
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and high performance liquid chromatography;
3) assemble encapsulated catalysts into MEAs and investigate CO2 reduction in
gas diffusion electrode environment using electrochemical methods,
chromatography analysis, and micro-kinetic modeling.

This research will have several broad scientific and social impacts. First,
studies of these novel encapsulated catalytic systems will advance knowledge of
precise synthesis of composite catalytic materials and structure-catalytic
function relationships. Second, the research efforts will deepen our
understanding of electro-driven conversion of CO2 to usable organic fuels
(electrofuels). Third, it will advance CO2 conversion knowledge based on solid
polymer electrolyte and gas diffusion electrode techniques and support the
world-wide research efforts to balance global carbon cycling and alleviate
global climate change issues. The students involved will not only acquire hands-
on research skills, but also learn analytical, communication, cooperation and
innovation skills. In addition, the PIs will incorporate the generated results
into the existing undergraduate courses and enterprise projects. The outreach
efforts will increase high school students? interests in science, engineering
and technology, and eventually benefit our society by a sustainably supply of
new generation researchers in these fields.