* 1235202
* Nano Ferrous Particles Dispersed on Optical Fiber Sensors for Distributed Corrosion Assessment of Civil Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Genda Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 312,871.00

The objective of this award is to explore and create a distributed corrosion
monitoring system with multiplexed long period fiber grating sensors that will
be packaged with nano ferrous particles filled polymers. The change in
wavelength of the fiber gratings is related to the degree of corrosion in the
ferrous particles through effective refractive index of the packaged optical
fiber. The approach is to develop rugged sensors and deploy them in parallel
with corrosion susceptible components (for example, steel beams and reinforcing
bars), accurately quantify the corrosion rate and mass loss of ferrous particles
in the well-controlled sensor structure, causatively relate the corrosion data
from the sensors to their nearby steel components, and cost-effectively assess
both pit and uniform corrosion induced deteriorations of the steel components
and then the load capacity of their structural system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once
validated and implemented in bridge applications, the proposed corrosion sensors
could impact the maintenance and safety of transportation infrastructures. They
have the potential to save up to $8 per square foot of bridge decks in the case
that the bridge decks are monitored and determined to have an extra year of
service. Their outcomes (corrosion rate and mass loss) can be directly used in
bridge design and management, thus realizing both short- and long-term benefits.
The research findings will be disseminated through technical publications,
international workshops, and exchange visits with other peer institutions. Two
lecture modules on "corrosion phenomenon" and "assessment tool" will be
developed and used in all education and outreach activities. Underrepresented
students will directly participate in this project and get trained with such a
highly interdisciplinary research topic.