* 1235666
* ACM SIGMOD 2012 Student Programming Contest: A Multidimensional Indexing System
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Samuel Madden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 03/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

NSF funding supports travel grants for U.S.-based student teams to participate
in the fourth annual programming contest held at SIGMOD 2012 in Scottsdale
Arizona, May 20-24, 2012 (http:// http://www.sigmod.org/2012/). The contest is
open to graduate and undergraduate teams from degree-granting institutions. This
year's task is to implement a multidimensional high-throughput in-memory
indexing system. As with previous years, the goals of the contest are to: (a)
stimulate student interest in the database management systems field; (b) present
a research challenge; (c) foster the creation of sharable open source code
modules; (d) foster Computer Science education by creating a forum where
students can excel; and (e) present a forum where excellent students can be
acknowledged for their problem-solving and programming skills. The contest is
conducted during the first two quarters of 2012, with a bake-off among the
finalists at the conference. A $5,000 prize, donated by SAP, will be awarded to
the winning team. This contest will stimulate the database community to develop
robust open source implementations of challenging research software. Such
implementations have intellectual merit in that they provide a base upon which
other researchers can build tools and students can learn how others have
architected large data management systems.

The contest will attract young, eager, students with enthusiasm for building
real systems to the database community and a special effort will be made to
encourage participation from under-represented groups. The programming contest
will emphasize that the community values real implementations in addition to
fundamental research, and will potentially lead to open source software that
will be used by researchers outside of the community. For more information see
the Program Contest website (http://wwwdb.inf.tu-dresden.de/sigmod2012contest/).