* 1235439
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Simulation-Based Design of Functional Sub-nanometer Porous Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ting Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

1234305/1235439 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Keten/Xu &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer thin films
containing high-density arrays of nanotubes as through channels are very
desirable as environmentally friendly and efficient selective transport systems.
However, successful design and synthesis of polymer membranes that can be
processed in solution and have precise subnanometer diameter pores, vertical
channel alignment, and tunable pore interior chemistry similar to biological
transmembrane proteins has remained challenging to produce. This project employs
a collaborative theoretical / experimental effort to model, design and
synthesize functionalized cyclic peptide nanotubes (CPNs) to understand
mechanisms governing their assembly in solution and co-assembly with block
copolymers. The objective of this research project is to generate mechanically
robust self-assembling peptide nanotubes with functional interiors that could be
used in selective porous membranes. To achieve this overarching objective, we
will (i) fabricate and characterize porous cyclic peptide nanotubes (CPNs)
functionalized with a polar (amine) group, (ii) produce layered membranes with
control over the vertical distribution of CPs with polar and non-polar groups
using crosslinkable block copolymer matrix, and (iii) investigate selectivity
mechanisms in membranes with tunable pore functionalities toward novel transport
capabilities. Validated large-scale simulation efforts will be integrated with
experiments to rapidly evaluate material design parameters and predict material
properties, circumventing challenges associated with purely combinatorial
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to break new ground
by mapping out the nascent material space of organic nanotubes through
simulations. Fresh knowledge pertaining to the underlying physics of
peptide/polymer hybrid nanostructures will be foundational for generating novel
functional subnanoporous membranes toward new platforms to study molecular
mechanisms underpinning key transport phenomena observed in biology. K-12
outreach and undergraduate research programs at Northwestern University and the
University of California, Berkeley, respectively, will be leveraged to recruit
underrepresented minority students and women into the research team through
summer opportunities at both institutions. An image library for organic nanotube
materials will be created and will serve as an open-access database for public
outreach, and for other researchers to identify broader applications of our
functional nanostructures and methods. Modules for virtual and laboratory
experiments will be created to promote effective learning in materials physics
and chemistry at all levels, and will be contributed to NanoHub and forthcoming
cyber infrastructures. Guidance and mentorship on career development as well as
work-life balance will be provided for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows through interactions with academia, industry and national labs.