* 1235706
* Collaborative Research:  Workshop on the Anticipatory Governance of Complex Engineered Nanomaterials, July 1, 2012 - June 30, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Kathleen Eggleson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2014
* USD 5,750.00

Abstract Collaborative Proposals: 1235693/1235706 Guston, David H. / Eggleson,
Kathleen K.

Intellectual Merit: The workshop will help move nanotechnology EHS research
forward in order to more quickly assess the possible impacts of nanomaterials on
health and the environment by characterizing the materials in question.

A series of background papers will address such topics as:

1. To what extent can we identify complex engineered nanomaterials (CENMs) and
their trajectories in existing nano literature, patents, and products?

2. What do we know about the materials that are being or might be used for
CENMs, in terms of current and anticipated functions, characterizations,
toxicological properties, and life-cycle knowledge? 3. How do current leading
scientific researchers understand the medium-term future development,
applications and governing issues of CENMs that constitute the primary focus of
this group?

4. What do we know about the ability of current regulatory science and
regulatory policy pathways (knowledge systems including standards of evidence,
decision support, etc.) to manage CENMs?

5. To what extent can we anticipate current approaches to predictive toxicology
for nanomaterials to apply to CENMs?

Broader Impact:

The workshop on the anticipatory governance of CENMs will take fulladvantage of
the dissemination abilities of the centers and groups involved. Background
papers and the draft report will be available on the websites of the centers and
notice of their availability sent to their multiple listservs with thousands of
subscribers. After revisions from the workshop vetting, the background papers
and the workshop report will be suitable for submission to journals such as
Journal of Nanoparticle Research or Nature Nanotechnology. The executive
committee may also arrange a briefing for the broader nano community following
the publication of the papers. The inclusion of public and private sector
participants in the workshop means that any perspectives and/or recommendations
derived there are more likely to find receptive audiences.