* 1235799
* Nonlinear Electrokinetic Effects on Near-Wall Microparticle Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Minami Yoda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 305,038.00

1235799 Yoda

Microfluidic Lab-on-a-Chip (LOC) devices shrink an entire medical laboratory
onto a single "chip" of a few square inches, making it possible to obtain the
results of various blood and urine tests within a few minutes at the patient's
home. A major enabling technology for LOC tests is controlling the transport of
nano- and microparticles with diameters ranging from about 0.5 to 5 nanometers
suspended in a conducting aqueous solution (e.g. blood plasma, urine) where the
transport of the particle solution is driven by a voltage gradient, or electric
field, through microchannels with diameters of a few micrometers to a few
hundred micrometers. In such small channels, a large fraction of the particles
interact with the channel walls. Recent observations in microchannel flows
suggest that the electric field that drives the solution also gives rise to a
repulsive force of O(10^-14 N) that drives the suspended particles away from the
wall, and that this force, which is proportional to the square of the electric
field magnitude, also scales as the square of the particle diameter. The
objectives of this work are therefore: 1) to develop our fundamental
understanding of how the properties of the particle and wall surfaces, as well
as those of the solution, affect these particle-wall interactions; and 2) to
determine whether this repulsive force can be used to separate nano- and
microparticles based upon their size and if so, the conditions that optimize
separation efficiency. The experiments will use evanescent-wave particle
velocimetry, a method that is uniquely suited to visualizing the dynamics of
particle-wall interactions that is also sensitive enough to detect the effects
of this extremely small repulsive force, to study flows through microchannels
driven by an electric field, as well as a pressure gradient to create shear. The
experiments will be complemented by a modest modeling effort. By determining how
this repulsive force depends upon the properties of the particle, the wall, and
the solution, this proposed work could lead to new technologies for: a) sorting
nano- and microparticles based on their size, among other properties; and b)
manipulating, collecting, and assembling particles of different sizes (and other
properties) in different regions of the channel wall. As noted earlier, these
are important technologies in designing LOC for medical diagnostics. They are
also important in new nanomaterials, specifically in making plasmonic
metamaterials with a negative refractive index that can be used as "invisibility
cloaks": these materials are typically fabricated by assembling nano- and
microparticles into large crystals and arrays on a solid substrate, or wall, by
applying an electric field to a particle solution. This research will also
educate a diverse group of undergraduate students in the largest program in
Mechanical Engineering in the U.S. to the applications of microfluidics and
nanotechnology, and involve high school students in summer research projects in
these areas.