* 1235727
* Building Academic Leadership and Campus Capacity to Transform STEM Education at Selected HBCUS
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2017
* Kelly Mack, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,100,102.00

The project entitled - Building Academic Leadership and Campus Capacity to
Transform STEM Education at Selected HBCUs - is developing a program of campus
specific activities that will advance the undergraduate science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education transformation for a group of nine
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) selected from among twenty-
six involved in the Preparing Critical Faculty for the Future (PCFF) project.
The current work of the PCFF project provides professional and leadership for a
critical group - current and future women of color STEM faculty at HBCUs. PCFF
is working with these STEM faculty to address pedagogical and academic
leadership issues. The PCFF 2 project will advance the current work by
continuing to build on the successful networks of support and mentoring that
PCFF has created. PCFF 2 will draw on the unique strengths of HBCUs to graduate
STEM majors, while effectively addressing the challenges that are unique to
HBCUs that may inhibit them from being even more
successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities include supporting continued
professional development activities for women of color STEM faculty who
participate in the PCFF project; broadening the reach of support to include
additional faculty from STEM and other disciplines, as well as staff and
administrators who can support STEM education transformation; providing
professional development to campus teams to plan and implement improvements in
campus structures of support; and providing on-campus consultation expertise to
help guide and advance their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities that PCFF
2 undertakes will have a national impact by identifying and documenting the
elements of success and by developing models of change that establish
institutional processes and educational practices that enhance the ability of
HBCUs to manage the changing STEM education landscape effectively. The project
will document and disseminate the models of success that can help HBCUs and
other institutions to address the challenge of increasing the number of STEM
graduates.