* 1235231
* Collaborative Research: Decoding &amp; Predicting Antarctic Surface Melt Dynamics with Observations, Regional Atmospheric Modeling and GCMs
* GEO,OPP
* 06/18/2011,03/31/2015
* David Schneider, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 03/31/2015
* USD 46,081.00

The presence of ice ponds from surface melting of glacial ice can be a
significant threshold in assessing the stability of ice sheets, and their
overall response to a warming climate. Snow melt has a much reduced albedo,
leading to additional seasonal melting from warming insolation. Water run-off
not only contributes to the mass loss of ice sheets directly, but meltwater
reaching the glacial ice bed may lubricate faster flow of ice sheets towards the
ocean. Surficial meltwater may also reach the grounding lines of glacial ice
through the wedging open of existing crevasses. The occurrence and amount of
meltwater refreeze has even been suggested as a paleo proxy of near-surface
atmospheric temperature regimes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using contemporary remote
sensing (microwave) satellite assessment of surface melt occurrence and extent,
the predictive skill of regional meteorological models and reanalyses (e.g. WRF,
ERA-Interim) to describe the synoptic conditions favourable to surficial melt is
to be investigated. Statistical approaches and pattern recognition techniques
are argued to provide a context for projecting future ice sheet change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The previous Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC AR4) commented on our lack of understanding of ice-sheet mass balance
processes in polar regions and the potential for sea-level change. The IPPC
suggested that the forthcoming AR5 efforts highlight regional cryosphere
modeling efforts, such as is proposed here.