* 1235273
* Novel Resettable Stiffness Systems for Response Mitigation of Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Ken Walsh, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 79,547.00

Earthquakes have the potential to cause large-scale destruction of civil
infrastructure often leading to significant economic losses or even the loss of
human life. Therefore, it is vital to protect civil infrastructure during these
events. Structural vibration control using damper provides a method for
mitigating the damage to civil infrastructure during earthquakes by absorbing
seismic energy from the structure. Damper with semi-active control has emerged
as an attractive form of structural control due to its effectiveness, inherent
stability, and reliability. This proposal plans to pursue research in resetting
semi-active stiffness damper (RSASD) to control vibrations. The purpose of the
proposed research is to develop innovative resettable stiffness systems that use
minimum feedback control. The resulting devices, by minimizing feedback control,
will have high reliability and robustness. The project involves assembly and
small-scale testing of the devices to evaluate their energy dissipation
characteristics. Annual Ohio University Middle School Science Fair will be used
to demonstrate the devices to students to encourage them to pursue STEM
education. The research results will also be incorporated in the courses to
advocate innovation in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RSASD has several
complexities associated with its operation. In particular, the feedback control
system is necessary such that the valve is pulsed open and closed when the
piston has reached its maximum displacement, that is, when there is a change in
sign of the piston velocity. However, this means that any noise (interference)
in the sensor signal, or any high frequency small amplitude structural
vibrations, could also trigger the valve, thereby resetting the device at the
wrong time. To accommodate this, a threshold on the position signal is used. The
threshold ensures that a predetermined minimum displacement of the piston has
occurred before resetting the device. Also, as a semi-active control technology,
the RSASD is subject to reliability issues related to the feedback system.
Failure of the sensor, microcontroller, or valve would lead to device
malfunction and loss of energy dissipation to the structure. An innovative
design with reduced feedback components will be investigated to develop a
resetting stiffness system to provide damping to vibrating civil infrastructure.
This new system, if successful, will make RSASD highly reliable and robust.