* 1235696
* GOALI: Transient Jets and Re-Ignition for Energy Efficiency Gains from Confined Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Mohamed Nalim, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 06/30/2017
* USD 328,120.00

Intellectual Merit: Combustible fuel-air mixtures can be ignited, intentionally
or not, by a transient jet, a puff, of hot reactive gas from an adjacent
combustion event. This re-ignition phenomenon differs greatly from common
electric spark or compression ignition events. Whether or not, and how quickly,
re-ignition occurs depends on a complex interaction of physical and chemical
processes occurring at different rates: puff vortex spinning, mixing and fuel
molecule oxidation. Preliminary experiments show good agreement with gas motion
predictions, but also indicate that re-ignition delay time depends on the fuel-
air ratio in a way that is as yet unexplained. This project will use
computational, experimental, and analytical approaches to investigate re-
ignition by transient jets that mix residual or re-injected combustion gases and
fresh mixtures, establish the re-ignition delay time for common gaseous fuels,
and determine their sensitivities to key parameters. Computational models will
be used to predict puff vortex dynamics and reacting mixture temperature in
stationary and traversing jets. Experiments will verify vortex dynamics and
measure re-ignition delay times for traversing and stationary jets through the
use of pressure sensors, visualization, and optical diagnostics. A simplified
mathematical model will then be developed to carefully disentangle the gas
mixing and chemical processes, and more accurately predict re-ignition. Fuel
oxidation theory validated in other types of combustion will be tested for
applicability to jet re-ignition. Scientists at a company partnering in this
project will not only guide the project itself, but also mentor a doctoral
candidate in applying the research findings at the
company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: This project will enable jet-
ignited combustion approaches aimed at dramatic reductions in fuel consumption
and greenhouse gas emissions in a wide range of power plants. The success of
this project has the potential to transform many of the ways in which fuel has
been consumed since the Industrial Revolution. It leads directly to novel
combustion methods that create a pressure boost in aircraft and electric power
generation engines. By retrofitting or redesigning power generation gas turbines
and aircraft jet engines with pressure-boost combustors, the United States can
save an estimated $10 billion dollars in fuel and 100 megatons of CO2 emissions
each year. The project will help develop pressure-boost combustion technology
using a device called a wave rotor combustor. This disruptive technology can
also enable innovative medium- and small-scale power generators as well as more
efficient hybrid vehicles and portable power units. Additionally, the project
enables more reliable ignition in trucks and locomotives using internal
combustion engines, allowing the substitution of less expensive, domestic gas
fuels for diesel refined from imported petroleum. Transient jets from small pre-
chambers can accomplish consistent ignition of natural gas while reducing
nitrogen oxide emissions and avoiding diesel smoke. The results of this research
will be immediately utilized in concurrent but separate wave rotor combustor
experiments, with simplified models being incorporated into design codes usable
by industry. The doctoral candidate will assist the industry partner in the
development of a wave rotor combustor prototype, the initial goal of which is
reducing fuel consumption, carbon emissions, and the weight of gas turbines by
about 20% each.