* 1235440
* GOALI: Effects of Gas in Design and Verification of Blast Densification of Liquefiable Sands
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Richard Finno, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 464,136.00

Infrastructure systems include many embankments for highways and railroads. In
seismically sensitive areas west of the Rocky Mountains and over broad areas of
the eastern and central US - estimated to cover as much as 40% of the
continental US, earthquake engineering for these facilities is very important. A
key design issue for such facilities is whether or not liquefaction - or the
loss of shear strength of saturated sands - will occur during an earthquake. If
such a possibility exists, then one must either relocate the embankment or
improve the potentially liquefiable soil to the point where the improved soil
will not liquefy under the expected earthquake. Loose sands are the soils most
susceptible to liquefaction. Two questions arise during design: (i) will
liquefaction occur under a given earthquake loading, and (ii) what are the
consequences of liquefaction? The most egregious effect is a flow failure of the
embankment through the liquefied soil. Because highway and railroad embankments
traverse large areas, the costs of mitigating the effects of the liquefiable
soils are large, as are costs related to realignment, if this option is followed
in design. To improve the ground over large areas, densification of loose sands
by controlled blasting is an economical approach. Blast densification consists
of placing charges within the loose sand layer requiring treatment. The charges
are detonated with multiple delays to generate cyclic loads, similar to an
earthquake. Large amounts of gas also are released in the ground with each
explosion. The "design" usually relies on historic or previous contractor
experience, as there is no rigorous theory that accounts for the parameters that
influence the densification process. Case studies have shown that loose sands
compress almost immediately after blasting, but when common penetration tests
are conducted to verify the increase in density, these results provide erratic
and, at times, rather counterintuitive results. If taken soon after the blast,
the penetration resistance may decrease, and at times never increases to levels
above the pre-blast level. At the same time, the ground surface settles almost
immediately after blasting, implying that loose sands in the subsurface have
increased density. However, the lack of increase in penetration resistance
suggests that the strength and stiffness of the soil apparently does not. This
leads to questions about future performance. Have the loose sands really been
improved to the point where liquefaction is not a possibility? Furthermore, how
the released gas affects the soil behavior is ignored in design and
verification, e.g., what form does the gas take in the ground, how does it
dissipate and how does it affect the behavior of the sands in response to
subsequent static and cyclic stresses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this GOALI research are to develop (i) a methodology to quantify the amount of
densification required to make the soil resistant to liquefaction and flow in
the presence of shear stresses with explicit evaluation of the effects of gasses
released during blasting, and (ii) a means of reliable in situ verification of
the ground improvement. To achieve the first objective, a laboratory
experimental program will be conducted to define the constitutive response of
reconstituted "gassy" sand specimens. The laboratory program will account for in
situ stresses and gas concentrations and include both monotonic and cyclic
tests. To achieve the second objective, a field verification program will
monitor the soil and pore fluid responses before, during, and after
densification at a production blast test section at a municipal waste disposal
facility near Charleston, SC. Blasting has been used at the site for more than a
decade to densify loose sands, and Geosyntec Consultants is the engineer of
record for this project. The field studies will include pore pressure
measurements, surface settlements, in situ testing, pore fluid sampling, pore
fluid pressure measurements, and in situ gas concentration and composition
measurements. Combining the field and laboratory studies to evaluate the effects
of the released gas during blasting provides a unique opportunity to remove the
empiricism in design and the contradictory results obtained during verification
testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to application to municipal waste
fills, the results of this research will have direct application to
infrastructure systems including many embankments for highways and railroads.
Also defining the behavior of moderately dense gassy sands will provide valuable
data that currently does not exist which can have an impact in offshore
applications, tailing dams and other conditions where gassy soils exist.