* 1235355
* Direct Measurement of the role of Confinement and Chemistry on Local Physical and Mechanical Properties of Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* John Torkelson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

The research objective of this award is to utilize techniques based on two
different physics to investigate the thermal and mechanical properties of
polymers near interfaces. In one case, nanoscale mechanical indentation is
performed by measuring the force required to push small tips into the sample
either from the top or side surfaces. In the second case, spectroscopy on
embedded fluorescent probes measures the change in light emitted from the sample
at different temperatures. These techniques are complimentary and orthogonal and
both analyses can be performed on the same physical samples. Current literature
reveals that substrate stiffness may play an important role in the effects on
the confined polymer. After synchronization of the measurement techniques, we
will investigate the mechanical interphase on a variety of substrates with
different stiffness. This study will encompass rubbery substrates through high
modulus silicon wafers. The effect of differences in polymer-substrate chemical
interactions will also be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructured
polymers are important components of a variety of important systems, including
lightweight structural materials, biomedical devices, and energy storage.
Unfortunately, the unknown mechanical properties of confined polymers leads to
uncertainty in design of novel devices and applications. Accurate assessment of
interfacial polymer properties will allow for a more robust design space and
tailoring of material properties to a higher degree. The proposed research will
also serve as an excellent training platform for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in the critical frontier of structure-based material
design. Outreach to undergraduates, underrepresented groups and local middle-
school students are included in the education plan, exposing larger societal
groups to materials design principles and the technological development process.
Students participating in this project will also have opportunities to
collaborate with scientists at national labs (Argonne) and industries (Dupont
and Boeing) in design projects.