* 1235963
* Travel Grant: Joint Symposium on Forest Based Biorefinery Technologies International Conference on Biomass-Energy Technologies (ICBT2012), Nanjing, China, October 22-24, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Yulin Deng, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 24,600.00

PI: Bandaru V. Ramarao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: State University of New
York, College of Environmental Science and Forestry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Travel &amp; Symposium Grant: Joint Symposium on Forest Based Biorefinery
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;International Conference on Biomass-Energy Technologies
(ICBT2012)&lt;br/&gt;Nanjing, China October 22-24, 2012. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This travel grant is to provide funding to about
12 academic researchers from the USA to participate and present papers at the
Joint Symposium on Forest Based Biorefinery Technologies and International
Conference on Biomass-Energy Technologies, ICBT 2012 in Nanjing, China, October
22-24, 2012. The symposium aims to provide a communication and exhibition
platform for experts, scholars, and entrepreneur in the biomass energy field.
The delegates will include not only renowned experts, scholars, and government
officials, but also company executives and professionals of investment
institutions in Asia, Europe, and the United States. At this event they will
discuss and exchange their ideas on ?hot spots??novel technologies?and
commercial development so as to encourage cooperative research on biomass energy
technologies between China and other countries, and promote the integration of
the Chinese biomass energy industry with international enterprises and
investment institutions. This conference will also provide new development
opportunities for international biomass energy institutions and enterprises. The
U.S. team including graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will
investigate international collaborative opportunities at the symposium. This
symposium will fill a critical need and bring focus to joint efforts between USA
and China on feedstock supply, conversion technologies, kinetics and reaction
engineering of biomass conversions, separation and purification processes and
novel bioproducts and materials in the context of forest products based
biorefineries.