* 1235870
* GOALI: Structure and Electronic Properties of Grain Boundaries in Earth Abundant Cu2ZnSnSxSe4-x (CZTS) Thin Film Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Mitzi, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 309,447.00

PI: Shenoy, Vivek Proposal Number: 1235870 Institution: Brown University Title:
GOALI: Structure and Electronic Properties of Grain Boundaries in Earth Abundant
Cu2ZnSnSxSe4-x (CZTS) Thin Film Solar Cells

Low-cost, high-throughput, and reliable photovoltaic production methods are
needed in order to make solar energy widely available. Thin-film solar cell
materials are of particular interest because they can be fabricated in a cost-
effective manner. Cu2ZnSnSxSe4-x (CZTS) is regarded as one of the promising
candidates of the absorber layer used in thin film devices because of the use of
Zn and Sn, two low-cost and earth-abundant elements.

The performance is affected by the grain boundaries in the crystalline
components. Currently there is no systematic experimental data or theoretical
models on the structure and orientation distribution of grain boundaries in
CZTS. The PIs will use a multi-scale approach that combines experimental
techniques for the grain boundary characterization with first-principles
calculations and genetic algorithms for structure determination and kinetic
Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations for modeling segregation
kinetics. IBM High Resolution Transmission Electron microscopy (HRTEM) will be
used to identify the grain boundary orientation by comparing with the TEM images
simulated by using density functional calculations. The Electron BackScatter
Diffraction (EBSD) method will be employed to measure the distribution of grain
boundary as a function of orientation. Spectroscopy (EDS) in the Scanning
Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) mode can provide information about the
atomic composition near grain boundary (Cu rich/poor).

The project will provide an opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students
to both carry out experimental work in a leading industrial lab and to develop
advanced computational skills. The progress made in the computational methods
will be included in the course that the PI has created to promote hands-on
simulation experience. The project will provide interactive software modules
from these projects to K-12 teachers and students participating in Brown?s
summer high school. Finally, given the large effort and resources that are being
invested in the development of efficient methods to improve the conversion
efficiency of CZTS-based solar cells, insights gained from increased atomic
level understanding of grain boundaries could have economic impact, particularly
in the semiconductor and photovoltaic energy industry.