* 1235942
* NSF Workshop on the Frontiers of Stochastic Systems, Networks and Control.  The workshop will be held on October 27, 2012 at Texas A and M University
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2013
* Srinivas Shakkottai, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2013
* USD 5,000.00

Objective: The Workshop on the Frontiers of Stochastic Systems and Control will
host participants from academia and industry, working on various aspects of
cyber-physical systems. The aim is to increase inter-community collaboration in
the applications of emerging analytical tools and techniques from control
theory, network science and stochastic processes to networks of interconnected
cyber-physical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The recent
past has seen the significant adoption of communication technology in
applications well beyond voice telephony. There have been significant advances
in the integration of communication technology into a number of systems such as
transportation and power networks, leading to the notion of cyber-physical
systems that integrate sensing, communication, and distributed control in large
scale physical networks. The confluence of communication networks with a number
of different areas to which ideas of distributed control apply, implies that
academic and industry researchers from diverse backgrounds should interact in
order to explore mutual synergies that arise from their different perspectives.
The workshop will consist of seminars and discussions to foster long-term
collaborations between the student, faculty, government and industry
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This workshop will introduce
students to cutting edge ideas as well as recent trends in research and
industry. Hence, a major part of the workshop is the education of students and
other participants on fundamental problems and solution directions in the space
of distribution control of systems.