* 1235124
* GEOTRACES Pacific Section:  227Ac Distribution in Deep Waters as a Constraint on Mixing and Mass Transport of Solutes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Douglas Hammond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2017
* USD 147,376.00

Because of its potential as a tracer of ocean mixing and transport, 227Ac (22
year half-life) has been identified as a parameter of interest for the
International GEOTRACES Program, a multi-national effort to map and study the
geochemical behavior of a suite of trace elements and isotopes in the global
ocean. Quantifying the biogeochemical dynamics of the deep sea is necessary for
understanding the oceanic cycling of carbon and other materials. Defining these
dynamics requires knowledge of mixing and advective transport rates that can be
applied to interpret concentration fields of biogeochemically important solutes.
Despite having a half-life that is well suited for the study of both vertical
and lateral transport in the deep ocean, few 227Ac measurements have been made
in the deep sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at the
University of Southern California will make measurements of 227Ac water column
profiles on the 2013 US GEOTRACES Pacific transect, a section from Peru to
Tahiti, one of several American contributions to the International GEOTRACES
effort. The team will also do analyses of archived sediments to constrain the
regional benthic flux of this isotope and provide a boundary condition for
interpreting its water column distribution. Recent advances in instrumentation
facilitate this analysis, and the synergy provided by the GEOTRACES program will
provide an ideal opportunity to obtain additional data that will serve two
purposes. First, 227Ac will be of value in defining the spatial variability of
mixing rates in the deep South Pacific, particularly when combined with
estimates based on 228Ra (6 year half-life), a tracer field that a collaborating
GEOTRACES proposal seeks to determine. Second, the mixing and transport rates
defined by this tracer pair will be useful for deducing the transport and the
dynamics of other solutes measured by GEOTRACES in deep waters. Solute transport
is due to both mixing and advection. By using multiple tracers with different
half-lives, the separate roles of these processes may be distinguished, allowing
a more complete understanding of the dynamics of solute behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As part of this effort, at least one
undergraduate and one high school student will have the opportunity to
participate in the research experience, gaining insight into the possibilities
of careers in this area and learning the approaches taken in scientific
research.