* 1235790
* Compliance and Dynamic Geometry Variation in Coronory Artery Flows under In-Vivo Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Danesh Tafti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 288,338.00

1235790&lt;br/&gt;Tafti&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are
the number one causes of death in the world. Extensive research has shown that
arterial wall mechanics and fluid dynamics play an important role in CVD
mediation. As the heart beats, the coronary arteries (CA), which are attached to
the pericardial surface or penetrate the myocardial wall, also experience
substantial motion. This motion is large scale and three dimensional in nature,
with local changes in curvature and torsion of the vessel. The effect of this
motion on the fluid dynamics of blood flow is further complicated by variations
in arterial wall stiffness resulting from plaque formation (atherosclerosis) or
the placement of stents. The research is driven by the hypothesis that in CA
flows, the large scale motions due to the motion of the myocardium along with
local variations or discontinuities of the vessel stiffness lead to non-
physiological flow patterns and abnormal wall shear stresses triggering
atherosclerosis. In order to tackle the scientific and engineering challenges
imposed, we will use state-of-art highly-resolved computations to create a
unique research framework that will significantly augment our understanding of
these complex flow systems. Using computational modeling of fully resolved
fluid-structure-interaction (FSI), the computations will tackle with
unprecedented fidelity the unsteady coupled fluid structure interactions with
applied motion of the myocardium and the arterial flow characteristics that have
challenged researchers in the past. Resolving the physical mechanisms of FSI in
flexible vessels with anisotropic compliance under the influence of the
myocardial motion as experienced in coronary arteries will lead to new
understanding of transport processes in physiological systems. The research
grant will train one graduate student and provide research experience to a
number of undergraduate students. A number of initiatives will be undertaken to
involve women and minorities in research and education, and to foster research
partnerships with medical institutions. The proposed research will contribute
towards better diagnosis of vascular disease and will have broad ranging
implications on the management of cardio-vascular disease with the potential of
saving millions of lives. It will provide the foundation needed for analyzing
and improving vascular implants as well as enable the development of new and
improved treatments and devices.