* 1235133
* Modular Autonomous Biosampler(MAB): Multi-platform system for distinct Biological size-class sampling &amp; preservation. Phase II-completion of standalone sampler &amp; AUV adapte
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2013,12/31/2019
* Stephen Cary, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2019
* USD 925,192.00

There is a serious community-wide deficiency in our ability to collect and
preserve biological samples across a broad spectrum of oceanographic platforms.
The PIs suggest that what is clearly needed is a single system that can be
easily adapted to multiple platforms servicing a broad range of applications
across the biological oceanographic community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
request funding for a 3-year development program to build and field two low-
cost, high-sample capacity modular, autonomous biological sampling devices
(MABs). This will include a standalone mooring-ready unit (6000 m depth rating)
and a second unit adapted for a 20 cm diameter AUV. The units will be capable of
filtering and preserving multiple distinct biological size classes
simultaneously, and will be deployable in any aquatic setting from a variety of
platform modalities (AUV, ROV, mooring, observatory
node).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits
of the sampler proposed herein cut across several disciplines, given the
potential for acquiring multiple size fractions from a water sample. This
capability will be useful from both a biological and a geological/biogeochemical
perspective. In the former case, studies of zooplankton, phytoplankton, and
bacterioplankton communities will be accommodated in what should be a highly
efficient and cost-effective manner relative to conventional, ship-based
sampling. In the future, intelligent tracking of biological features (e.g.,
chlorophyll patches, particulate thin layers) by AUVs will enhance the utility
of such high-capacity samplers and the data generated from this material.