* 1235036
* EAGER: Novel Hybrid Photovoltaic Mechanism using Ferroelectricity Assisted Charge Transport
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Sung Jin Kim, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 06/30/2014
* USD 119,183.00

The objective of this program is exploring a novel mechanism of efficient charge
transfer and transport using ferroelectric materials. To accomplish this goal,
the proposed research will be focused on following tasks: 1) synthesis and
preparation of inorganic and organic materials for light absorber and
ferroelectricity, 2) device fabrication using various structure designs to take
advantages from synthesized materials and 3) optical and electrical
characterization as well as spectroscopic evaluation. As a transformative
research, the successful outcomes will contribute to build a novel photovoltaic
mechanism which can provide a major impact to overcome the obstacles in next
generation solar cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is that it
can discover unexplored physics from proposed ferroelectric assisted charge
transport in nanostructured solar cell. Also, the research outcomes will provide
the solutions and direction for nanomaterial based photovoltaic devices.
Finally, it will lead the creation of a novel technology towards new next
generation photovoltaic paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are
innovative curricular materials which emphasize nanotechnology and
interdisciplinary research for the graduate students, and opportunities of
research experience to the undergraduate students. The undergraduate research
will focus on participation of underrepresented minority groups. Also, this
program will benefit to renewable energy technology and related industry and
scientific societies.