* 1235522
* Atomistic Mechanisms Governing Friction and Instability in Calcium-Silicate-Hydrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Rouzbeh Shahsavari, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,003.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a new modeling framework that
enables utilizing the fundamentals of material science to uncover the mechanisms
of nanoscale contact phenomena in cement hydrate, Calcium-Silicate-Hydrate
(C-S-H), and link them to microstructure properties. The core strategy is based
on exploring atomistic deformation-based mechanisms, "unit processes", that
govern instability and mechanics of semi-crystalline C-S-H. First, by developing
a reactive atomistic modeling framework, the complex deformation mechanisms of
friction and nanoscale surface interactions within the C-S-H will be
investigated. Second, under various chemical and physical environments,
precursors will be identified upon which two or more unit processes propagate
across particle boundaries or within a particle. This will help identify
strategies for "engineering particle boundaries" akin to engineering grain
boundaries in nanocrystalline metallic systems. Third, the fundamentals of
nanoscale interactions will be upscaled to C-S-H microstructure properties using
computational nanoindentation tests on statistically representative volumes of
C-S-H. Regions and directions of defect nucleation and instabilities will be
quantified by a position-sensitive instability criterion. Finally statistical
analysis tools will be employed to study various random configurations and C-S-H
assemblies to identify nanoscale variables that are most influential in
microstructural response.

If successful, the outcomes of this project will significantly impact science
and engineering curricula to better understand the influence of nanoscale
friction and instability in mechanics of complex infrastructure materials. The
research will critically advance the scientific knowledge on cement hydrate and
particulate materials to develop unifying strategies for discovering new
mechanisms and processes that lead to instability, cracking and fracture. This
potentially-transformative approach rooted in inherent, non-intuitive nanoscale
features of materials, can have a broad impact on the design of concrete
infrastructure with improved safety and durability, and will be applicable to
several other fields such as colloidal systems, polymer science, and ceramic-
like materials. The educational plan focuses on recruiting and training
undergraduate and graduate students and outreach to a nearby college in Houston
to involve underrepresented students and stimulate their interest in cutting-
edge materials science and mechanics techniques.