* 1236505
* Hierarchical Adaptive Variable Fidelity Approach for Incompressible Wall-Bounded Turbulent Flow Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Oleg Vasilyev, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

1236505 Vasilyev

Latest advancements in wavelet-based numerical methodologies for the solution of
partial differential equations, combined with the unique properties of wavelet
analysis to unambiguously identify and isolate localized dynamically dominant
flow structures, make it feasible to propose development of intelligent methods
for turbulent flow simulation that tightly integrate numerics and physicsbased
modeling. The overall goal of the research is to develop a robust and
computationally efficient predictive computational approach, capable of
performing variable fidelity numerical simulation of transitional and turbulent
incompressible flows for different flow conditions including turbulent flow
separation, turbulent boundary layers, shear layers, and jets. Spatially
variable wavelet thresholding strategy will be used for model form adaptation.
The wavelet threshold will evolve in space and time using feedback control to
guarantee that only a priori specified fraction of turbulent kinetic energy or
turbulence dissipation rate is resolved. With such a strategy the transition
between adaptive Wavelet-based Direct Numerical Simulation (WDNS), the Coherent
Vortex Simulation (CVS), the Stochastic Coherent Adaptive Large Eddy Simulation
(SCALES), and adaptive Wavelet-based Unsteady Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes
(WURANS) simulations regimes is natural: the WURANS models switch to subgrid
scale model for SCALES to no model for CVS and WDNS approaches as the percentage
of the resolved turbulent kinetic energy or resolved turbulence dissipation rate
increases from 0% to 100%. This will form a basis for the proposed new physics-
based integration of WDNS, CVS, SCALES, and WURANS methodologies. The strength
of the proposed methodology is that all models (WDNS, CVS, SCALES, WURANS) use
the same wavelet based adaptation strategy to resolve and tracks the energy-
containing eddies on the adaptive computational mesh. The approach will be
further enhanced by integrating it with Brinkman penalization to enforce solid
boundaries of arbitrary complexity. A unique advantage of combining the proposed
approach with Brinkman penalization is the ability to enforce boundary
conditions to a specified precision without a significant computational
overhead. The proposed hierarchical variable fidelity approach will be
extensively validated for a number of benchmark problems such as turbulent
channel flow, turbulent flow over backward facing step, turbulent flow in a
planar asymmetric diffuser, and turbulent flow past circular and square
cylinders. The algorithms developed herein specifically address problems of
efficient and affordable numerical simulations of turbulent flows, when
classical methods have failed to yield progress in reliable predictive modeling.
The research will push the envelope of computational capabilities of modeling
multi-scale physics of high Reynolds number turbulent flows and will make
possible the simulations of high Reynolds number turbulent flows, which
currently are difficult or impossible to solve using conventional numerical
algorithms. It is expected that the research will provide insight into the
complex multi-scale physics of turbulent flows, improve our understanding of
fluid turbulence, and even provide engineers with a vital design tool that
completely eliminates the onerous overhead of current grid generation methods.
An additional aim of this project is in education and dissemination of the newly
developed approach and in distribution of the software tools to be developed as
a part of the project for the wide use by the scientific community including
government laboratories. The new integrated eddy capturing approach has
potentially revolutionary impact on all technological endeavors in which
turbulent flow plays an important role. Aeronautics, propulsion, transportation
and energy are just a few potential areas for this. The range of other
applications in free-surface flows, MHD, and nonlinear PDEs in general is
tremendous. High resolution results generated as a part of this project are
expected to be broadly used by the scientific community.