* 1236209
* Collaboration on Oxidative Elimination of Cyanotoxins by Ferrates(VI, V, and IV)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dionysios Dionysiou, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 98,019.00

1236331/1235636/1235803/1236209 Sharma/Westrick/O'Shea/Dionysiou

There is serious concern over the human health impacts of cyanobacteria,
commonly referred to as blue green algae, in drinking water reservoirs
worldwide. Cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (Cyano-HABs) have been especially
problematic in the Great Lakes and Florida Watersheds in recent years. The Great
Lakes contain one-fifth of the world?s freshwater and provide drinking water to
over 24 million Canadian and U.S. citizens. In this region, there are reports of
cyano-HABs events at least at six locations in Lake Ontario, seven locations in
Lake Erie, three locations in Lake Huron, and two locations in Lake Michigan.
Cyanobacteria produce taste and odour compounds but pose a serious environmental
hazard because of the release of potent water soluble toxic compounds, called
cyanotoxins (i.e., hepatotoxins, dermatotoxins, neurotoxins). Microcystins
(MCs), which are hepatotoxic cyclic peptide toxins, are the most widespread
cyanotoxins. As global climate change occurs, cyano-HABs are predicted to
increase in both frequency and toxicity.

The increase in HABs and the negative health effects of MCs have resulted in an
urgent need to identify efficient water treatment methods to eliminate
cyanotoxins from water supplies. Physical methods can be employed to remove MCs
however such methods do not destroy the toxins and the associated treatment
costs are generally prohibitive. Oxidative transformation of cyanotoxins to less
toxic by-products offers an attractive option for treatment of contaminated
water. Conventional oxidative technologies, such as chlorination, UV, and
ozonization are often not cost effective. In addition, the formation of toxic
by-products, including bromate and disinfection by products are major drawbacks.
High-valent iron-based tetra-oxy compounds, ferrates (FeVIO42-, Fe(VI), FeVO43-,
Fe(V) and FeIVO43-, (Fe(IV)) are emerging disinfectants and promising oxidizing
agents for water treatment and can address the concerns associated with the
current treatment technologies. Fe(V) and Fe(IV) are more powerful oxidant than
Fe(VI) and may efficiently treat chlorine resistant microorganisms and toxins.
This research will investigate the degradation of toxins by different ferrates
under natural water conditions without producing toxic byproducts. Additionally,
a novel photocatalyst will be developed which in presence of Fe(VI) under solar
light and visible light irradiation will yield efficient degradation of
cyanotoxins.

The research is expected to provide the fundamental mechanistic understanding
necessary for the development of rational strategies for optimizing the ferrate
process and ferrate-based solar driven photocatalytic process for water
treatment. The collaborative project will make a significant contribution in the
field of water purification using ferrate technologies. The development of cost-
efficient technologies for water purification, especially for small scale
treatment plants as response technologies to the seasonal problems of algal
blooms will have a significant implication in protecting human health.
Additionally, a molecular understanding of the chemistry of ferrate species will
help to elucidate the involvement of high-valent iron species in a number of
critical biological processes, including aging and diseases. The research
activities will promote and foster teaching, mentoring, training and learning
through interactions of a compentent research team composed of undergraduate
students, graduate students, postdocs and the PIs. The PIs will recruit females
and minority students. Outreach activities will provide opportunities to
undergraduate and high school students, including from underrepresented groups,
for training and research in environmental engineering and science, which will
include water monitoring and cyanobacterial identification.