* 1236355
* Low-temperature assembly of all-inorganic solar cells from nanocrystal inks.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Mikhail Zamkov, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 302,512.00

PI: Zamkov, Mikhail&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236355&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Bowling Green State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Low-temperature assembly of all-
inorganic solar cells from nanocrystal inks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of semiconductor thin films from nanocrystal ?inks? is emerging as a
powerful alternative to conventional methods of film deposition relying on high-
vacuum and high-temperature processing of bulk semiconductors. In addition to
the anticipated cost reduction, the integration of solution-processed
nanocrystal (NC) films into device architectures is inspired by the possibility
of tuning the energy of electrical charges in NCs via nanoparticle size. This
opens up an additional degree of freedom for manipulating material?s
optoelectronic properties and controlling charge flow rates at heterostructured
interfaces in solar cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
general strategy for processing of all-inorganic solar cells from solutions of
colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals, using a matrix- encapsulation approach to
yield heteroepitaxial nanocrystal/matrix monoliths, expected to show a bulk-like
electrical conductance and compelling photovoltaic energy conversion in
solution-processed devices. From the fundamental prospective, this work will lay
the necessary groundwork needed for incorporating the unique properties of
matter at nanoscale into bulk-size materials, potentially leading to the
demonstration of new functionalities and properties. From the material
fabrication standpoint, this work will advance the current frontiers of
nanoparticle self-assembly, thus serving as a benchmark study to aid the on-
going research in the area of NC devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, the
appeal of employing semiconductor NC inks for low-temperature (T &lt; 200 Â°C)
fabrication of solar cells is compromised by the instability of surface ligands,
which link neighboring nanocrystals in such devices. To address this issue, the
project will go beyond the traditional ligand-linking scheme and develop a novel
strategy for assembling colloidal semiconductor NCs into all-inorganic solids.
To this end, nanocrystals will be bonded into a surrounding matrix of another
semiconductor material, designed to preserve optoelectronic properties of
individual nanoparticles, while enabling high mobility of electrical charges and
excellent thermal/chemical stability of resulting solids. The distance between
adjacent NCs in the matrix will determine the degree of inter- nanoparticle
electrical coupling and will be used to tune the conductance of the film towards
enhancing the charge transport characteristics. Meanwhile, the use of all-
inorganic matrices will help suppressing the interaction of NCs with external
environment, thus giving rise to improved device stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful development of inorganic nanocrystal films
will result in an alternative, cost-effective architecture of nanocrystal
solids, which will reduce the costs and potentially improve the functionality of
solid state optoelectronics. This innovation can be harnessed in diverse fields,
including solar energy production, photocatalysis, quantum electronics,
environmental science, and semiconductor industry. The educational aspects of
this interdisciplinary proposal will focus on elucidating students through
research activities, mentoring, specialized workshops on nanotechnology, and
graduate curriculum development.