* 1236141
* An accurate, tunable size filter for particles in microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Sascha Hilgenfeldt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 299,945.00

1236141 Hilgenfeldt

In microfluidics, the efficient and reliable sorting of small particles by size
and other properties is a challenge encountered in cell sorting, genetic cell
assays, or lab-on-a-chip devices handling droplets and suspensions. The
objective of the research is to develop a sorting device that is (i) passive,
i.e., it does not rely on active feedback from the particles; (ii) tunable,
i.e., a critical particle size can be selected at will; and (iii) does not
compromise an efficient throughput through the device by introducing obstacles.
The centerpiece of this device is an oscillating microbubble, driven by
ultrasound, which establishes a steady streaming flow field that can be
superimposed with an external flow through the device. By varying flow rate and
ultrasound amplitude, the device is tuned to a critical size of particle: if a
particle's diameter is below this value, it will pass through the device; if it
is above this value, its trajectory will (passively) deflect it off the bubble
to be collected in a secondary flow circuit. No physical constriction is
introduced into the channel, and the particles are separated where the flow is
fastest, not where it is slowest, as in traditional passive sorting devices. The
same device can also be applied to sort particles by deformability, including
macromolecules with conformational changes.

Among laminar flows on the microscale, the proposed bubble streaming flows show
fundamentally novel qualities. They demonstrate the concept of virtual flow
confinement: narrow conduits for cargo-laden fluid are produced that neither
slow the flow down nor lead to excessive shear forces on the cargo. Moreover,
these flows are under quantitative, non- invasive control from easily adjustable
external parameters and show size specificity on scales much smaller than any
scale of soft-lithography manufacturing. Using macromolecules in the set-up
gives new fundamental insight into the dynamics of coiled or stretched
macromolecules (such as DNA) and the transition between coiled and stretched
states.

The broader impact of the work is societal and educational: Crucially important
applications profit from improved-throughput, size-selective microfluidic
particle transport, including cytometry and cell sorting, assays of cell
deformability in diagnostics of cancer and blood diseases, or purification and
enrichment of biomedical samples. The classification and purification of
macromolecules is likewise of enormous importance in biotechnology, in genetic
assays of DNA, or in the efficient production of pure proteins, a major
challenge that at present makes many therapeutic proteins prohibitively
expensive. The interdisciplinary nature of the work will attract undergraduate
students from both bioengineering and engineering science backgrounds, who will
form a research team together with the graduate student on this project,
analyzing experimental data and helping with simulations. This project will be
connected to existing interdisciplinary initiatives at Illinois, such as the new
In3 Innovation Initiative and K-12 outreach, through the development of both
focused research projects for university student teams and demonstration
projects for high-school students.