* 1236053
* Predicting the Nature of the Protein Corona: From Fundamental Modeling to Phenomenological Descriptors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2017
* USD 250,001.00

Abstract

#1236053 Hall, Carol K.

Excitement about the potential of nanotechnology to revolutionize the fields of
electronics, materials, medicine, and energy is tempered by concerns about the
impact of engineered nanomaterials on the environment and on human health. The
small sizes that make nanomaterials so attractive for the creation of new
molecular-scale engineering devices render them highly susceptible to adsorption
by the human body through inhalation, ingestion and skin penetration. Previous
studies suggest that toxicity is related to the physicochemical properties of
nanoparticles such as size, shape, surface area, charge, agglomeration status,
and hydrophobicity but no general trends have been established. Our research is
based on the current thinking that a key step in the body's response to
nanoparticle intrusion is the formation of the protein corona, an envelope
surrounding the nanoparticle containing proteins adsorbed from the biological
fluid following initial exposure. The long term goal of the proposed research is
to develop a correlation tool capable of predicting the nature and composition
of the protein corona on engineered nanomaterials. This research is intended to
be the first step in the development of risk assessment models for
nanoparticles. Subsequent steps will be done with collaborators who plan to use
the correlation to help predict the in vivo disposition (ADME) of nanomaterials,
develop physiologically- based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models and ultimately
create risk assessment model.

Intellectual Merit: The objectives are: (1) to predict which proteins in
biological fluids adhere to specific engineered nanomaterials, (2) to provide a
set of descriptors that characterize the composition and physico-chemical
properties of the corona of a given engineered nanomaterial, and (3) to use
these tools to rank order the affinities of proteins for specific nanoparticles.
Multiscale modeling will be used to determine geometric and energetic parameters
for a new intermediate-resolution model, "PRIME/NP" for protein/nanoparticle
systems. Energy calculations based on PRIME/NP will be used to predict
nanoparticle/protein affinities, and discontinuous molecular dynamics (DMD)
simulations will be used to model competitive adsorption of proteins on
nanoparticles.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research could impact research in the area of
biomaterials where the biocompatibility of medical implants is an issue. In
addition to training a (female) Ph.D student, research and education will be
fostered by: (1) using nanoparticle-protein corona formation, its relation to
the potential toxicity of engineered nanomaterials, and the response to this
issue by government and society as the basis for examples developed for the PI's
undergraduate chemical engineering thermodynamics course, (2) creating a power-
point presentation describing the basics of nanotechnology and measurement of
toxicity for dissemination via the web, and (3) making a video presentation
targeted for general audiences that shows how molecular-level computer
simulation can be used to understand nanoparticle toxicity The PI will continue
her considerable but informal activities to broaden the opportunities for women
and will introduce a brown bag lunch series for women graduate students and
postdocs in her department at NCSU.