* 1236606
* Creating Tunable Adaptive Boiling Heat Transfer Surfaces with Electrowetting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Ruchhoeft, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,997.00

CBET-1236606&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dong Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal energy
transport is a critical aspect in a myriad of industrial processes involving
power generation and energy transmission. Nucleate boiling has been employed for
decades as an effective means of transferring large amount of thermal energy.
Thus, if nucleate boiling heat transfer can be better controlled and enhanced,
energy efficiency of these processes will be improved significantly. There are
two primary goals of nucleate boiling heat transfer enhancement technologies: 1)
to maximize heat transfer per unit temperature rise in the heated surface, and
2) to increase the upper limit of nucleate boiling heat transfer, also known as
the critical heat flux, at which the surface is blanketed with dry vapor and
catastrophic burnout may occur. The prevailing enhancement methods are based on
chemically or topographically structuring the boiling surface. However, the main
disadvantage of such surface structures is their static nature, which prevents
active control of the spatiotemporally dynamic boiling process. Consequently,
the available thermal performance of nucleate boiling is far below its enormous
potentials. This project will explore a new venue to enhance nucleate boiling
heat transfer by creating tunable adaptive boiling surfaces with the aid of
electrowetting. It capitalizes on the complimentary roles of hydrophobicity and
hydrophilicity played in nucleate boiling, and takes advantage of the ability of
electrowetting to alter the surface wettability reversibly and robustly. This
research will elucidate the effects of electrowetting-modulated reversible
surface wetting on nucleate boiling as well as demonstrate the efficient and
low-cost manufacturing of such tunable adaptive boiling heat transfer surfaces.
By exploiting electrowetting, this work will provide a previously unexplored and
powerful tool to actively control and optimize the key nucleate boiling
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing nucleate boiling heat transfer will
improve the efficiency and reduce the size and cost of various energy systems.
This project will provide a transformative approach to conquer the performance-
limiting obstacles in nucleate boiling heat transfer technologies. Thus, it will
have far-reaching impacts on industries that rely on nucleate boiling as the
primary means of heat transfer. The design and fabrication techniques developed
in this work will lay the foundation toward economical large-scale production of
functional surfaces for boiling heat transfer applications. An integrated
research and education program will be established at University of Houston,
which is one of the most ethnically diverse research universities in the nation.
The program will create new career opportunities for underrepresented groups by
actively recruiting qualified minority and female students as
undergraduate/graduate research assistants. The educational outreach activities
will provide scientific training and laboratory experiences to K-12 teachers and
students.