* 1236052
* Collaborative Research: Exploration of Near-Field Thermophotovoltaic Energy Conversion for Efficient Thermal Energy Recycling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sung Cho, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

CBET-1236239/1236052&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Park/Cho &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
thermophotovoltaic (TPV) system is a promising energy conversion device that
generates the electric power from the infrared thermal radiation. However, its
low power throughput and poor conversion efficiency restricts the usage in
practical applications. One solution for resolving these issues is to utilize
near-field thermal radiation, which can exceed the blackbody thermal radiation
by several orders of magnitude. However, due to difficulties in maintaining the
parallel nanoscale gap between the emitter and the receiver, experimental
investigations of near-field thermal radiation have been limited to simple
spherical or point-like emitter geometries. This proposal thus aims to
experimentally investigate near-field thermal radiation between planar
structures within a submicron vacuum gap and its contribution to the near-field
TPV energy conversion. The innovative aspects of the proposed research are (1)
to microfabricate a suspended thermal emitter (heater) to achieve a uniform
temperature and minimize conduction heat loss; (2) to vacuum-package the
microheater with a diaphragm to allow thermal radiation as the only heat
transfer mechanism between the heater and the diaphragm; and (3) to precisely
control the vacuum gap between the heater and the diaphragm by changing the
diaphragm curvature with the external pressure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide the quantitative measurement of the near-field radiative
heat transfer between two parallel plates at vacuum gap distances of a few
hundred nanometers. In addition, the advantage of near-field TPV energy
conversion device will be systematically examined, which also will provide the
measurements of the power throughput and conversion efficiency of the near-field
TPV device. The theoretical aspect of this research will improve our fundamental
understanding of near-field interactions between thermally emitted
electromagnetic waves and nanostructures via surface plasmon resonance,
scattering, diffraction, and photon localization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of the proposed research will enhance scientific and technological
understanding of the nanoscale TPV energy conversion while promoting teaching,
training, and learning. The PIs will put forth considerable efforts to involve
graduate and undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented
group, in cutting-edge nanotechnology research. They will gain hands-on
experiences in micro/nanofabrication, thermal and electrical characterization of
micro/nanodevices, and near-field radiative heat transfer measurements. The
outcome of the proposed research will be incorporated into courses, such as
Micro/Nanoscale Energy Transport at URI, and disseminated to the public through
Thermal-Fluids Central (http://www.thermalfluidscentral.org) and technical
journals.