* 1236738
* Turning Tars into Energy: Zeolites with Hierarchical Pore Structure for the Catalytic Cracking of Tars
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Georgios Bollas, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 188,698.00

PI: Valla, Ioulia&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236738&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;Title: Turning Tars into Energy: Zeolites
with Hierarchical Pore Structure for the Catalytic Cracking of
Tars&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at conversion of waste tars
compounds in synthesis gas derived from biomass gasification, into valuable
gases using one step catalytic process. The importance of this research is
driven by three significant factors: (a) the detrimental effect of tars in
downstream gasification processes, (b) the carginogenic nature of tars (multi-
ring aromatic hydrocarbons), which makes their disposal impossible and (c) the
potential to increase the efficiency of the overall biomass gasification process
by transforming byproducts to valuable products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
objective this research is to test the hypothesis that zeolite-based materials
with hierarchical pore network architecture will eliminate the diffusion
limitations of the heavy multi-ring aromatic compounds hydrocarbons present in
tars and will accommodate their cracking. Moreover, they will provide the open
framework structure for the incorporation of transition metals, which will
enhance the reforming reactions of the produced lighter hydrocarbons to
synthesis gas.This project will focus on the synthesis, characterization and
evaluation of various microporous-mesoporous zeolites with pore network and
metal active sites that will enhance the cracking and reforming of heavy
aromatic hydrocarbons to synthesis gas. Two types of zeolite precursors with
different acidity, crystal size and Si/Al ratios will be modified. Mesoporosity
will be introduced in the zeolites by employing controlled desilication pathways
and surfactant assisted method. Various transition metals will be incorporated
in the micro/mesoporous surface of the zeolites using wet impregnation method.
The effectiveness of the modified zeolites to crack and subsequently reform the
tars into valuable synthesis gas will be evaluated in laboratory-scale fixed bed
reactor. Model compounds will be used to simulate the complex mixture of the
tars. Advanced materials characterization and liquid and gas analysis techniques
will be used to gain fundamental understanding of the cracking and reforming
reaction mechanism of tars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI?s hypothesis lies on the
idea that utilizing the advantages of zeolites with hierarchical porosity and
transition metals would be ideal and would create great potential for
transforming the unwanted tars to valuable energy. Thus, this research will make
fundamental contributions via: (a) the discovery and the advanced
characterization of hierarchical pore zeolite-based materials for the effective
cracking of heavy hydrocarbons present in tars; (b) the identification of
effective transition metals for the reforming of light hydrocarbons to synthesis
gas; and c) the understanding of the nature and the reactivity of multi-ring
aromatic hydrocarbons present in tars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
technological impact on the biofuel industry, this project will also have
educational impact: a) it will contribute to the education of both undergraduate
and graduate students; b) it will bring high school students during the summer
for a one-week-long introduction to engineering technologies through the NSF RET
program; and c) it will attract and give the opportunity to teachers from
districts with financial challenges to elevate their professional carrier and to
stimulate their post-elementary students to pursue an engineering education in
college through the NSF Joule Fellow and da Vinci programs.