* 1236681
* Large Scale Dynamics and Statistics of California Extreme Weather in the Atmosphere and in Global Models
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Richard Grotjahn, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 603,845.00

This project will focus on two types of extreme weather events that affect the
California Central Valley, viz extreme hot spells, and cold air outbreaks. Both
these extreme weather events is associated with very prominent and highly
significant patterns of weather variables in the atmosphere. This project will
undertake diagnostic analysis of extreme weather events. The diagnostic tools
will also be applied to simulations of historical climate by several climate
models to assess how well those models simulate large-scale meteorological
patterns and evaluate how well each model captures the dynamics needed to create
the large-scale meteorological patterns. Simulations of future climate will be
analyzed and recalibrated, based on the performance of each model in simulating
historical climate, so as to estimate how the properties of each extreme weather
event might change in the future

Extreme weather events are of great interest to the agricultural community, to
public utilities and their associated regulatory agencies, and to the public in
general. Results from this work will be communicated to farmers through the
agricultural extension service and various agricultural periodicals. Results
will also be shared with the California Energy Commission and with the
EnvironMentors chapter, a national program to involve and excite
underrepresented youth in environmental studies. Thus the broader impacts of
this project are substantial.