* 1236107
* GOALI: Unipolar Diffusion Charging of Spherical and Agglomerated Nanoparticles and its Application toward Surface-area Measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* David Y.H. Pui, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,001.00

CBET-1236107&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important properties of nanoparticles are
related to their extremely high surface to volume ratios, including catalytic
activity, bioavailability, health effects, and reactivity in the environment.
This project studies the fundamental unipolar charging mechanics of
nanoparticles and their agglomerates/aggregates. By combining unipolar charging
and electrostatic deposition to develop an instrument, it will enable online
measurement of the geometric surface area of airborne nanoparticles with various
morphologies. Thus far it is only possible to measure the so-called Fuchs or BET
surface area, which do not provide information about the geometric surface area
of airborne particles.&lt;br/&gt;The research will perform fundamental studies
on diffusion charging mechanisms. Investigated particle sizes will be from
several hundred nanometers down to below 20 nm for spheres, and below 80 nm for
agglomerates and aggregates. Charging rates between the loose agglomerates and
partially sintered aggregates will be determined experimentally and
theoretically. Instrument developmental effort will be performed at both UMN and
TSI laboratories, which will involve: (1) offline determination of the surface
area of the agglomerates and aggregates, (2) investigation of the combination of
charging and electrostatic deposition for the measurement of particle surface
area, which will incorporate the Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP) developed by
our German collaborators, and (3) overall response of the charger, ion trap and
ESP for agglomerates and aggregates. The charge distributions and electrostatic
deposition efficiencies of agglomerates are different from those of spheres. Our
study will elucidate principal dependencies of charging and electrostatic
deposition on particle morphology.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This proposed study will advance understanding of the effects
of particle morphology on unipolar charging and electrostatic deposition of
nanoparticles. This will help to develop a method for online measurements of
total geometric surface area of spherical and agglomerated nanoparticles. Such a
method can have a wide range of applications since fast and online nanoparticle
surface area measurement is desirable in process control of nanoparticle
manufacturing, in dosage determination for nanoparticle toxicity studies, in
exposure measurement and many other applications. It will play an important role
in studying environmental, health and safety (Nano-EHS) implications of
engineered nanoparticles. The Nano-EHS issues will be prominent in society and
is the theme of the just released NRC Report on Research Strategy for
Environmental, Health, and Safety Aspects of Engineered Nanomaterials (2012).
David Pui serves on the Advisory Board of two EU Nano-EHS programs: SCAFFOLD and
NANODEVICE. Last year, he served on the Advisory Board of the 5th International
Symposium on Nanotechnology, Occupational and Environmental Health, and was a
panelist of the Roundtable Discussion on Assessment of Nanoparticle Exposure in
Occupational Settings at the Society of Toxicology Annual Meeting. During the
past two years, he presented seven plenary lectures at various international
symposia on the Nano-EHS topic. Results obtained from this research project will
be disseminated through these outreach channels. We also plan to integrate the
knowledge into our teaching activities. For example, David Pui is involved in
the teaching of a joint public affairs, law and bioethics course on
Nanotechnology and Society (PA 8790/Law 6037/BTHX 8000 course at the University
of Minnesota).