* 1236393
* Collaborative Research:  Virus removal in membrane bioreactors:  Role of virus aggregation and adhesion
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Volodymyr Tarabara, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 230,573.00

1236672/1236393&lt;br/&gt;Nguyen/Tarabara &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerobic membrane
bioreactors (MBRs) have become a state-of-the-art technology for municipal and
industrial wastewater treatment. Compared to traditional activated sludge
reactors, advantages of MBR include smaller footprint and better effluent
quality. MBRs have become a particularly attractive treatment choice for water
reuse. In reuse applications or when the effluent is released to sensitive water
bodies such as recreational water, it is especially important that viral
pathogens are removed so that public health is not threatened. Comprehensive
studies of virus fate in MBRs are currently lacking yet required for wider
application of MBR technology, including decentralized water reuse with variable
influent quality. The PIs will systematically investigate the role of virus
adhesion and aggregation on virus removal in MBRs. The central hypothesis is
that the extent of virus adhesion to extracellular polymeric substances (EPS)
and soluble microbial products (SMP) counter-correlates with virus passage
through the membrane. The experimental plan consists of the following tasks: (1)
conduct bench-scale aerobic MBR studies with flat sheet and hollow fiber
membranes of varied pore size; in a subset of tests operating conditions will
mimic those used in the CH2M Hill full-scale MBR facility in Traverse City, MI,
(2) characterize SMP, EPS, and membrane biofilm harvested from the bench-scale
MBR system and the full-scale MBR plant, (3) quantify virus aggregation and
adhesion to fouled membranes using SMP and EPS characterized in Task 2, (4)
correlate adhesion and aggregation with the removal of virus by fouled membranes
at different stages of biofilm development, and (5) evaluate virus removal in
MBRs using cell culture-dependent methods and quantitative PCR. Adenovirus is
selected as target virus for this study. The findings will have the potential
for transforming MBR design criteria particularly as they pertain to membrane
selection. While MBR-based treatment relies on the membrane to ensure an
appropriate separation barrier, virus removal has not been a criterion in
designing MBRs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As our technological, economic and social
attitudes and approaches toward water shift from the unidirectional resource-to-
waste approach toward the concept of sustainable reuse, stricter control over
microbiological quality of treated used water becomes a question of when rather
than if. With this in mind, we see the practical end of the research we propose
in informing the decision-making process required for the development of water
reuse policies and regulations of the near future. Successful completion of this
project will provide scientific basis for re-conceptualizing MBR design and
operation to accommodate virus removal as one of design criteria and treatment
goals. The project brings together a diverse team of PIs with a complimentary
set of skills including interfacial science, membrane processes, and
environmental microbiology and an industrial partner representing a full-scale
MBR facility. A group of graduate and undergraduate students co-advised by all
PIs will be provided a range of learning opportunities in an environment that
combines academic studies, laboratory research in collaboration with the
industrial sector, and international work. The PIs will organize annual mini-
symposia - at UIUC (year 1), MSU (year 2), and at the Traverse City MBR facility
(year 3) where project participants will present their findings, discuss future
research and receive feedback from the industrial partner.