* 1236931
* Attention Networks and Cognitive Challenges:   Positional Advantages in Complex and Distant Search
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* David Stark, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,368.00

Network theory has provided novel concepts and analytical tools for
understanding how actors can leverage privileged access to others' expertise to
make sound decisions. But to date it has focused on the social ties that
comprise social communities. By identifying communities through network patterns
of attention, instead of through patterns of direct soical network linkages,
this project will identify cognitive communities, thereby reorienting network
analysis from its traditional focus on social ties. To do so, a dataset will be
constructed on the stock market coverage of more than 19,000 analysts for more
than 16,000 companies listed on the major US stock exchange markets, during the
period 1983-2011.

Intial hypotheses will be examined on how members of a relatively closed
cognitive community performs in solving complex but local problems, how actors
spanning structural holes perform solving less complex but more distant
problems, and how actors occupying a structural fold of overlapping cohesive
communities peform in solveing the most complex distant problems.

This work will shed light on how attention allocation in markets affects
cognition and how the social distribution of attention gives an edge to some
actors. Because the reports of analysts are a key ingredient in the trading
decisions of market actors, this analysis will provide new lenses to understand
how abnormal fluctuations in market prices originate, and ultimately lead to
financial bubbles.