* 1236378
* Connecting Glassy Dynamics to Micro-Scale Elasticity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* David Pine, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

1236378 PI: Wyart

Particulate materials, such as suspensions or granular matter, are the most
commonly used materials in industry after water. However, explaining their
rheological properties remains a challenge. These systems are complicated by the
presence of disorder as well as by structural and dynamical heterogeneities,
often on multiple length scales. At high densities, such a granular fluid
undergoes a jamming or glass transition where the dynamics stop. In recent years
there has been a considerable effort to characterize this transition, and it has
been realized that dynamical heterogeneities play a key role. However, there is
no consensus concerning what causes such heterogeneities. This project will
develop a novel method to measure the micro-scale elasticity of amorphous
materials. This approach will be used both experimentally and numerically to
characterize the disorder and heterogeneities of amorphous solids, and to
investigate the jamming transition by which they are formed. The method consists
of introducing probe particles of controlled shapes and sizes. Thermal noise
causes the probe particles to rotate on a time scale governed by the elasticity
of their local environment, and by their shape and size. Measuring the
rotational dynamics of the probe by means of confocal microscopy, light
scattering, or numerically in simulations will give access to local elastic
properties. The range of time scales and length scales can be tuned by
controlling the shape and size of the probes. This method will be employed in
colloidal suspensions, both experimentally and numerically, to measure the
evolution of elasticity and its spatial heterogeneities as the concentration of
colloids is increased, and to test fundamental theories of the glass transition.

This project will create an experimental method to probe the microscopic
properties of disordered granular materials, the most commonly used materials in
industry after water. This method will address questions of fundamental and
practical importance in the fields of particle flow, biophysics, soil mechanics,
and material science. Insights gained from this study will help improve the
design of glassy materials and advance our understanding of clogging or jamming,
which are of important for multi-phase flows relevant to the oil industry and
potentially for the lethal vaso-occlusive eventt?clogging?occurring in sickle
cell disease. In addition to these applications, the subject matter of this
project lends itself to educational and community outreach activities.