* 1236660
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of Decentralized Harvested Rainwater Systems using the Urban Water Infrastructure Sustainability Evaluation (uWISE) Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Defne Apul, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 243,913.00

1236660 (Apul). The current urban water infrastructure in the U.S. is in failing
condition, energy intensive, largely underfunded, and being over-extended by
urban sprawl. There is an urgent need to chart an effective pathway to future
sustainable water infrastructure that integrates the understanding and
interactions of water supply, sanitation, and stormwater management and
implications of these practices on sustainability metrics. This project
envisions that decentralization of water infrastructure will play an important
role in creating such future sustainable and resilient urban environments.
Decentralized rainwater harvesting (RWH) systems are the focus of this project.
Their use in toilet flushing has great potential to not only reduce the demand
on potable water supply but also reduce stormwater runoff volumes. In addition,
the technology is mature and fairly easy to implement in new development and in
existing building stock. Thus, RWH is positioned as a feasible and promising
first step towards a decentralized urban water management paradigm. This project
will develop a new and extensible sustainability modeling and analysis
framework, called Urban Water Infrastructure Sustainability Evaluation (uWISE).
The uWISE framework will be applied to analyze water infrastructure
configurations where harvested rainwater is used to flush toilets and compare it
to the centralized urban water infrastructure alternative in terms of a robust
set of sustainability metrics. The uWISE framework couples dynamic urban
watershed modeling with life cycle assessment at both building and watershed
scales with extensibility in mind. Another aspect of this project is its
development of the ?desired value analysis? approach, which uses Bayesian
statistics to determine the system design parameter space necessary for creating
sustainable outcomes. Through involvement in cross-institution research
activities, two PhD students will be trained, one of which will gain first-hand
experience in curriculum development and college teaching. Research results will
be integrated in University of Toledo and University of Utah civil engineering
courses. A collaborative distance learning environment will be used to offer a
new graduate course in Sustainable Urban Water Infrastructure, in which students
from the two universities will work together in completing an integrated
infrastructure sustainability project using uWISE and other project results.
Research results will be shared with local stakeholders using our existing
collaborations within Northwest Ohio and Utah. Results will also be outreached
nationally using peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, and via
ASCE, ISI, and USGBC. Specifically, incorporation of project outcomes to enhance
the LEED building rating system and the Sustainable Infrastructure (ISI)
EnvisionTM rating system will be pursued.