* 1236040
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of the Microbiome Aerosolized in Shower Units
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Kerry Kinney, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/28/2017
* USD 202,204.00

1236040/1236104&lt;br/&gt;Kinney/King &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide variety of
microorganisms have been detected in household tap water and the potential
exists for these microbes to be released into the air during showering
activities. While bacterial levels in drinking water systems are routinely
monitored, the fungi present in these systems are not. Nevertheless, a wide
range of fungi are present in the tap water reaching homeowners. Aerosolization
of fungi from contaminated water during showering has been implicated as one
source of fungal infections in immune-compromised individuals. More broadly,
mold exposure in homes is associated with asthma exacerbation and allergies yet
our daily exposure to fungal aerosols during showering remains unstudied. The
overall objective of the project is to identify the fungi present in residential
shower units to investigate the hypothesis that showering releases fungal
bioaerosols and to identify the presence of potential human allergens and
pathogens. The study will utilize state-of-the-art wetted wall cyclone (WWC)
bioaerosol sampling and sequencing methods to identify the fungi released from
residential shower units on two different municipal water supplies over two
seasons (summer and winter). Potential sources of the fungi detected in the
shower air will be investigated by collecting additional samples from the
showerhead as well as the shower water. Finally, several factors potentially
affecting fungal release into the air (e.g., water temperature and flow rate,
shower head design, cleaning) will be investigated systematically in an
experimental shower unit to allow manipulation of the key variables and to
conduct longer term sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential risk
associated with human exposure to fungi during showering is not well understood
even though it is known that fungi are present in tap water reaching households
in the United States and elsewhere. Exposure to fungi has the potential to cause
infections for immune-compromised individuals and to exacerbate asthma and
allergy symptoms in sensitive individuals. This study will characterize and
quantify the fungi released into the air during showering and lay the foundation
for assessing the associated human health risks. The project will include a
number of outreach activities to increase societal awareness of bioaerosols and
their environmental impacts. These activities will include hosting seminars and
open lab access to high school students, teachers and the general public as well
as water system and medical representatives. The results of the research will be
disseminated to the immune-compromised community since they are the segment of
the population at greatest risk. In addition, the multidisciplinary nature of
this work will be leveraged to provide new research experiences that expose both
graduate and undergraduate students to the field of bioaerosols via the
Graduates Linked to Undergraduate Engineers (GLUE) mentoring program at UT and
the BIOTECH 685 graduate course at TAMU.