* 1236083
* Determination of uptake and elimination rates for isotopically enriched ZnO nanoparticles by Eisenia Fetida and the potential for trophic transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Steven Lev, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 130,970.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1236083&lt;br/&gt;Lev,
Steven&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The use of engineered metal
nanoparticles (NP) in consumer products such as washing machines and cosmetic
products is becoming widespread. As an example, ZnO NPs have the ability to
absorb ultraviolet (UV) light when below the size of 100 nm, and are commonly
found in sunscreens. Considered to be the richest family of nanostructures, ZnO
NPs are also used as rubber additives, pigments, and in photoelectrodes.
Environmental exposure to nanoparticles is not a new concept and organisms have
adapted to natural exposures; the concern lies with the recent influx of
manufactured nanoparticles that may have a detrimental effect on the
environment. With the majority of NPs being released to the environment through
municipal waste water and sewage sludge mediums, aquatic and terrestrial systems
are a likely sink for manufactured nanoparticles. The fates of these
nanoparticles once released into the environment and the potential for transfer
of NPs to organisms higher in the food web (e.g. birds and small mammals) are
open questions. This investigation will utilize nanoparticles with a chemical
fingerprint to track the fate of NPs in soil and the potential for uptake and
transfer to higher-level organisms using the earthworm Eisenia fetida.
Earthworms are in constant direct contact with soils and are an important
potential entry point into the terrestrial food web where bioaccumulation of NPs
can occur in higher-level organisms. The fingerprinted NPs in this study will be
readily discernibly from other sources of Zn in the soil and the earthworm. The
behavior of the fingerprinted NPs in a soil system will be compared with other
non-nano forms of Zn (bulk ZnO powder and ZnCl2) over time to evaluate the
impact of soil ageing on the bioavailability of the different Zn forms. This
general approach will be used to test the following hypotheses; 1) There will be
no difference in the uptake or elimination of Zn by E. fetida among all three
forms of Zn, indicating that zinc NPs are easily eliminated by E. fetida and
there is no potential for transfer via earthworms to the terrestrial food web
and, 2) There will be no difference in the uptake or elimination of Zn by E.
fetida among the three zinc treatments after 42 days of ageing and that these
treatments will not differ from the initial
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An understanding of
nanoparticles' fate in soil systems and their impact on the wider environment,
which ultimately impacts the quality of our lives, is of prime interest to our
society. There is a critical need for scientists trained to understand these
types of emerging systems. This project will provide educational opportunities
at all levels. Minority students with an interest in working on this project
will be identified and recruited through an active NSF STEP program "Towson
Opportunities in STEM" (TOPS). All involved students will work as part of a
multi-disciplinary research team over the course of the project. Results from
this investigation will be disseminated by students at the Towson University
Research Expo, at appropriate professional conferences as well as through the
peer-reviewed literature.