* 1236508
* Consumer Exposure to Airborne Nanoparticles Released from Nanotechnology-Enabled Clothing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Gediminas Mainelis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,773.00

1236508&lt;br/&gt;Mainelis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of nanotechnology-
enabled clothing may lead to the release of nanomaterials and their agglomerates
resulting in inhalatory consumer exposures. Given an ever-increasing number of
consumer products incorporating engineered nanomaterials there is a growing
concern regarding the release and human exposure to nanoparticles and associated
adverse health effects. However, the data on the nanoparticle release from the
consumer products and associated exposures are very limited. The exposure route
depends on the product type and the use of many products may result in exposures
via multiple routes, including inhalation. This study will focus on inhalatory
exposures of one product category which has not been explored yet --
nanotechnology-enabled clothing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
Airborne nanoparticles and their agglomerates released from nanotechnology-
enabled clothing, and the quantification of the resultant consumer exposures and
challenge to the human respiratory system is an important topic in nano
environment health and safety studies. Under realistic exposure scenarios the
investigators will test whether the inhalatory exposures and the resultant
respiratory deposition of airborne nanoparticles due to the use of
nanotechnology-enabled clothing are more pronounced compared to products that do
not use nanotechnology; whether the release of nanoparticles intensifies as the
products undergo "wear and tear" over time; and what are the overall emissions
of such particles. Overall, the study will provide exposure data for
toxicological and epidemiological studies, and risk assessment.&lt;br/&gt;In a
controlled test environment, by using robotic mannequins, the researchers will
realistically simulate walking and running with nanotechnology-enabled clothing
as well as handling of the clothing and will quantify the total emissions and
potential inhalation of released nanoparticles in terms of inhaled and lung-
deposited particle size, concentration, surface area,volume and mass. The size,
shape, composition, density, and agglomeration of nanoparticles in the product
matrix and in the airborne state will be analyzed using scanning and
transmission electron microscopy, atomic emissions spectrometry and X-ray
fluorescence spectroscopy. The deposition of the released particles in the
respiratory system will be estimated by using the determined particle
characteristics and established lung deposition
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: These will include new information
about the potential personal and environmental burden due to the use of
nanotechnology-enabled consumer products. Due to the ubiquitous availability of
nanotechnology-enabled clothing, the study results will apply to a large segment
of the population. The obtained exposure data will be used to estimate the
short-term and long-term risks associated with the use of nanotechnology-enabled
clothing. The data from this study will serve as a scientific basis for
developing cytotoxicity and health studies that address health risks associated
with the prevalence and use of nanotechnology-enabled consumer products. The
project will train a graduate student in an exciting field of exposure
assessment and measurement of nanoparticles. The project will also provide
funding for an undergraduate student to perform research on nanoparticle
exposures. The PI and co-PI will conduct outreach to the public on Rutgers Day,
a University-wide open house that provides hands-on projects and demonstrations
to the Rutgers' visitors, faculty and students. The project findings will be
disseminated through the national and international conferences, peer-reviewed
manuscripts, Rutgers Today news service, and the Rutgers University YouTube
channel.