* 1236120
* Solving a Sticky Problem: Understanding Enzyme Binding to Lignocellulosic Biomass during Biofuel Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Tim Whitehead, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2016
* USD 314,484.00

PI: Whitehead, Tim&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236120&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Solving a Sticky Problem:
Understanding Enzyme Binding to Lignocellulosic Biomass during Biofuel
Production&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological-mediated conversion of cellulosic
biomass to useful fuels and chemicals is a promising avenue towards energy
sustainability. A critical impediment for this avenue is the cost of the
cellulase enzymes needed to deconstruct biomass to fermentable sugars. At the
current cellulase-to-substrate loading the cost per gallon of fuel produced from
lignocellulose would still be at least an order of magnitude higher than the
enzymes required to degrade starch, even if the enzymes could be produced as
cheaply as soy protein. One strategy to reduce enzyme requirements is to recycle
the cellulases in a continuous process, but enzyme inactivation during biomass
saccharification severely limits this approach. PI?s recent findings show that
enzyme inactivation occurs through non-productive interactions with residual
lignin (i.e. the cellulases adsorb to hydrophobic lignin surfaces hastening
their denaturation) for most pretreatment chemistries and biomass
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI hypothesizes that minimizing the potential
of mean force between the cellulases and lignin polymer will reduce surface
adsorption between the two, hence minimizing enzyme inactivation. Thus, the
primary objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that selective
variation of cellulase surface chemistry can decrease lignin-mediated
inactivation due to reduced protein surface adsorption to lignin. The hypothesis
will be tested by using computational protein design to identify mutations that
result in different enzyme surface potentials predicted to minimize enzyme-
lignin adsorption, and then genetically program these mutations in two
representative cellulases from the workhorse microbe Trichoderma reesei. A large
number (ca. 1000) of cellulase variants will be recombinantly expressed and
screened for solubility and activity on cellulosic substrates. Surviving
variants will be tested for retention of structure, solubility, and stability.
Adsorption isotherms will be recorded for the variants for natural and synthetic
lignin of varying surface chemistry and microstructure. The PI will test this
hypothesis for cellulase catalytic domains, carbohydrate binding modules, and
the full-length cellulases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
fundamental quantitative understanding of protein-surface adsorption effects
with significant implications for commercial-scale bioenergy production using
lignocellulosic biomass. More generally, this work will supply datasets for
identifying critical parameters governing enzyme-surface interactions crucial
for disparate applications such as separations of single wall carbon nanotubes,
laundry detergents, biomaterials for medical uses and immobilized
biocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage students from K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels from various interdisciplinary programs and
under-represented groups to broaden their understanding of the role of
industrial biotechnology in mitigating bioenergy related problems in an
environmentally sustainable manner. The project will utilize the established
outreach educational programs at the Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center to
create bioenergy-relevant educational materials for science teachers within the
greater mid-Michigan school community.