* 1236373
* Adaptive Hotspot Cooling with Self-Propelled Jumping Condensate
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Chuan-Hua Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

CBET-1236373&lt;br/&gt;Chuan-Hua Chen&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile hotspots are prevalent in electronic
systems, including microprocessors and power electronics with constantly
changing computing tasks and external payloads. Existing cooling solutions are
generally designed for fixed hotspots (e.g. thermoelectric coolers) or slowly
varying heat loads (e.g. flat plate heat pipes), and are therefore not adequate
to address the cooling challenges of moving hotspots. This study aims at
developing a novel phase-change cooling mechanism for adaptive thermal
management of hotspots, where the self-propelled jumping of dropwise condensate
on superhydrophobic surfaces is utilized to promote liquid return to the
evaporator. The cooling system consists of water/vapor enclosed by two closely
spaced parallel plates, a superhydrophilic evaporator and a superhydrophobic
condenser. The hotspots on the evaporator drive the working fluid to vaporize
and then condense on the opposing plate. When multiple condensate drops coalesce
together, the released surface energy propels the merged drop to jump
perpendicularly back to the hotspots, completing the liquid return and
sustaining the phase change process. The adaptive cooling is accomplished by the
preferential evaporation of the working fluid at the hotspots and the rapid
jumping return across the very short inter-plate distance. The jumping-
condensate approach offers a unique combination of hotspot cooling capabilities:
(i) rapid response to moving hotspots; (ii) adaptive cooling for minimal thermal
gradients; and (iii) passive cooling independent of external forces. Through
integrated experimental and numerical investigations that are guided by simple
scaling laws, the self-propelled jumping condensate will be studied in the
context of adaptive hotspot cooling. In terms of interfacial transport
phenomena, the project is expected to yield physical insights to surface-energy-
powered jumping processes, which are widely observed in nature and potentially
useful for improving industrial condensers. In terms of thermal transport
processes, the project offers a fundamentally new mechanism for condensate
return in phase change systems and a novel approach for adaptive thermal
management of moving hotspots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is potentially
transformative in enabling the thermal management of mobile hotspots which
bottleneck the performance of state-of-the-art microprocessors and power
electronics. The proposed research is also applicable to the promotion of self-
sustained dropwise condensation, particularly for applications where favorable
external forces may not exist (e.g. spacecraft cooling), and the development of
biomimetic materials and systems harvesting interfacial energy (e.g. anti-dew
materials). In addition to training graduate students and attracting minority
undergraduates to STEM research, the project will strive to outreach to K-12
students and the general public. Through the PI?s ongoing CAREER program, a high
school teacher will continue to translate cutting-edge research in the PI?s lab
into refereed curricular units published at teachengienering.org. When
appropriate, this project will also leverage the PI?s past successes with major
media outlets such as the Discovery Channel to disseminate the research
findings.