* 1236846
* Investigation of mass and heat transport and sustainability of the novel  thermally driven membrane distillation crystallization process
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Tzahi Cath, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2016
* USD 222,782.00

1236846&lt;br/&gt;Cath&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When considering one of the more
popular desalination processes, reverse osmosis, practical water recovery in
seawater desalination is hydraulically limited to approximately 60 percent, and
in brackish water desalination, recovery is limited to approximately 80 percent
by mineral scale formation. Restricted water recovery and increasing energy
demand at higher recoveries might limit further improvement of currently used
membrane desalination technologies. Distillation processes, and specifically
membrane processes that utilize vapor pressure as a driving force, are not
limited by the osmotic pressure of feed or brine streams, and might be a
solution to overcome the limitations of current desalination
processes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Thus, the main objective of this research is to
comprehensively investigate heat and mass transport in novel membrane
distillation crystallization processes in which water is sustainably desalinated
from supersaturated feed solutions and minerals can be simultaneously recovered
for beneficial use.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on measuring the
rates of formation, size distribution, adhesion to membranes, and
removal/harvesting of mineral crystals that form during desalination of water
containing sparingly soluble salts. It also investigates the effects of
operating conditions and environments on the sustainable production of purified
water and minerals using the membrane distillation crystallization process.
Controlled laboratory experiments will be carried out in which a rigorous
scientific approach will be applied to identify, characterize, and quantify the
individual and combined mechanisms controlling bulk and surface crystallization
and their effects on heat and mass transport through the membrane. In
particular, the focus of the research will be to identify the optimal operating
conditions under which this hybrid desalination and mineral recovery process can
be sustainably operated under supersaturated conditions to produce water and
produce valuable mineral. Through the analytical methods and quantitative tools
that will be developed as part of this research, improvements will be made to
the current understanding of the fundamental principles and mechanisms involved
in evaporation of water through scale layers followed by porous synthetic
membranes. These will help the application of this knowledge in the modeling and
design of small and large engineered systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited water
recovery in existing desalination processes is the cause for elevated operating
costs of desalination. This research will address the global need to increase
water availability through the constant improvement of technologies that produce
water at higher quality, lower energy demand, using renewable sources of energy,
and without harming the environment. Understanding the mechanisms of reversible
and repeatable membrane fouling scaling when treating supersaturated solutions
by thermally driven membrane processes will mitigate one of the main problems
encountered in desalination of saline water. Ultimately, the goal of this
research is to improve our ability to provide clean water at an affordable cost
to the public in modern and developing countries. The results will also
facilitate the design of better treatment processes to reduce the discharge of
brines to the environment and increase the reliance on natural resources, such
as solar energy, for desalination. The research and educational plan will
support the participation of undergraduate and graduate science and engineering
students, and specifically from underrepresented groups/minorities in research
and education. The development of interactive lecture and hands-on activities,
and the establishment of continued education programs for pre-college teachers
will enhance the interests of their students in science, engineering, and the
environment, and will hopefully direct more motivated students to pursue higher
education in environmental engineering.