* 1236837
* A Hybrid Input-Output, Techno-Economic Life Cycle Modeling Approach to Enable Greener Supply Chains
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Eric Masanet, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 310,913.00

1236837 (Masanet). There is growing interest among manufacturers, retailers, and
governments in understanding the supply chain energy and carbon "footprints" of
products, as well as in ways to reduce such footprints. While much attention has
been paid to life-cycle assessment (LCA) methods for environmental footprint
estimation, comparably little attention has been paid to robust, quantitative
methods for analyzing design, process, and policy opportunities for reducing
product environmental footprints. This research will develop a hybrid supply
chain modeling approach, which aims to couple input-output LCA methods with
sector- and process-level techno-economic energy analysis data and methods. The
approach will allow for both environmental and economic assessment of discrete
technology and process improvement opportunities across the many energy and
emissions sources, end use technologies, and sectors that comprise a product's
supply chain footprint. This will be accomplished through several key tasks that
include: (i) developing methods for disaggregating sector energy data into end
use categories meaningful for engineering analysis; (ii) developing statistical
methods for benchmarking current end use technologies for each sector; (iii)
deriving techno-economic cost curves by end use; and (iv) developing an
intuitive public use computation tool for applying the modeling methods. The
work will further the state of analytical and statistical methods in the
characterization of complex supply chains in technology-rich fashion, which is
critical for detailed design, supply chain engagement, process and materials
selection, and product-oriented policy decisions. The successful development of
this novel modeling approach would have a huge impact on the LCA and supply
chain environmental management communities, and would further be ideally
suitable as an educational tool for students at many levels, including pre-
college students. Such information can be used by manufacturers to understand
where the greatest opportunities for environmental improvement might be in their
supply chains and how cost-feasible such improvements might be, by policy-makers
to identify product supply chains and technologies that offer the most cost-
effective and efficient targets for reducing product embodied impacts, and by
the LCA community to better model technology variation and technology costs at
the process level in LCAs. It will also help forge a new bridge between the LCA
and techo-economic modeling communities. The project will develop case studies
for visualizing and analyzing the various degrees of freedom for driving greener
supply chain practices, and will incorporate these case studies into a teaching
module with exercises for pre-college science classes. Smaller research problems
will be structured to be suitable for undergraduate students. Regular meetings
among participants will ensure proper communication, and a formal data
management procedure will be in place to ensure proper archiving of modeling and
simulation data, material, procedure, software, and educational material. In
addition to normal journal publications, a website will be developed to
advertise the program, disseminate results and information about teaching
modules and sharing demonstration experience in schools, and announce outreach
activities such as seminars by PI, research openings for undergraduates, and
summer activities for teachers.