* 1236316
* Accelerated versus decelerated settling velocity of a drop
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Thomas Ward, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 10/31/2012
* USD 250,973.00

1236316&lt;br/&gt;Ward&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emulsions are liquid-liquid mixtures
that are subject to sedimentation driven by gravitational forces. Examples of
dilute-dispersed phase emulsions that are relevant for biological applications,
or derived from bio-materials, include pharmaceutical drugs (e.g. propofol),
topical creams (e.g. facial creams) and vegetable oil fuel emulsions. These
emulsions are all derived from some form of lipid (fatty acid, triglyceride)
that may be converted directly in a surfactant via a hydrolysis or
saponification chemical reaction. Converting a percentage of the fatty acids
directly into a surfactant would provide an easy one step process for
stabilizing certain biologically relevant emulsion. It is well known that
surfactants, when adsorbing to an interface from the bulk-dispersed phase, will
lead to decelerated motion of a droplet. The decelerated motion is caused by a
Marangoni stress generated by concentration gradients due to the accumulation of
surfactant at the rear of the droplet that oppose droplet sedimentation. The
researchers will study a process to generate desorption dominated motion which
would cause a reversal in the Marangoni stresses and therefore produce
accelerated droplet motion when compared with sedimentation of a droplet with a
clean interface. To generate stresses that cause droplet acceleration one must
produce more surfactant at the interface than the long elapsed time, equilibrium
surface coverage value. The researchers will demonstrate that this stress
reversal may be produced by generating surfactant at the interface through a
fast chemical reaction. A key objective of this proposal is a study of both
accelerated and decelerated steady low Reynolds number droplet sedimentation in
a viscous liquid. The unique feature in this project is droplet sedimentation in
the presence of dilute surfactant species generated by an interfacial chemical
reaction. The study includes a combination of experiments and
mathematical/computational analyses. The goal is to experimentally measure the
translational velocity of a single droplet as a function of the input parameters
which are the reactant types (vegetable oils and dispersed-aqueous sodium
hydroxide), concentration of reactants, and droplet volume. Parallel to the
experiments, a mathematical analysis is performed using a power series expansion
of Legendre and Gegenbauer polynomials to satisfy the steady interfacial species
conservation laws containing thermodynamic relationships for
adsorption/desorption and chemical reaction kinetics combined with momentum
transport equations in the Stokes flow limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will explore novel physical phenomenon associated with the sedimentation speed
of a single droplet. The research should provide additional insight for current
and future processes that utilize the long term storage of dilute emulsions
since these processes depend on the velocity of a single sedimenting droplet.
Further understanding of long term storage processes will be vital for emulsions
produced from biological material since decomposition limits their shelf life.
An undergraduate student from an HBCU will work in the PI's lab during the
summer to participate in the project. The research results also will be
disseminated though departmental websites and at conference meetings.