* 1236562
* Fundamental Understanding of HDA Process: One-Step Conversion of Lignocellulosic Biomass to Furan-Based Precursors for Drop-in Liquid Fuel
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Xuejun Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2016
* USD 336,901.00

PI: Pan, Xuejun Proposal Number: 1236562 Institution: University of Wisconsin-
Madison Title: Fundamental Understanding of HDA Process: One-Step Conversion of
Lignocellulosic Biomass to Furan-Based Precursors for Drop-in Liquid Fuel

This project is to fundamentally understand an innovative process (HDA:
hydrolysis- dehydration-aldol condensation) for producing ?drop-in? biofuel from
lignocellulosic biomass. The process directly converts cellulose and
hemicellulose in the biomass to furan-based precursors for fuel-grade
hydrocarbons in one step under mild conditions (120-140°C) without prior biomass
pretreatment and fractionation. The precursors can be easily converted to fuel-
grade hydrocarbons via hydrogenation/dehydration. Specifically, in the presence
of acetone as solvent and reactant and halide salt (such as lithium bromide) and
mineral acid as catalysts, the biomass undergoes hydrolysis of cellulose and
hemicellulose to monosaccharides, dehydration of the monosaccharides to furfural
and hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), and aldol-condensation of HMF and furfural with
acetone, and ends up with the formation of furan-based precursors with chain
length of C6?C21. Meanwhile, lignin in the biomass is extracted with high
purity, low molecular weight, and good reactivity, showing great potential in
lignin co-products development. The unreacted acetone and catalysts can be
recycled and reused.

The specific objectives of this project are (1) to further optimize the HDA
process to improve the conversion yield and selectivity of the furan-based
oxygenate precursors and to establish process mass balance; (2) to elucidate the
reaction pathways of cell-wall components (cellulose and hemicellulose) and to
fundamentally understand the HDA process; (3) to characterize chemical, physical
and thermal properties of the extracted HDA lignin.

In addition to innovative research activities, this project also emphasizes on
high-quality education, development and dissemination of new knowledge, and
outreach activities. The success of proposed process would provide an
alternative and innovative approach for producing drop-in liquid fuel from
lignocellulosic biomass, such as agricultural crop residues (corn stover),
energy crop (switchgrass), and forest biomass (wood). The integrated education
plan will target broad range of students. In addition to regular undergraduate
and graduate students, special attention will be paid to the students from high
school and underrepresented groups by encouraging them participating summer
projects on bioenergy.