* 1236164
* A novel application of flame hole dynamics to consistent turbulent nonpremixed combustion modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Carlos Pantano-Rubino, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 279,085.00

Most systems used in transportation and energy conversion devices are powered
through combustion of fuel in turbulent flows. Improvement of current and future
versatile fuel feedstock, while reducing pollutant emissions, is a primary
technological challenge. The chemical activity is typically concentrated within
thin flames, usually called flamelets, which are embedded in an otherwise non-
reacting turbulent flow field. These flamelets are one-dimensional models of the
combustion process and are unable to account naturally for multi-dimensional
phenomena appearing in flows where finite-rate-chemistry effects or preferential
transport effects are important. Edge flames are two-dimensional structures
consisting of curved edges that can arise at the boundary of a partially
extinguished flame. In non-premixed flames, edge flames consist of premixed
segments (lean and/or rich in fuel), with a diffusion flame that consumes the
excess reactants trailing behind. Edge flames are relevant in turbulent flows
where finite-rate chemical processes lead to extinction/reignition of the
combustion; for example, near holes poked in turbulent diffusion flames at high
strains (regions of strong turbulence activity). They should be incorporated in
numerical simulations, where necessary, for a comprehensive and physically
realistic description. The objective of the project is to develop, verify, and
validate structural flame models for turbulent combustion that couple
consistently real gas chemistry, flame structure, and hydrodynamics.
Furthermore, the proposal pursues an extension of these flame-abstraction ideas
to large-eddy simulation (LES) by developing a formalism and closure that can be
applied with generality in turbulent simulations. The project involves
integrating flamelet and edge flame structures and their dynamics in a
methodology for accurate and efficient numerical simulations. The proposed
program focuses on reducing empiricism and improving predictability through
first principles in the modeling closures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will make a significant impact in the understanding and in the
capability to predictively model turbulent combusting flows with generality in
terms of flow conditions and fuel chemistry. Enhancements in the prediction of
these flows have numerous industrial and societal benefits: energy conversion
efficiency has a direct effect on cost and pollution. Moreover, the advances and
innovations in computational thinking and in the use of cyber resources will
enhance the engineering and applied mathematics education, which in turn helps
extend the national human-resources base for science and technology. The broader
impact of the accomplished work is through publications and presentations in the
technical and scientific community, and by educating and training students and
young scientists for future careers in academia and industry.