* 1236266
* RUI: Photochemical Degradation, Soil Sorption, and Environmental Fate of Pharmaceutically Active Compounds in Simulated and Natural Water Samples
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Wendy Cory, College of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 334,630.00

1236266 Cory

At this time, the environmental fate of pharmaceutically active compounds
(PhACs) is largely unknown. Trace levels of these compounds are often discharged
into the environment following wastewater treatment. Once they enter the
environment the removal processes include solar photodegradation and sorption to
soils and sediments. The objectives of this research project, which will study
ten PhACs with different chemical properties, are (1) to identify the major
transformation products of photodegradation for each PhAC, especially those
products whose chemical structures suggest potential for environmental
persistence and/or ecotoxicity; (2) to study the environmental fate of not only
the parent pharmaceutical but also the products of photochemical and soil
degradation; and (3) to investigate the rates of direct and indirect
photodegradation in order to determine the primary route of photochemical
degradation for each PhAC. To achieve the project?s objectives, the following
methodologies and analyses will be employed: (1) exposure of PhAC-spiked water
samples to simulated sunlight and soil samples, (2) chemical extraction
techniques including ultrasonic- and microwave solvent-assisted extractions, (3)
analytical techniques including high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
and liquid chromatography with mass spectrometric detection (LC-MS), and (4)
software for data analysis including chemical modeling and geochemical computer
codes. The expected outcome is a more complete picture of the fate and
persistence of each compound in the environment. This multidisciplinary study
brings together researchers from the fields of environmental engineering,
environmental geosciences, and pharmaceutical and analytical chemistry and will
involve the direct participation of eighteen undergraduate researchers.

The release of pharmaceutically active compounds (PhACs) into the environment is
a problem of global concern. PhACs, which include drugs, personal care products
and their metabolites, enter natural water systems after passing through
wastewater treatment plants that have proven inefficient at removing many of
these compounds. From there they travel and/or transform in the environment; the
processes of natural dilution, transformation, or removal of the PhAC are a
function of its chemical and physical properties. A 2002 USGS study found that
80% of 139 streams across 30 states contained detectable levels of one or more
PhACs. While the measured concentrations of these compounds in natural waters
are well below medical dosage levels, studies of the risk to the ecosystem have
indicated adverse effects to both aquatic and non-aquatic organisms. The risk
posed by this mixture of PhACs to children, women of childbearing age and people
with compromised immune systems is not known. To date, most of the research in
this area has focused largely on the environmental occurrence of PhACs. However,
the environmental fate of PhACs "how they travel through the environment and
transform into different molecules over time" is still largely unknown.
Ultimately, results from this study could be used to assess and minimize the
risk posed by these compounds to the ecosystem and human health as well as to
engineer solutions for removal of these compounds more effectively during
wastewater treatment.