* 1236596
* Biophysicochemical Interactions between Nanomaterials and Pulmonary Surfactants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Yi Zuo, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 289,812.00

Abstract

#1236596 Zuo, Yi

This NSF award by the Environmental Health and Safety of Nanotechnology program
supports work by Professor Yi Zuo to study the interaction mechanism between
nanomaterials and pulmonary surfactant. Pulmonary surfactant is a detergent-like
phospholipid-protein mixture that covers the entire internal surface of the
respiratory tract. It plays an important role in surface tension reduction and
host defense. Inhaled nanomaterials must first interact with this surfactant
film before contacting lung cells and translocating to other organs. Therefore,
interactions between nanomaterials and pulmonary surfactant represent the
initial bio-nano interaction in the lungs. However, the interaction mechanism is
still largely unknown. The research goal of this proposal is to study
biophysicochemical interactions between natural pulmonary surfactants and
engineered nanomaterials, thus characterizing the potential adverse health
effect of inhaled nanomaterials on the respiratory system. This work is
important to the general public because it will provide new data that complement
the current nanotoxicological knowledge obtained from cell culture and animal-
models, thus advancing current understanding of nanosafety.

Intellectual Merit:For the first time, the project team will systematically
study biophysical and biochemical interactions between different nanomaterials
(including carbon nanotubes, graphene nanoplatelets, and metal oxide
nanoparticles) and pulmonary surfactants. This research will provide a novel
insight into the interaction potential between surfactant phospholipids/proteins
and carbon-based nanomaterials with unique aspect ratios/shapes. In addition,
the project team will develop a novel in vitro model that mimics bio-nano
interactions in the lungs, for studying the environmental, health and safety
(EHS) impacts of airborne nanomaterials.

Broader Impacts: The interaction mechanism between nanomaterials and pulmonary
surfactants has a translational value for nanomedicine-based pulmonary drug
delivery and for pathophysiological study of respiratory diseases related to air
pollution and particulate matters. Given the unique location of the University
of Hawaii, the proposed work will promote participation of Native Hawaiians,
Pacific Islanders, and students from other underrepresented groups. The PI will
develop new undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula with
interdisciplinary components, and help enhance the infrastructure for research
and education. With local and international collaborations, the PI will
disseminate the research to increase public awareness of nanotechnology and its
potential EHS impacts.