* 1236676
* Model Validation for Photosynthetically Active Radiation Transport and Multiphase Flow in Algal Photobioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Michael Olsen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 354,990.00

CBET-1236676&lt;br/&gt;Vigil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent interest in algaculture
is largely driven by the desire to acquire renewable alternatives for petroleum-
based products. However, the development of commercially-viable algal
biorefineries requires significant advancements not only in the bioengineering
of robust, fast-growing microorganisms tuned to produce high-value products, but
also substantial improvements in process engineering for more rapid and
efficient production of algal products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breakthroughs in
the design and optimization of algal photobioreactors can be achieved through
the implementation of highly accurate and computationally efficient numerical
models of radiation transport and complex multiphase fluid phenomena that
characterize these reactors. This research project directly addresses the need
to develop reliable computational models capable of being used for the design
and scale-up of algal photobioreactors. In particular, state-of-the-art two-
phase computational fluid dynamics simulations of buoyancy-driven bubbly flows
commonly found in photobioreactors will be validated by using index-of-
refraction matching methods to carry out particle image velocimetry experiments
with sufficient temporal and spatial resolution to rigorously test simulation
predictions and to determine the importance of including various interface force
models for drag, lift, virtual mass, rotation, and strain. The three-dimensional
distribution of light in algal photobioreactors will be simulated by developing
a novel spectral radiation transport model (based upon the method of discrete
ordinates) that also accounts for the presence of bubbles and the optical
effects of transparent reactor walls. Validation of the spectral radiation
transport model will be achieved by carrying out a series of light measurements
in a cylindrical algal bioreactor illuminated by filtered light sources that
pass radiation with narrow bands of wavelengths in the photosynthetically active
regime. After the computational fluid dynamics and radiation transport
simulations have been validated, the interplay between the fluid dynamics and
the radiation transport in the reactor will be explored by carrying out
Lagrangian particle tracking simulations to compute light absorption histories
experienced by individual algal cells, which is of paramount importance in
determining the rate of production of biomass by these microorganisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algaculture is an increasingly attractive alternative for
producing fuels and chemicals derived from petroleum, but the development of
economically viable algal biorefineries requires significant improvements in
both the engineering of elite microorganisms and in the design and scaleup of
photobioreactors. This project will employ experimental methods and computer
simulations to improve the understanding of how fluid motion and light
distribution in algal photobioreactors impacts the production of biomass, and
the results will form the basis for constructing a simulation tool for improving
the design of production-scale equipment used in algaculture. The research will
also provide educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
in a research area of strategic national importance.