* 1236433
* Understanding the Role of Biofilm on Disinfection By-Product Formation and Fate in the Water Distribution System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Youngwoo Seo, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 379,904.00

1236433 Seo

In contrast to our understanding of disinfection by-product (DBP) formation in
water treatment plants, where water quality parameters and the formation of DBPs
can be monitored simultaneously, the formation of DBPs in water distribution
systems is not well understood due largely to the complexity of interactions
occurring in water distribution systems. Recent studies have indicated that the
presence of biofilm impacts not only the biological stability of water but also
the chemical stability of water in distribution systems via reaction with
residual disinfectant. Moreover, biofilm can provide a dynamic repository for
various organic materials present in the bulk fluid and subsequently utilize
them as a primary nutrient source. Considering the persistence of biofilm and
current operational responses to biofilm outbreak in water utilities, which
include increasing the concentration of residual disinfectants to inactivate
biofilm, biofilm may be one of the primary contributors to DBP formation in
distribution systems. Beyond increased DBP formation potential from biofilm,
recent studies also reported that biological degradation of DBPs in water
distribution system was strongly related to the presence of heterotrophic
bacteria. While many public and industrial sectors are working to overcome the
persistence of biofilm formation and its dissemination in water distribution
systems with disinfection practices, unwanted DBPs may be generated during
biofilm disinfection. To address the current knowledge gap, this study aims to
investigate the role of biofilm on DBP formation and degradation in water
distribution systems. The proposed tests will apply various biochemical analysis
tools, DBP analysis, microelectrode techniques, and molecular tools to monitor
biofilm growth, disinfectant transport, DPB formation, and degradation, thus
providing a mechanistic understanding of reactions, decay of disinfectants, and
the production of DBPs by the organic matrix of biofilm.

Overall, research outcomes will address our current knowledge gap regarding DBP
formation by biofilms that form in water distribution systems and improve our
ability to predict and identify harmful DBP formation, which will contribute to
protecting public health from both harmful biofilm and DBP formation. Tasks
completed during the proposed study will generate robust information toward
understanding the mechanisms of DBP formation as well as the fate of DBPs in
distribution systems. This may assist many water utilities to assess and
optimize disinfectant practices for biofilm control while minimizing DBP
formation in water distribution systems. In addition, the proposed project will
provide training and education for Ph.D students as well as summer research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students. Research findings will
also be incorporated into the PI's undergraduate courses. Furthermore, research
findings will be introduced in the PI's outreach and service activities for
underrepresented K-12 students and for Engineers Without Borders Projects in
Honduras.