* 1236258
* Towards Assessing and Mitigating the Toxicity of Metal Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Goetz Veser, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2016
* USD 305,000.00

CBET 1236258&lt;br/&gt;The present project aims to advance the current
understanding of nanomaterials toxicity with a specific focus on size-dependent
toxicity of metal nanoparticles (NPs) in the "non-scalable regime" (1 nm - 10
nm). The approach is based on the combination of the synthesis of finely
controlled and well-characterized metal nanoparticles, with the use of zebrafish
models for fast toxicological screening and mechanistic studies It builds onto
the expertise of an engineer who is an expert on nanomaterials synthesis,
characterization, and application, combined with that of a medical researcher
who is an expert on zebrafish models of human disease. The proposed work
exploits a number of unique reagents and facilities, including the University of
Pittsburgh's zebrafish facility, one of the largest in the world. The proposed
approach will be applied to three metals with broad relevance in nanomaterials
application in consumer products and industrial processes (Ag, Fe, and Ni), and
comprises specifically the following steps:&lt;br/&gt;- Size-controlled
synthesis of metal nanoparticles with dimensions in the 1 - 10 nm range (plus
controls in the size range of 30 - 100 nm), and careful and extensive
characterization of these materials prior to toxicological
studies.&lt;br/&gt;-Identification of size- and dose- dependent toxicity of
these engineered NPs via zebrafish studies.&lt;br/&gt;- Mechanistic studies of
organ-specific toxicity to identify target organs in comparison to the
respective free metal salt and as function of particle size.&lt;br/&gt;-
Finally, investigation of the impact of porous silica coatings on the toxicity
of metal nanoparticles as a potential means to mitigate NP toxicity without
impacting accessibility and hence functionality of the engineered
NPs.&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the proposed approach aims to develop methodology for
fast and reliable screening of nanoparticle toxicity, improve understanding of
nanotoxicity in the "non-scalable" size regime (&lt;10 nm), and demonstrate an
approach towards mitigating nanoparticle toxicity via porous
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The project directly addresses
the fundamental challenge posed by the multidisciplinary nature of
nanotoxicological studies. By focusing on two aspects of scientific significance
as well as great practical importance: the systematic study of size-dependent
nanotoxicity in the "non-scalable" regime, which has been largely neglected to-
date, and the study of porous coatings as a means towards mitigating the
toxicity of metal nanoparticles, it aims to enable significant advances towards
a better fundamental understanding of the toxicity of metals at the nanoscale.
The project will furthermore establish zebrafish studies as a fast and robust
screening tool for nanotoxicological studies. By using transgenic zebrafish
lines expressing reporter genes under tissue specific promoters, rapid
evaluation of potential target organs for (size-specific) NP toxicity will be
possible for the first time. This will enable establishing whether nanomaterials
are subject to size-dependent fundamental changes in toxicity and target
pathways, similar to the well-established fundamental changes in chemical
reactivity for metal NPs in the sub-10 nm range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact Demonstration of fast and reliable screening tools for nanotoxicity and
development of an improved fundamental understanding of the toxicity of
materials in the nanoscale regime could have profound impact on the development
and implementation of safe "nano-enabled" consumer products. Fast and cost-
efficient screening would pave the way towards robust and responsible
implementation of NPs in nanomaterials-based consumer and industrial products,
further accelerating the market penetration of these materials with potentially
huge impact on quality of life. An improved understanding of the basic
principles of nanotoxicity would furthermore help to (pre-emptively) guide the
design of novel nanomaterials with safety built into their design. Finally, such
an understanding could yield reliable guidelines for legislative action on
nanomaterials.