* 1236351
* Three-dimensional Separated Flows around a Bump Imbedded in a Boundary Layer with Pulsatile Freestream: Biofluid Dynamics of Phonation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Michael Plesniak, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 317,999.00

1236351&lt;br/&gt;Plesniak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation concerns the
complicated unsteady (pulsatile) flow around a protuberance, such as encountered
in polyps or nodules on the vocal folds. Despite its prevalence in engineering
and biological flows, the previous work on flow separation from a hemispheroid-
like object, or bump, on a wall has all been limited to steady freestream flow
conditions, thus creating a significant void in the knowledge base. The overall
objective of the investigation is to understand flow structures produced by
three-dimensional flow separation in pulsatile flow over a 2:1 aspect ratio
prolate hemispheroid on a wall. The outcomes of this work will provide insight
not only into bioengineering flow applications, but also contribute to the
broader topic of unsteady three-dimensional flow separation from smoothly-
contoured objects on a boundary. It will be determined how flow structures
interact with the wall in order to elucidate their impact on the shear stress
and pressure signature on the wall both upstream and downstream of the
protuberance. This secondary objective is of great importance because
bioengineering flows are most concerned with fluid-structure interactions that
elicit a biological response (e.g. pressure loadings that drive the dynamics of
voiced speech, and wall shear stresses that have been linked to
atherosclerosis). A suite of experimental investigations will be performed in a
wind tunnel, utilizing time-resolved particle image velocimetry, laser Doppler
anemometry, wall pressure measurements, skin friction line visualization, and
oil-film interferometry, in order to resolve the separated flow morphologies,
and their interaction with flow parameters of interest on the wall. The
transformative potential of the proposed study is to facilitate the development
of an unprecedented ability to design systems that take advantage of inherent
features of unsteady 3-D separated flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed study
and understanding of separated 3-D flows in pulsatile flows constitutes the
intellectual merit of the proposed study. Vocal fold polyps and nodules are
hemispheroidal protuberances that develop on the vocal folds, altering the fluid
loading that drives voiced speech and produces sound. Magnetically-targeted drug
delivery in the arteries results in hemispheroidal conglomerations on the
arterial surface, disrupting the hemodynamics. In both scenarios, the
protuberance interacts with a pulsatile flow field. Found not only in
biomedical, but also engineering applications, pulsatile flow over a bump on a
wall presents a fundamental fluid mechanics problem involving three-dimensional
flow separation, complex vortex shedding patterns, and fluid-structure
interactions along the downstream wall. The proposed research is applicable to
the aforementioned examples of bioengineering flows, as well as to the broader
case of flow separation from objects that are located in a buffeting wake (e.g.
automobile and marine aerodynamics, wind turbine performance, etc.), and also to
environmental flows and contaminant transport around hills and berms. The
proposed research plan will achieve broader impacts by (1) benefiting
engineering and societal environments, (2) increasing participation of
undergraduates and underrepresented groups, and (3) K-12 outreach programs.
Furthermore, the grant will facilitate the training of a Ph.D. student and a
post-doctoral scholar. Dissemination of information will be achieved through
scholarly publications, conference proceedings, and the archival of data on the
PIs existing research website. Additionally, several mentoring activities for
post-doctoral scientists, graduate, and high school students are underway.