* 1236814
* Collaborative Research:  Ammonia (NH3) Emission from Fertilizer Application: Understanding an Uncertain Input to Air Quality Models
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Carl Bernacchi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 489,381.00

This research project will measure ammonia emissions from the corn plot at the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) Energy Farm and to scale local
emissions to the regional scale. The ammonia emissions will be measured by
relaxed eddy accumulation and the aerodynamic gradient method using denuders and
a cavity ringdown spectrometer, respectively. Emissions above and within the
corn canopy at the landscape scale will be interpreted with a bi-directional
exchange model. A process-scale modeling approach using EPIC (Erosion
Productivity Impact Calculator) and its interactive version (i-EPIC), which are
driven by environmental factors regulating ammonia emissions (i.e., meteorology,
soil and canopy characteristics, land use, and mass of fertilizer applied), will
be used to scale local emissions to the regional scale.

The results of the project will be disseminated through the venues of research
conferences and publications but also through the use of web-based tools. The
principal investigators will interact with the National Atmospheric Deposition
Program (NADP) to examine the potential of integration with the existing pilot
Ammonia Monitoring Network and with the NADP's Critical Loads and Total
Deposition Science subcommittees. As part of the educational and mentoring
component, undergraduate students will be recruited, with specific emphasis on
underrepresented groups, and mentored by the principal investigators and
graduate students, on the research methods of this project. They will also be
mentored on preparing presentation material for professional conferences and for
transferring their knowledge to high school age female students from diverse
backgrounds participating with STEM campus activities. As part of this research
project, new teaching modules will be developed for air quality courses with
focus on atmospheric deposition models and use of micrometeorological methods.
Teaching modules will also be developed for a new summer camp focused on
environmental engineering, for high school age female students. The additional
teaching modules related to the topic of this proposal will focus on the effects
of food and biofuel production on air quality and climate change.