* 1236203
* Gas Purification with Recovery and Reuse to Achieve More Sustainable and Competitive Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Mark Rood, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 306,001.00

1236203 (Rood). There is a wide range of manufacturing processes (e.g., chemical
manufacturing, coating operations, and production of packaging materials,
solvents, degreasers, and coatings) that use volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
in gas streams with single-pass gas-usage systems and then exhaust these gas
streams to the atmosphere after disposal of the VOCs by thermal oxidation. Such
approach also generates additional pollutants such as CO2 and nitrogen oxides.
This research will develop a system utilizing activated carbon fiber cloth
(ACFC)-electrothermal swing adsorption (ESA) that will efficiently (based on
mass, energy and cost) capture, recover, and reuse a wide range of these VOCs
and allow for recycling of the resulting clean carrier gas stream to the process
that generated the gas stream. This research will provide a sustainable
alternative to exhausting manufacturing gases into the atmosphere because it
will: 1) provide recycling of purified carrier gas streams and concentrated VOCs
for manufacturing processes that originally used single-pass gas-usage systems
that treated such streams as wastes instead of valuable resources; 2) allow for
conservation of natural resources and reduce energy consumption for
manufacturing processes; 3) provide additional safety and environmental
protection by reducing emissions from manufacturing processes; and 4) provide
for more economically competitive manufacturing than currently possible. Such
approach is consistent with US Department of Commerce?s definition of
sustainable manufacturing (USDoC, 2011). The intellectual merit of this research
provides: 1) a novel system that can be readily integrated to existing
manufacturing processes that will transform manufacturing from single-pass gas-
usage systems to systems that produce purified carrier gas streams and high
purity VOCs that are reused in the manufacturing processes to conserve
resources, reduce energy consumption, reduce costs, and make US manufacturing
more sustainable and more competitive; 2) real-time detection and control of
mass transfer within the ACFC during adsorption and regeneration cycles with
remote electrical resistance/power measurements to increase VOC capture and
recovery efficiency; 3) real-time detection of temperature within the ACFC
during electrothermal heating and cooling with remote electrical resistance
measurements to control adsorbent temperature and therefore more effectively
control regeneration and cooling cycle times; and 4) elimination of the need for
hydrocarbon sensors and direct contact temperature sensors, which simplifies the
system, improves run-time by eliminating the corresponding sensor failures,
increases safety, and reduces the costs to purchase and maintain the sensors.
The broader impacts of this research are: 1) development and evaluation of a
novel ACFC-ESA system with improved detection and control of mass transfer and
temperature with less sensors that can be integrated into a wide range of
manufacturing systems to make US manufacturing sustainable; 2) the development
of project-based modules that will be included in the classes taught by the PI
and used to develop undergraduate research projects that will consider broad
environmental engineering issues with corresponding societal and economic
impacts; and 3) the recruitment of undergraduate students through the Morrill
Engineering Program and presentation of projects conducted by undergraduate and
graduate students at professional conferences and to K-12 students who
participate in the ?Gains in the Education of Mathematics and Sciences? program
through the Engineer Research and Development Center-Construction Engineering
Research Laboratory as well as UI?s Engineering Open House.