* 1236459
* Effective Conversion due to Nano-Engineered Photocarrier Kinetics in Quantum Dot Medium
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Vladimir Mitin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2015
* USD 339,999.00

Research Objectives and Approaches

The objective of this research is to develop a scientific, engineering, and
technological basis for high efficiency photovoltaic conversion in a single
junction quantum dot solar cell with specifically designed quantum dot medium
for effective harvesting and conversion of sub-bandgap photons. The proposed
approach is based on nanoscale engineering of the photoelectron processes by
manipulation of potential profiles produced by InAs quantum dots with built-in
charge in modulation-doped GaAs photovoltaic structures. The research program is
a collaborative effort of two research groups with complementary expertise from
Universities at Buffalo and Albany (UB and UA); it includes design, fabrication,
and systematic characterization of quantum dot solar cells.

Intellectual Merit

Nanoengineering of photocarrier kinetics via tailoring the specific nanoscale
potential is a novel original approach in photovoltaic conversion. By providing
the needed fundamental and technological basis, this program develops effective
ways for increasing the conversion efficiency.

Broader Impacts

The methodology and principles developed during this research will be applicable
to a number of photovoltaic devices with quantum dots and nanocrystals. The
project will also have broader impact through its contributions to education:
(i) 1-2 week student exchange between the two Universities; (ii) for K-1
students, continuing development of modern electronics and nanotechnology
laboratories; (iii) incorporation of the information technologies via Java
Applets for energy conversion; (iv) continuing participation in Robert McNair
program for historically under-represented students; (v) promotion of
nanotechnology via interactive exhibit at the Buffalo Science Museum and various
presentations at UB and UA.