* 1236832
* GOALI: Evaluating mechanisms and Developing strategies for simultaneous sludge reduction and nutrient removal in activated sludge processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 368,945.00

1236832&lt;br/&gt;Goel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The treatment of municipal
wastewater using engineered bioreactors such as activated sludge system is
widely used around the globe. The bacteria present in activated sludge
bioreactor gain their energy from organic carbon and nutrients present in
wastewater. The activated sludge processes are designed in a manner such that a
continuous wastage of biomass from these configurations is needed to compensate
for the growth of the bacteria so that the biomass, commonly known as sludge,
does not accumulate in the system. This excess sludge requires further
processing and disposal which may account for 25 to 65% of the treatment plant's
total operation cost. With diminishing sludge disposal options and the cost
associated with further processing of the excess sludge, the sustainability of
activated sludge treatment processes is in question. This GOALI project, in
collaboration with SIEMENS Water Company as an industrial partner, will explore
the possibility of simultaneous sludge reduction and nutrients (nitrogen and
phosphorus) removal in activated sludge treatment systems. The research will
shed light on the mechanisms of sludge reduction in activated sludge processes
operating at significantly high solid retention time to induce biomass
anaerobiosis, and examine the sustainability of sludge minimizing processes for
nutrient removal and also evaluate the ecology of nitrogen and phosphorus
removing bacterial community. The investigator will run lab scale reactors using
real wastewater to examine the feasibility of simultaneous sludge reduction and
nutrient removal. The investigator will use stable isotope probing to profile
bacterial community in the laboratory scale reactors and to achieve carbon mass
balance in the sludge minimizing reactor. The investigator will also develop
bacterial kinetic parameters for carbon, ammonia and phosphorus removal in
sludge minimizing reactor to establish design parameters leading to full scale
implementation of the proposed innovative process with the help from SIEMENS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide insights into the possibility of
sludge reduction coupled with nutrient removal in world's most widely used
wastewater treatment processes. By establishing the mechanisms of sludge
reduction and by developing the design kinetic parameters for key processes,
this project promises a significant paradigm shift in the operation and design
of activated sludge systems. This NSF GOALI proposal is the first attempt to
demonstrate simultaneous nutrient removal and sludge reduction using sludge
fasting and feasting during introduction of real wastewater. The research
directly address two important grand challenges; (1) U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency's research priority about biosolids management and reduction
and, (2) reducing nitrogen pollution- one of the priority areas defined by
National Academy of Engineering. This GOALI proposal will have a strong positive
impact on wastewater treatment industry and that impact is further ensured by
the involvement of SIEMENS, a global leader in wastewater treatment technology
development. The PI will work with local school district to integrate
environmental engineering lab practices in high school curricula. This project
will contribute to the professional development of one graduate student and
several undergraduate students with particular emphasis on minority students.