* 1236372
* Novel Squaraines for Enhanced Near Infra-red-active Organic
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jeremy Cody, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 344,010.00

PI: Collison, Christopher&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1236372&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rochester Institute of Tech&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Novel Squaraines for Enhanced Near Infra-red-active
Organic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic photovoltaic (OPV) solar cells are
inexpensive to produce but suffer from low efficiencies, which ultimately
prevent their widespread use. Some success has been achieved using polymer based
active layers, which absorb strongly in the blue-green region of the solar
spectrum. However, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10% must be achieved
for commercial viability and incorporation of a near infra-red (NIR) low-band-
gap-absorbing dye is necessary to accomplish this goal. Many groups have
therefore explored NIR sensitizer addition to their OPVs but many promising low
band-gap materials have shown poor PCE or difficulties in processing. A
substantial need remains for new materials and new developments in fabrication
of NIR-active OPVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates novel,
solution processable squaraine dyes, targeted specifically for optimal
application in NIR bulk heterojunction active layers for tandem OPVs. The work
is designed based on a systematic variation of the functional groups on
synthesized squaraines and a measure of the associated impact on isolated
variables such as solubility, solid state morphology and aggregation, molecular
orbital energy levels, interaction strength with fullerene electron acceptors,
and excited state lifetime. Functional group substitution will be exploited
because of the large number of potential synthetic precursors. Thus, an
appropriate solubility and film morphology will be dialed in, beneficial since
conductive properties are associated with the order and packing of the molecules
in the solid state. Resulting optical absorbance red-shifts and energy level
changes will also be explored. The long term goal is to describe how squaraine
dyes must be chemically modified to achieve high PCEs for commercial viability.
In application-driven research, an empirical approach is commonly used to meet
goals for better device performance. However, a strong complementary approach is
involved in this work on the prescription for how devices can be improved by
fully understanding all contributing variables and mechanisms for efficient
operation. To achieve the highest PCEs an interdisciplinary approach will be
utilized making use of the team?s ability to i) make, measure and optimize
devices, ii) test a complete range of individual properties contributing to
device efficiency and iii) synthesize new compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results from this project will help enable more efficient, affordable and
sustainable solar cells. Participating students will develop a fundamental
confidence and understanding in chemistry, materials science and device
engineering that can be universally applied. Research experiences and
publication opportunities for graduates and, importantly, a large number of
undergraduates will be provided.