* 1236416
* Thermal Interaction of Graphene with Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Satish Kumar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 326,983.00

1236416&lt;br/&gt;Kumar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many communication and military
electronics require field - effect transistors which can operate in the
frequency range of 100s of GHz to THz. Graphene is one of the thinnest and
strongest known materials with exceptional electronic and thermal properties.
The graphene based transistors can exceed the performance of existing
transistors which makes them very attractive alternative for next generation
high frequency devices. Graphene typically interacts with metals and insulators
in its devices which significantly changes its properties. The performance of
graphene based devices can be limited by the characteristics of the contact at
the metal-graphene interface. It has become imperative to understand the
electronic and thermal interaction between graphene and the metals it interfaces
in its devices. The thermal and electrical transport across the metal-graphene
interfaces is strongly dependent on the structure and nature of the chemical
bond at the interface. It is important to decipher the coupled electronic-
thermal transport at metal-graphene interfaces as a function of interfacial
configuration in order to accurately model the performance of graphene devices
and engineer the interfaces when possible. The objective of this research is to
develop and employ systematic modeling and experimental techniques that consider
the bonding and structure at metal-graphene interfaces in order to investigate
the interfacial electrical-thermal transport and elucidate the crucial
components of interfacial electrical/thermal contact resistances at time and
length scales relevant to nanoscale graphene transistors. A first-principles-
based study will be performed to correlate the interfacial thermal
characteristics to the nature of chemical bonding and interfacial structure.
Metal-graphene interface structures will be fabricated, characterized and
thermal/electrical resistances will be measured. This research will lead to
development of a new understanding of transport that sets the framework for
modeling the performance of next-generation graphene devices with unprecedented
accuracy, especially high-frequency and high-power devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of interfacial transport at metal-
graphene contact developed by this research will provide directions for
efficient thermal management of graphene transistors which will allow them to
operate in very high frequency regimes or operate the device at lower
temperatures. Such achievement will significantly enhance the capabilities of
graphene transistors and reduce a critical barrier for use of these devices in
high frequency electronics applications while leading to a significant gain in
the energy efficiency, performance, and operating life of future electronic
systems. The project will lead to the development of educational materials in
the area of Computational Modeling and Energy Transport for both graduate and
undergraduate students. Small demonstrations and lectures prepared by this
research will increase the awareness of K-12 students for energy related
problems and also motivate them for college and graduate education.