* 1236730
* Enzymatic Biocatalysis of Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals in Wastewater: A Sustainable Technology for Emerging Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Rachel Brennan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 315,999.00

1236730 (Brennan). As beneficial water reuse becomes a common practice
throughout the world, concern over the effects of residual contaminants on
aquatic ecosystems and human health is escalating. Found in everyday commercial
items like plasticizers, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and flame retardants,
endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) have been shown to disrupt hormone
function in exposed organisms, causing adverse physiological effects even at
very low concentrations. Typically, these contaminants are not completely
removed during conventional wastewater treatment, and are discharged into
receiving waters where they can potentially harm ecosystems and re-enter potable
water supplies. Although some physical and chemical treatment methods exist for
treating EDCs in wastewater, they are expensive and unattainable for the
majority of the world. An inexpensive, sustainable treatment method is sorely
needed for removing these emerging contaminants from wastewater. Intellectual
Merit. The overall objective of this research is to critically evaluate the
technical and economic feasibility of enhancing EDC removal in wastewater
treatment plants (WWTPs) using a symbiotic consortium of fungi and bacteria with
a demonstrated ability to catalyze the elimination of EDCs. Although fungi have
demonstrated such a capacity to degrade EDCs in batch systems containing
nutrient-rich growth media, the use of mycelia in continuous-flow systems for
the treatment EDCs in wastewater has not been reported. The PI has recently
shown, however, that certain fungi are able to grow in wastewater and produce
biocatalytic enzymes that are capable of catalyzing the destruction of EDCs.
Similarly, others have recently shown that ammonia oxidizing bacteria (AOB) can
co-metabolically degrade certain classes of contaminants in wastewater using
monoxygenase enzymes, and that in certain scenarios, bacteria-fungi interactions
can result in a synergistic enhancement of overall degradative capacity.
Therefore, to realize the full potential of WWTP ecology, this research will
combine analytical chemistry and molecular microbiology techniques to understand
the extent to which the AOB and fungal communities can be enhanced and
augmented, and the mechanisms by which synergism can be promoted between
inoculated and/or native fungi and AOB in WWTPs. It is envisioned that by
promoting unique, enzyme-driven biocatalytic pathways, wastewater treatment
processes can be optimized for effective EDC treatment while maximizing cost
effectiveness. To meet this objective, data generated from a series of batch and
bioreactor experiments will be incorporated into a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
of the technology to determine its relative sustainability compared to more
conventional physical and chemical treatment methods. Combining the results of
lab-scale research with LCA results will enable a guided deployment of the
technology for the treatment of EDCs at a pilot-scale ecological wastewater
treatment system (a.k.a., eco-machine). If validated at the pilot-scale, then
other eco-machine systems could be similarly converted, and conventional
wastewater treatment plants could be enhanced or upgraded to include EDC-
treatment. Broader Impact. In addition to supporting graduate and undergraduate
student research, this project will disseminate information to the local
community through an interactive website on safe water practices and guided
tours of an eco-machine facility. The technology developed in this work would be
the first to investigate the concept of enzyme-mediated destruction of emerging
contaminants in wastewater using immobilized whole mycelia in combination with
AOB, which could represent a significant cost savings over traditional treatment
methods. Additionally, it is expected that improvements in the analytical
identification and quantification of EDCs and their metabolites will be
developed during this work, enabling progress in the understanding of EDC-
degradation pathways, and thereby increasing the ability to optimize treatment
processes for their removal. Finally, the LCA-driven development of the proposed
technology will provide a detailed accounting of environmental costs and
benefits and provide a framework for critical evaluation of the economic
feasibility and long-term viability of the process, while providing insight into
how its design can be improved for greater sustainability. This systems-based
approach is a new paradigm for holistic wastewater treatment, which could serve
as a model for the future development of sustainable infrastructure.