* 1236070
* Coupling Small-particle Adsorbents with Membranes for Trace-containment Removal in Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Tanju Karanfil, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 325,285.00

CBET 1236070&lt;br/&gt;David Ladner, Tanju Karanfil, Thompson
Mefford&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological advances have resulted in
promising nano- and micro-sized (small-particle) materials that can remove
synthetic organic chemicals (SOCs) from drinking water. These small-particle
adsorbents, such as graphene platelets and super-fine powdered activated carbon
(S-PAC), show faster adsorption kinetics than larger materials. Small-particle
adsorbents also perform better in the presence of natural organic matter (NOM),
which means they may be better in real-world situations. However, a practical
problem exists with small particles: preventing their passage into the finished
drinking water. Microfiltration (MF) and ultrafiltration (UF) membrane processes
can be effective, but pore blockage by the small materials decreases water flux
and increases the energy required for separations. Thus there exists a quandary:
small particles are best for SOC adsorption, but large particles are easier to
remove. A major advancement would be to find materials and conditions where SOC
adsorption is high, NOM competition is low, and little energy is required to
remove the adsorbents. This project is built around three main Aims: (1)
Determine the properties of small-particle adsorbents that enable SOC adsorption
with minimal interference by NOM. (2) Determine the extent to which small-
particle adsorbents will foul membranes of various pore size and examine the
particle breakthrough propensity. (3) Explore engineering methods to achieve SOC
adsorption with minimal energy required for membrane separations. In Aim 1 NOM
will be extracted from raw water and from coagulated/flocculated water to test
competitive adsorption of SOCs. In some experiments 3H-labeled NOM and
14C-labeled atrazine will be used to investigate mass-transport mechanisms. In
Aim 2 membrane flux and particle breakthrough will be measured when removing
small-particle adsorbents, taking into account the effects of aggregation.
Carbon spheres will be produced with well-controlled particle size to carefully
study particle size effects. In Aim 3 a reactor/membrane setup will be used that
will allow SOC adsorption by dispersed particles before inducing aggregation
that is expected to decrease fouling and membrane breakthrough. Adsorption
capacity and kinetics are commonly investigated for novel materials, but here
both competitive adsorption effects and small-particle removal requirements will
be explored simultaneously to learn how these phenomena are interconnected. For
example, the structure of an aggregate of small particles will affect both
adsorption kinetics and membrane transport. Novel techniques will be used to
investigate the phenomena, such as the radiolabeled NOM and atrazine for
detection levels that have not previously been achieved in competitive
adsorption studies. Further, the concept of induced adsorbent aggregation in
membrane systems has not been previously explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project may lead to engineered unit processes specifically designed to
efficiently remove SOCs of concern, like personal care products and endocrine
disrupting compounds, from drinking water sources to protect human health. The
study will also elucidate desirable materials properties, giving researchers
targets for which they can aim in future materials development. Although SOC
removal is the focus, this is in fact a hybrid system that will allow multiple
treatment objectives in a single process (i.e., the control of both small
molecular weight contaminants and microbial contaminants). Moving into the
future, sustainable water treatment will require low-footprint and low-energy
processes, which are the dual objectives here.