* 1236981
* Linking the Dendrochronology of Northern Europe and the Mediterranean: Yenikapi
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Peter Kuniholm, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,334.00

With three years of National Science Foundation support, the principal
investigator, Peter Kuniholm, and the Cornell Tree-Ring Laboratory will work to
finish building an absolutely-dated tree-ring chronology for the Eastern
Mediterranean complete back to 3000 BC and possibly to 7000 BC or before. 7500
years' worth of chronologies spanning 9000 years but not yet in a single
sequence has already been constructed. Focus will be placed on sample collection
from three regions. The first is a large-scale commercial exploitation of
Croatian and Bosnian rivers for thousands of stems of subfossil oak, some of
which will not only fill sequence gaps but may go back in time to before 10,489
years ago, the present limit of oak chronologies for Northern Europe. The
enterprises have agreed to supply slices of all their long-lived material. A
second 'target of opportunity' is the unique possibility afforded by the
construction of a 39-kilometer-long subway system through the heart of downtown
Istanbul. The construction of the tunnel has recently been postponed for a year
in order to allow more time for excavation and preservation of some millions of
archaeological artifacts, but the completion date for the tunnel is scheduled
for four years from now. Archaeological excavations operating in three 8-hour
shifts per day in the excavation for the main train station - at Yenikapý at
present 800 meters x 400 meters x 25 meters deep - have so far penetrated
through a long series of Ottoman, Byzantine, and late Roman levels, and in one
segment as far back as the Neolithic where recently wattle-and-daub fishermen's
huts from the 6th millennium BC were unearthed. In the past three years
Kuniholm's team has collected over 2000 pilings from a variety of periods at
Yenikapý and in the next three or four years expect to collect 3000 more from
the earlier periods. Imported wood from Northern Greece, the Black Sea coast of
Turkey, and the Danube - perhaps even up the Danube itself - has already been
identified, thereby shedding light on patterns of import and export. Finally Dr.
Kuniholm is collaborating with a Bulgarian and EU research effort "Submerged
Landscapes, Reconstructing Palaeoenvironment and Settlement Pattern(s) in
Prehistory," of which the co-PI (Wazny) is the chairman of the
dendrochronological segment. It is expected to retrieve about 1000
dendrochronological samples a year from these sources, some of which are already
providing links between the Aegean oak chronology and the absolutely-dated North
European oak chronology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building a continuous
tree-ring time-line from the present to the Neolithic or earlier will allow
dating to the year for a variety of cultures in the Near East, Aegean, and
Balkans, at present only poorly linked. If the Croatian and Bosnian rivers yield
what one might reasonably expect, this will also permit calibration of the
European oak radiocarbon timescale before the current 8480 BC. The Cornell Tree-
Ring Laboratory is a leading US scientific organization and plays a major role
in training undergraduate and graduate students in dendrochronology. This grant
will also help to maintain the laboratory at it high level of productivity and
allow it to continue in its mentoring role.