* 1236225
* Reaction Processes in Organic Droplet Spray Plasma Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Bruce Locke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 362,701.00

While many organic compounds are commonly synthesized using high temperature,
high pressure, and/or catalytic processes, the application of low temperature
electric discharge plasma processes to perform organic synthesis has the
potential to improve energy efficiency and to affect chemical selectivity and
yield through spatial and temporal control of the plasma. In order to introduce
functionality into hydrocarbons, for example OH groups, this project deals with
reactions initiated in low temperature plasma exposed to small droplets of
organic liquids. This work will advance our understanding of organic gas-liquid
reactions in electrical discharge plasma where the liquid droplets are exposed
to the plasma environment under ambient temperature and pressure conditions such
that they are not evaporated. The research involves the synthesis of a wide
range of organic compounds starting with saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbon
liquids that are sprayed into the reactor as small droplets. The pure organic
droplets will flow into the low temperature and low power plasma where vapor and
interfacial reactions occur. In the case of saturated hydrocarbons,
hydroxylation reactions to form alcohols will be investigated with emphasis on
hydrocarbons with 6 to 10 carbons. Hydroxyl radicals will be formed from small
amounts of water and or hydrogen peroxide vapors added to the flowing gas
stream. In the case of unsaturated hydrocarbons hydrogenation reactions will be
investigated with hydrogen mixed in an argon carrier. Unsaturated hydrocarbons
with 6 to 10 carbons as well as selected oils will be studied. In both cases
selectivity and yields will be analyzed as functions of the various reactor
properties including gas and liquid flow rates and composition, pulsed input
power and frequency, and electrode geometry. The general working hypothesis that
will be tested and analyzed is that reaction selectivity and yield for plasma
reactions of organic compounds from organic liquid droplets can be controlled
through variation of plasma and reactor operating conditions. It is anticipated
that the reaction products that are soluble in the organic liquid phase will be
favored through a mechanism found previously for hydrogen peroxide generation
from liquid water droplets whereby liquid soluble products preferentially
accumulate in the liquid phase where they are protected from plasma degradation
in the surrounding gas. In general, the project seeks to develop a new way to
introduce functionality into organic compounds in the liquid phase through
spatial and temporal control of the plasma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop fundamental knowledge on how plasma in gas-liquid environments
leads to the formation of various synthetic organic compounds. Understanding of
how such reactions occur is important for the design and operation of chemical
reactors that can be used in practical applications to make many useful
compounds. For example various alcohols can be made from hydrocarbons in such
systems, and this work will have impact on a range of other applications of
plasma processes used in material and chemical synthesis and fuels processing.
This work is expected to lead to significant advances in our understanding and
further development of plasma chemistry with potential impact on the production
of valuable organic compounds efficiently from various liquid hydrocarbon
sources.