* 1236493
* Microbial Interactions with Biodegradable Polymer Nanocomposites that Incorporate Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Edward Bouwer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 10/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This NSF award by the Environmental Health and Safety of Nanotechnology program
supports multidisciplinary work by Professors Howard Fairbrother, Ed Bouwer and
Seth Guikema to characterize the effect of microbial interactions with
biodegradable polymers that incorporate carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Polymer
nanocomposites containing CNTs represent an example of a next generation type of
nanomaterial because of the beneficial effects that CNTs have on many polymer
properties. However, following consumer use polymer nanocomposites will enter
the environment where their ultimate fate and impact will be intimately
dependent upon their interactions with microorganisms present in environmental
regimes such as landfills, soils or surface waters. To better understand the
life cycle of this new class of nanomaterials we plan to develop a systematic
understanding of the persistence and fate of biodegradable polymer
nanocomposites exposed to different microbial populations, including potential
pathways for CNT release. Findings from these experiments will also be used as
the basis to develop a risk-based decision making framework that can determine
the most appropriate means for disposing of polymer nanocomposites. Such a
proactive approach for risk assessment and life cycle analysis is necessary for
new types of nanomaterials in the developmental stage.

Intellectual Merit: The experimental design is to establish relationships that
link important parameters, such as CNT loading, type and surface chemistry with
biodegradation and biofilm accumulation rates and biotransformation mechanisms.
Through this approach environments will be identified where CNTs could be
released as particles from the solid phase composite and where biodegradable
polymer nanocomposites could resist biodegradation and persist, in stark
contrast to the behavior of the native polymer. The PIs will initially focus on
preparing a selected suite of well characterized CNTs and CNT-containing
biodegradable polymer nanocomposites where CNT type, surface chemistry, loading
and the biodegradable polymer matrix will be varied. Using selected single and
mixed culture populations to mimic different environmental regimes, microbial
interactions with polymer nanocomposites and CNT particles will be explored by
conducting three types of complementary experiments: (1) flow cell studies to
evaluate attachment and biofilm accumulation on the surface of the polymer
nanocomposites, (2) batch studies to quantify biodegradation and CNT release,
and (3) isotopically labeled CNTs to determine the fate of CNT-carbon and
potential CNT degradation mechanisms.

Broader Impacts - This research will develop a fundamental and holistic
scientific understanding of microbial interactions with CNT-containing
biodegradable polymer nanocomposites, an emerging class of nanomaterial with
enormous commercial potential. This information will also provide a predictive
framework for the development of nanocomposites with material properties that
have been engineered for positive social and economic consequences without long
term industrial liability. The PIs will also provide research opportunities,
guidance, and mentoring to female high school juniors through the Women in
Science and Engineering program and female undergraduate students from the Notre
Dame of Maryland University (a local, primarily teaching, women?s college).
Additionally, the PIs and graduate students will give presentations in a pilot
program, the City Springs Science Outreach Program, which focuses on enhancing
scientific literacy and awareness for minority and underprivileged grade school
students (5th grade) through exposure to hands-on science and engineering
projects and activities.