* 1236662
* Rheological Characterization of Cellularly Remodeled Hydrogel Matrices
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Kristi Anseth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

1236662 Anseth

Designing scaffolds to mimic the extracellular matrix and provide a 3D
microenvironment that can be remodeled by cells during migration has been an
area of growing interest with applications in wound healing, tissue engineering
and stem cell expansion. Although such materials provide an initially well-
defined microenvironment for the cells, little is known about how migrating
cells degrade and remodel synthetic scaffolds. The lack of quantitative and
predictable information about this process has limited advances in biomaterial
design. To bridge this gap, characterizing a 3D hydrogel matrix remodeled by
encapsulated cells using both macro- and microrheological measurements will
enable quantitative evaluation of the material properties in the region directly
around the cell, the pericellular region, before the onset of and during cell
migration. Specifically, we propose experiments to determine material properties
and the length scale of scaffold heterogeneity during the degradation reaction.
Bulk rheology will be used to supplement microrheology enabling measurements of
the complete gelation reaction. Finally, measurements conducted in the presence
of an encapsulated migratory cell line, specifically human mesenchymal stem
cells, will be performed to better understand how rheological changes in the
pericellular region correlate with cell morphology, focal adhesions and
motility. This approach to understanding cell migration, focusing on the
fundamental rheological changes within the hydrogel, has the potential to
transform many fields including but not limited to rheology of soft materials,
3D cell culture, tissue regeneration and biomaterials development.

Broader impacts: The information gained during these studies will increase
knowledge about cell remodeling during migration. The proposed research will
have a significant impact on the intellectual advances and broader technological
developments in several fields including wound healing, tissue engineering and
stem cell culture. This will benefit society by advancing the development of
biomaterials that can control cellular function, motility and morphology. The
results of this work will be disseminated in academic papers and conference
presentations. This multidisciplinary project will train students, graduate and
undergraduate, with special efforts to recruit students from underrepresented
groups. These students will perform research to meet the goals of this project,
and this research will also be shared with the community. The PI and her
research group have a history of extensive outreach to high school students and
teachers and the general public, and the team will work to highlight the impact
of biomaterial science in society.