* 1236155
* 3-D Nanowire Heterostructures from Earth Abundant Materials by Low-cost Fabrication Process for High-efficiency Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Shadi Dayeh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 297,592.00

PI: Wang, Deli&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236155&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California-San Diego&lt;br/&gt;Title: D Nanowire Heterostructures
from Earth Abundant Materials by Low-cost Fabrication Process for High-
efficiency Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen
Generation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sunlight and seawater are the ultimate
sustainable energy sources on earth. Together they constitute a potential
solution to the global energy crisis and at the same time can reduce carbon
emission due to the use of fossil fuels. A photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell
utilizes solar energy to directly split water and generate hydrogen, which is
clean and free of carbon emission. However, it is broadly recognized by the PEC
community that there is no single material that can be the perfect
photoelectrode candidate for solar water splitting with respect to light
absorption, water reduction, chemical stability, etc. This project will
investigate the use of three-dimensional (3-D) tree-like branched nanowire
heterostructures from earth abundant materials by low-cost fabrication process
as photoelectrodes for high efficiency and potentially, a practical and
sustainable clean hydrogen generation. The array of the tree-like 3-D branched
nanowires offers a unique combination of desired properties that are critical to
high efficiency PEC hydrogen generation, including enhanced light absorption,
improved charge separation/collection, enlarged surface area, and better
electrochemical reaction dynamics. Specifically, the proposed research focus
will be on (i) design and fabrication of the 3-D nanostructured photoelectrodes
using earth abundant materials (Si, Cu2O, Fe2O3, etc.) by low-cost solution
processes, (ii) understanding of the interface between the nanowire core and
branches and their effect on separation and transport of the photogenerated
charge carriers, and (iii) understanding of the electrolyte/nanowire interface,
in particular the surface electrochemical reaction/corrosion of semiconductor
electrodes at high local acidic/basic conditions. Chemically robust materials
such as TiO2 and WO3 will also be studied. The research will develop an
understanding of the fundamental materials science and chemistry questions
regarding heterojunctions formation in nanomaterials and interfaces, as well as
create a new paradigm of heterogeneous functional integration at nanoscale.
Specifically with regard to renewable energy research, this work will also shine
a light on design and fabrication/manufacturing of high-efficiency photovoltaic
devices and H2 generation. In addition, the project will provide opportunity to
the undergraduate and graduate students to obtain training in the
interdisciplinary areas related to this project.