* 1236865
* Atmospheric Fullerene Chemistry: Elucidating Oxidative Pathways and Characterization of Corresponding Derivatives
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* John Fortner, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

NSF 13-1179&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Health and Safety of
Nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Dr. Barbara Karn&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#1236865&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric Fullerene Chemistry: Elucidating Oxidative
Pathways and Characterization of Corresponding
Derivatives&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Carbon based nano-scale materials
such as fullerenes and nanotubes in particular have been proposed for a variety
of applications and are now on track to be widely produced at the industrial
scale. Of particular interest, and currently deeply lacking in information/data,
is the role of atmospheric processes (e.g. oxidizing reaction scenarios) to
significantly alter a wide breadth of fullerene environmental behavior(s)
including: solubility, (bio)availability, reactivity, stability, toxicity and
overall environmental impact. This project is designed to fundamentally evaluate
the reactivity (including kinetic and derivative analyses) of solid state and
aqueous available fullerene species under various, highly controlled,
atmospheric conditions, focused on oxidation pathways. The overarching
hypothesis of this project is that C60, as a model fullerene, can be chemically
oxidized and physically altered by a variety of oxidative, yet ubiquitous,
processes in the atmosphere. Sub-hypotheses include: (A) Multiple, competing
oxidative reactions occur simultaneously, albeit with different kinetics,
resulting in corresponding and various derivatives; (B) Under "wet" conditions
(&gt;10% RH), fullerenes will become increasingly hydrophilic, dissolving
aggregates, with hydrolysis as major reaction after initial oxidation; (C) Model
(atmospheric) organics and inorganics in the gas phase will modify these
kinetics; (D) Reaction products from "wet" reactions (&gt;10% RH) will be
relatively stable in aqueous systems; whereas&lt;br/&gt;under "dry" reaction
conditions, derivatives will continue to react with water upon aqueous
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: At the conclusion of this
project, we will have a vastly improved understanding of environmentally
relevant chemical mechanisms/pathways and physico-chemical factors that control
the rate and extent of fullerene aggregation, transformation(s) and stabilities
under atmospheric conditions. This information will provide fundamental
understanding for material life cycle(s) in addition to aiding in the
interpretation of fullerene toxicological studies. Results will also provide
information regarding fullerene stability, storage and commercial applications,
and will contribute to the development of green fullerene
chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to creating and
disseminating new technical knowledge needed for decision-making regarding an
industrially produced, engineered nanomaterial; this project (platform) is
designed to broadly impact both undergraduate and graduate education and
research, in addition to contributing to specific K-12 outreach programs.
Graduate and undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;(project integrated) education and highly
interdisciplinary research will strengthen our human resource base in an
emerging need area where qualified researchers are in short supply, yet needed
for the development of sustainable nanotechnologies. Furthermore, PI's will
support and work directly with educators and students, providing expertise and
regular mentoring at the St. Louis' Knowledge is Power Program (KIPP): Inspire
Academy, preparing students for local, regional and international science fair
projects and competitions.