* 1236005
* Environmental Implications of Nanocellulose: Biodegradation and Toxicity Potential
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Amy Pruden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

CBET 1236005&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Studies over the past ten years have made it
apparent that various commercially-relevant nanomaterials have harmful impacts
on the environment. Unfortunately, there is a void of knowledge about the
environmental implications of cellulose-based nanomaterials (nanocellulose). At
the same time, the market for cellulose-based nanomaterials is expected to
exceed a billion dollars by 2020. Given the estimated size of this market and
the expected chemical and biological stability of nanocellulose there is a need
to evaluate the environmental implications of these nanomaterials. Even though
cellulose is generally considered to be an environmentally-friendly material
given its omnipresence in woods, fibers, and tunicate animals, nanocellulose is
both physically and chemically very different. These differences mean that it
cannot be assumed that nanocellulose is as biodegradable and environmentally
benign as cellulose in its native state. Thus, the proposed research will
evaluate biodegradation (i.e., will nanocellulose naturally break down) and
toxicity (i.e., is nanocellulose harmful to some organisms) utilizing bacterial
communities relevant to wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and impacted water
environments. WWTP microbes are especially relevant because as production of
nanocellulose escalates, concentrations entering WWTPs will correspondingly
increase. &lt;br/&gt; The study will focus on two hypotheses: Hypothesis One:
Bacterial biodegradation of nanocellulose will be influenced by its surface
properties (e.g., charge, hydrophobicity, and steric hindrance imparted by
surface functional groups). Hypothesis Two: Negatively charged nanocellulose
materials are non-toxic, while those possessing positively-charged surface
modifications will be more toxic because they adhere to or disrupt cellular
membranes (which are negatively charged). To test these hypotheses we have
developed a research plan consisting of two integrated research tasks: Task 1.
Evaluate the biodegradability of nanocellulose, and Task 2. Evaluate the
toxicity and stress responses elicited by nanocellulose. Because very little is
known about the environmental implications of nanocellulose production and use,
the laboratory research efforts defined by Tasks 1 &amp; 2 will be complemented
by the parallel development of a life cycle assessment (LCA) inventory module
for an undergraduate LCA course (ENGR 3134) at Virginia Tech. In this effort,
undergraduate students taking ENGR 3134 will produce inventories that consider
nanocellulose production and use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
proposed one year investigation is high risk/high reward and will establish
critical baseline information on nanocellulose biodegradation and toxicity
potential. Nanocellulose holds great promise as a potentially "green"
nanomaterial. However, it is critical that this assumption be validated,
especially as major production facilities are now going online. The
physicochemical state (e.g., surface moieties, surface charge, aggregation
state) of varying preparations of nanocellulose will be linked both to its
biodegradability and microbial toxicity using complex microbial communities
(anaerobic digester and wetland sediment) relevant to environments most likely
to be impacted by disposal or other release. As the core material of
nanocellulose is thought to be "inert", the approach could eventually provide a
means to isolate the effects of surface chemistry and the behavior of
nanomaterials as a whole in governing their environmental implications. This
investigation will also advance the fundamental knowledge base of anaerobic
cellulose degradation, a key biogeochemical process important for critical
issues such as climate change and the development of alternative biofuels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Two Ph.D. student researchers will be
funded by this project and will gain interdisciplinary training across fields of
nanotechnology, sustainable biomaterials, environmental microbiology,
environmental engineering and application of molecular tools. The project will
have institutional impact by catalyzing interdisciplinary collaboration between
the VT Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science (ICTAS) Sustainable
Nanotechnology (SuN) and Water Sustainability research thrusts, which will
provide complementary graduate student support. Interdisciplinary graduate
education will also be enhanced via the companion VT SuN Interdisciplinary
Graduate Education Program (IGEP), which will also provide opportunities for
student support. The proposed LCA inventory will serve as an integral component
of the undergraduate Virginia Tech Green Engineering program, providing a hands-
on opportunity for in-class and independent undergraduate researchers, while
also establishing a paradigm by which the "green" nature of nanotechnologies can
objectively be assessed. Outreach efforts to women and economically
underrepresented groups will be made to support community education as well as
to aid in recruiting Ph.D. and undergraduate researchers to assist in this
project.