* 1236691
* Sustainable Bioconversion of Liquid Biofuels: Linking Organic Waste Processing and Microalgae Cultivation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edward Bouwer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 348,900.00

1236691&lt;br/&gt;Betenbaugh/Bouwer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algae represent a
potentially valuable renewable source of liquid fuels including diesel and jet
fuel. These liquid fuels are derived from the lipids generated during the
accumulation of algal biomass and represent an alternative to petroleum-based
liquid fuels for airplanes and motor vehicles. Algal biomass can be generated
using photosynthesis (photoautotrophy), with organic carbon sources
(heterotrophy), or using a combination of organic carbon and sunlight
(mixotrophy). Unfortunately, algal biofuel processes derived from photosynthesis
alone typically generate low amounts of algal biomass and reduced yields of the
lipids. Alternatively, algae can generate much higher levels of biomass and
produce high lipid yields when supplemented with organic carbon and other
nutrients. However, the addition of traditional organic carbon sources such as
glucose increases production costs and hinders commercial feasibility. An
equally pressing sustainability problem is the environmental impacts and costs
resulting from the accumulation and disposal of agricultural, industrial, and
municipal organic wastes. This research program will simultaneously address both
sustainability and energy issues by combining organic waste treatment processes
with the generation of liquid fuels using microalgal bioprocessing. Specifically
the project aims to alter waste treatment in order to generate increased amounts
of organic carbon sources that can be consumed by microalgae and to manipulate
microalgae to enable these hosts to consume a greater variety of carbon sources
available from anthropogenic organic wastes. The specific objectives of the
project are as follows: 1) Optimize environmental waste processing
(fermentation) to generate high yields of organic nutrients that can be consumed
by microalgae; 2) Manipulate microalgae genetically in order to allow these
cells to consume a larger number of organic waste by-products. In the Bouwer
laboratories, organic waste processing conditions including chemical and
biological pretreatment steps as well as carbon and nitrogen content will be
manipulated in order to increase organic matter conversion to target organic
acids. Unfortunately, while microalgae can consume some organic acids, many
algae are unable to process other organic acid by-products from waste treatment
processes. Therefore, the second aim of the project in the Betenbaugh laboratory
is to reprogram microalgae cellular metabolism to enable them to consume
additional organic waste by-products that the species do not typically consume.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three of the greatest sustainability challenges facing the
world are pollution of the environment, over-reliance on non-renewable fossil
fuels, and global warming. Long-term solutions should consider holistic
approaches that address multiple sustainability issues simultaneously. This
program addresses these challenges by linking organic liquid waste disposal with
microalgae growth and lipids production for the generation of renewable liquid
biofuels. Utilization of organic wastes by microalgae will reduce agricultural,
industrial and domestic waste runoff that threatens our rivers, lakes, and
oceans and will lead to the creation of jobs in areas where the employment
opportunities are most needed. This technology can integrate with existing
agricultural and domestic waste-treatment facilities for renewable energy
generation, economic development, and community self-sufficiency. An equally
important goal will be the development of a new education paradigm focused on
sustainability. Through a partnership with Baltimore's minority public STEM high
schools, students will be educated using hands-on approaches to generate
biofuels from microalgae in web-based and laboratory settings including a local
arboretum. In addition, classroom and laboratory courses focused on bioenergy,
biosustainability, and environmental recovery are under development at Johns
Hopkins University. Thus, the proposed project will provide a valuable research
and education platform to train the next generation of cross-disciplinary
engineers and scientists dedicated to finding solutions to pressing
sustainability issues on our planet.