* 1236653
* Impacts of Surface Coating Aging on Nanomaterial Fate and Transport in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Linda Abriola, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 309,999.00

1236653&lt;br/&gt;Pennell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite rapid advances in
nanotechnologies over the past decade, our current understanding of nanomaterial
fate and transport in the environment remains limited. Recent studies have
demonstrated that new approaches are needed to accurately predict the transport
and retention of nanomaterials in soils and aquifers. In addition, nanomaterial
mobility is known to depend upon surface coating properties and the presence of
stabilizing agents, such as surfactants and organic matter. Although most
commercially-available nanomaterials are produced with surface coatings, very
little information is available regarding their longevity and impact on
nanomaterial fate over time. To address these gaps in our current understanding
of nanomaterials, the project combines laboratory experiments with mathematical
modeling to quantify and predict the effects of surface coating aging on the
fate and transport of several representative engineered nanomaterials (iron and
manganese oxides) in sands and natural soils. The research is structured around
three tasks; (1) determination of nanoparticle deposition and release rates as a
function of surface coating properties using a quartz crystal microbalance
(QCM), (2) measurement of nanoparticle transport and attachment in soil columns
and aquifer cells, and (3) development and validation of mathematical models to
predict the effects of surface coating properties and aging on nanoparticle
mobility and persistence in soils and aquifer materials. Novel aspects of the
research include the assessment of nanoparticle deposition rates, utilization of
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and light
transmission (LT) analysis to visualize nanoparticle mobility, and the
integration of experimental and mathematical modeling to assess nanomaterial
fate in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit
of the proposed research lies in three areas critical to the pursuit of
environmentally sound and sustainable nanotechnologies; (1) development of
methods to convert nanoparticle deposition measurements into attachment rate
parameters that can be used to predict transport behavior, (b) measurement of
the effects of surface coating aging on nanoparticle stability, aggregation, and
mobility, and (c) development and validation of numerical simulators capable of
predicting the environmental fate of nanomaterials as a function of changes in
surface coating integrity. The unique coupling of experimental studies with
mathematical modeling allows for careful evaluation of methods that can be used
to rapidly estimate nanoparticle attachment parameters for a range of surface
and solution conditions, and will culminate in the development of numerical
models that are able to predict the effects of surface coating integrity and
composition on nanomaterial fate and transport. We anticipate that the
experimental parameters and mathematical models developed in this work can be
utilized to predict the fate and transport of other nanomaterials in subsurface
systems, and will serve as an important component for nanomaterial life cycle
analysis. In addition, the knowledge gained in these studies will improve our
understanding of filtration technologies used to treat drinking and waste waters
containing nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An important component of
the project is the incorporation of education initiatives into the research and
instructional activities of the investigators, with the goal of extending the
impact of acquired knowledge beyond the traditional framework of journal
publications and conference presentations. This goal will be achieved through
the following activities: (a) inclusion of undergraduate students in coupled
experimental and mathematical modeling research, (b) development of interactive,
multi-media instructional tools, and (c) recruitment of female and under-
represented minority students. The instructional materials, consisting of model-
based tutorials, videos prepared by undergraduate and graduate students, and
illustrative case studies and modeling tools, will be incorporated into freshmen
and sophomore-level courses and released on a web site so that a broader
audience of students can explore processes that govern the fate and transport of
pristine and aged nanomaterials in terrestrial environments.