* 1236165
* Measurement of thermal transport through a single nanostructure: A pit stop on the path towards single molecule thermal transport measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Arvind Narayanaswamy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,886.00

CBET 1236165 PI: Narayanaswamy

Nanostructures have thermal transport properties quite different from those of
their bulk counterparts. Experimental techniques capable of measuring very small
temperature changes and heat flux are necessary tools towards the goal of
understanding the effects of nanostructuring on thermal transport properties.
This project will develop a new method for measuring thermal transport through
single nanostructures that is based on the deflection of bi-material
microcantilevers to heat flow. This deflection occurs due to the difference in
thermal expansion coefficients of the two layers of material. Due to their small
size, bi-material cantilevers are extremely sensitive thermometers. In the new
measurement technique, a single nanostructure is suspended between the ends of
two cantilevers. One cantilever acts as a heater and the other as a sensor for
heat flowing through the suspended nanostructure. The method will combine the
extraordinary sensitivity of cantilever-based thermal measurements with the idea
of the suspended microdevice method invented by Philip Kim and Li Shi. The
investigator has developed a reliable method for suspending electrospun polymer
nanowires between two cantilevers, making them a suitable choice for studying
the role of nanostructuring in polymeric materials as well as demonstrating the
ability of the method to measure thermal conduction through single
nanostructures. Especially for low thermal conductivity materials such as
polymers and polymer nanocomposites, the high sensitivity of bi-material
cantilevers makes them an ideal platform for measuring thermal conductance. The
technique developed in this work can then be naturally extended to the
measurement of thermal conduction in nanostructures of other material as well.

Thermal performance of polymers is especially important in applications such as
polymer based thermal interface materials, insulating dielectrics for
microchips, and polymeric electrolyte membranes in fuel cells. Understanding
thermal transport in isolated polymeric nanowires is essential for the design of
better polymer nanocomposites. The measurement technique developed in this work
will address the need for more sensitive techniques capable of measuring thermal
transport through single nanostructures of any material. Such measurements
provide invaluable insight into the effects of nanostructuring on thermal
properties. The research performed for this project will be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate curriculums to emphasize the role of engineering in
nanoscale research. The project will also be used to encourage K-12 students to
continue onto careers in engineering and science and highlight the importance of
mathematics in achieving that goal.