* 1236157
* Collaborative Research:  Flow Instabilities in Gas-solid Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Christine Hrenya, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 207,884.00

1236157/1236490 PI: Hrenya/Yin

Gas-solid flows are ubiquitous in both nature (landslides, avalanches, planetary
rings, etc.) and industry (pharmaceuticals, food products, chemical and
petroleum industries). High-velocity gas-solids flows that are found in a wide
range of applications (circulating fluidized beds, pneumatic transport lines,
sand flow modeling, erosion prevention, planetary rings, etc.), in particular,
often develop instabilities that are referred to as ?clusters?, which are known
to have a large impact on system performance. Accurate prediction of onset and
evolution of the clusters is critical to the design, scale-up, and optimization
of related systems. It is shown that inelastic inter-particle collisions and
gas-solid drag can both independently lead to instabilities; in real systems,
however, they always cooperate and their relative importance has not been
examined. The objective of this research is twofold: (i) to elucidate the
relative importance of the various origins of the instabilities in high-
velocity, gas-solid flows, and (ii) to critically assess the ability of a new
kinetic-theory (continuum) model to predict the quantitative nature of such
instabilities. This research will begin with a simplistic, time-dependent
cooling system where kinetic energy input is absent, and then move to more
complex and practically relevant fluidization systems with and without solid
boundaries to investigate time-independent statistics. Four different
computational methods will be used. Lattice Boltzmann simulations that solve the
detailed flow around particles will be used to provide first-principle-based
data sets needed to assess the relative importance of collisions and gas phase
effects as well as cluster formation and evolution. On the continuum level,
linear stability analyses based on two-fluid kinetic theories will first be used
to predict the stability boundary; Euler-Lagrangian method where only gas phase
is treated as a continuum and particles are discrete, and Euler-Euler models
where both gas and particle phases are treated as continua, will then be used to
simulate the evolution of the clusters. These results will be compared to the
lattice Boltzmann data for a critical assessment of the predicative ability of
the various continuum models. This research will generate first-principle-based
simulation data on cluster formation and evolution for high-velocity gas-solid
flows, and these data will be used to establish an accurate theory able to
predict both onset and evolution of the clustering instability on the continuum
level.

The simultaneous flow of gas and solid particles occurs in windstorms,
landslides, reactors used for energy production, and mixing units used by the
pharmaceutical industry, to mention just a few. The complex physical
interactions occurring in these systems make them difficult to predict from past
experiments alone. In this project, mathematical models with no fitting
parameters will be developed and used to predict flow phenomenon unique to these
systems. The availability of such a modeling tool is expected to reduce to
improved design of reactors in shorter turn-around times and at smaller costs
than is currently possible. The model will be made available to researchers
worldwide via an existing open-source code, and thus is expected to find future
use in numerous sectors, including pharmaceuticals, chemical process industries,
energy production, geology, and astrophysics.