* 1236062
* Enhanced Flow Boiling Heat Transfer at Microscale for Stable, High Heat Flux Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 297,684.00

CBET-1236062&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kandlikar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High heat flux removal
while limiting the substrate temperature is critical in electronics cooling
application. Current processor cooling demands are seen to reach a heat flux of
1 kW/cm2 while the device surface temperature needs to be low enough to keep the
junction temperatures below 85 Â°C within the IC chip. Flow boiling in
microchannels has been identified as a potential cooling technique to meet this
cooling demand. However, the boiling instability and poor heat transfer
performance during flow boiling in microchannels have been major impediments in
realizing the desired cooling performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
effort is directed specifically at developing a stable, high performance flow
boiling system to meet the current electronics cooling demands. This will be
accomplished by a novel open microchannel design with tapered manifolds. The
open microchannel design provides a low resistance pathway for vapor while the
liquid remains in contact with the substrate providing efficient cooling due
nucleate and/or convective boiling. Further enhancements in heat transfer
coefficient and critical heat flux (maximum possible heat flux under safe
operation) will be achieved by adding offset strip-fins and nanowires
respectively on the substrate. The tapered manifold provides an effective way to
eliminate the flow boiling instability. These concepts have been validated in
the preliminary experiments in the PI?s lab. The focus of the project will be to
understand the basic mechanism of flow boiling in this configuration and
significantly improve the heat transfer performance with water. In addition,
FC87 and ethanol will also be investigated as working fluids. FC87 is a
dielectric fluid that can be directly used in electronics cooling application.
Ethanol is also a dielectric fluid and has a better heat transfer performance
compared to FC87. Although ethanol is flammable, its superior performance may be
weighed against the precautions needed in designing safe cooling systems. The
work will be done by graduate and undergraduate students who will gain hand-on
experience on conducting advanced research on microscale transport processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major outcomes of the project will be developing a
novel high heat flux removal system, understanding the basic heat transfer
mechanisms during flow boiling at microscale, and educating undergraduate and
graduate students. In addition, the students and PI working on the project will
open interactions with area middle school students. They will be introduced to
the emerging scientific areas including advanced heat transfer concepts,
nanostructure development and research endeavors in quest of overcoming
scientific barriers. Student from a local city school are scheduled to visit RIT
once every week to interact with graduate students and learn from simulated
projects that will be directed towards mimicking some of the key aspects of the
planned research. The project will also be showcased to female students from
high schools during their visits organized by WE (Woman in Engineering)
volunteers at RIT.