* 1236272
* Molecular Environment-Tailored, Self-Assembled and Nanomorphology-Controlled Electron Acceptors for High-Performance Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alex Jen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

PI: Ma, Hong Proposal Number: 1236272 Institution: University of Washington
Title: Molecular Environment-Tailored, Self-Assembled and Nanomorphology-
Controlled Electron Acceptors for High-Performance Solar Cells

So far, the most efficient architecture to build polymeric solar cells (PSCs) is
the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure prepared by mixing electron-rich
polymers and electron-deficient fullerides such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61 (or C71)
butyric acid methyl ester (PCBMs) with a power-conversion efficiency of over 8%.
However, fullerene derivatives have undesirable properties such as a relatively
large bandgap and low absorption coefficient in the visible spectrum to lack
ideal absorption of solar radiation, and excessively deep lying LUMO level to
result in needless energy loss during electron transfer and so limit the
efficiencies of the final devices, in particular their open-circuit voltages.
Thus, there is an urgent need for alternative acceptor materials that - like
PCBMs - possess favorable electron-transporting and processing properties, but
which also absorb strongly in the solar spectrum, have energy levels
significantly different from those of fullerene-based acceptors, and exhibit
diversification regarding derivatization and functionalization. In addition, it
is desirable to have electron acceptors with the combination of tunable
molecular structures, controlled nanomorphology in electron donor (D)/acceptor
(A) blends, and tailored D/A interfaces in optimized device architectures, which
allow maximized exciton generation/migration and charge
separation/transport/collection.

The main objectives of this project are 1) development of electron acceptors
through tailoring of pi-conjugated core/bridge and peripheral group to have
tunable energetics (bandgap, HOMO, LUMO), controlling molecular dielectric,
dipolar and steric environment to favor efficient D/A interfacial charge
separation, and introducing thermo-/photo-removable, hydrogen-bonding and
surface-binding groups to allow processability, monolayer-templated self-
assembly and nanophase formation for optimized charge transport and collection;
2) photophysical, electronic and morphological studies of these electron
acceptors in solution/thin film and their blends with variable ratios of low-
bandgap p-type polymers, and establishment of a correlation between molecular
structures and material properties such as light absorption, electronic
property, photoluminescence quenching, and charge separation/transport dependent
on molecular environment and nanophase control; 3) fabrication and testing of
conventional and inverted PSC devices by utilizing optimized electron acceptors
as component of active layer through spin-cast bulk heterojunction or patterned
monolayer-induced assembly of D/A nanophases toward high power-conversion
efficiency above 10% and good stability.

Rational design, synthesis and processing of novel electron acceptors with
tailorable molecular environment, self- assembling property and controlled
nanophase, and their device fabrication and testing will provide a
transformative approach to fulfill these requirements, and establish a new
platform in fundamental understanding of relationship among molecular structure,
processing, property and device performance in particular on D/A interfacial
charge separation dependent on dielectric, dipolar and steric parameters. This
project will have broad impact through the training of new professionals who are
skilled with state-of-the-art research techniques and are sensible, creative,
and devoted to solve the social need. This project will include education
activities at different levels covering K-12 to graduate students.