* 1236210
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Catalytic Hydrogenation and Hydrogenolysis Steps to Produce Novel Liquid Fuels from Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Vadim Guliants, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 318,959.00

PI: Guliants, Vadim Proposal Number: 1236210 Institution: University of
Cincinnati Main Campus Title: Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Catalytic
Hydrogenation and Hydrogenolysis Steps to Produce Novel Liquid Fuels from
Biomass

This project seeks to develop new catalytic technologies to produce novel liquid
fuels, linear C5-C6 alcohols and ketones, by hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis of
biomass-derived 2-methylfuran (2MF) and dimethylfuran (DMF). The project focuses
on elucidating the fundamental relationships between the molecular structure and
catalytic function of well-defined model Pt and Pd nanoparticles in 2MF and DMF
hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis steps to produce linear C5-C6 alcohols and
ketones selectively. The research program will address the following fundamental
issues: the importance of preferential exposure of specific crystal planes; the
roles of crystal size, shape and defects; the nature and number of surface metal
sites participating in 2MF and DMF hydrogenation; the influence of the reaction
conditions (H2/furan ratio, temperature, pressure); role of catalytic support
(e.g., carbon, Al2O3 and SiO2); the impact of equilibria between the ketones and
corresponding alcohols on hydrogenation selectivity; the fundamental kinetics
and surface reaction mechanism. Additional insights into the mechanism of 2MF
and DMF hydrogenation will come from molecular modeling studies employing close-
packed (111) and other dominant Pd and Pt surfaces. The molecular structure-
reactivity relationships from this research will be used to develop fundamental
mechanistic models for 2MF and DMF hydrogenation over metal catalysts, which
will assist in the design of improved catalysts, both noble (e.g., Pt, Pd) and
base (e.g., Cu, Ni).

This research will broadly impact on (1) society at large and (2) recruitment of
undergraduate and underrepresented students. Society at large is expected to
benefit from this research aimed at replacing nonrenewable, fossil fuels from
unstable regions with renewable fuels from US-grown biomass. Recruitment of
undergraduate and underrepresented students is an integral part of the proposed
effort. Junior and senior students will take special project credits towards
their technical elective requirements by performing research in the PI?s
laboratory. The PI will continue to recruit women via Women in Science and
Engineering Program (WISE) and Rowe Center for Women in Engineering at
Cincinnati.