* 1236716
* Operando Molecular Spectroscopy during Catalytic Biomass Pyrolysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 311,993.00

PI: Wachs, Israel Proposal Number: 1236716 Institution: Lehigh University Title:
Operando Molecular Spectroscopy during Catalytic Biomass Pyrolysis

Biomass pyrolysis to produce bio-oil is emerging as an attractive technology to
produce renewable liquid fuel. However, a major obstacle in the development of
this technology is the catalytic pyrolysis of the biomass to bio-oils - - the
first and most critical catalytic reaction step. Very little attention, however,
has been paid so far to the catalyst and catalytic reaction mechanisms of
biomass pyrolysis. The hypothesis of this proposal is that a fundamental
molecular level of understanding of the catalyst, surface reaction intermediates
and reaction pathways during biomass pyrolysis will guide the rational design of
advanced catalysts that will yield improved bio-oils and fuels.

This project will focus on the molecular events taking place on the surface of
solid acid catalysts during biomass pyrolysis since recent biomass pyrolysis
studies have only investigated pyrolysis product yield and bio-oil composition
under various reaction conditions. In order to elucidate the molecular events
taking place on the catalyst surface, cutting edge in situ and operando
spectroscopic characterization studies during the catalytic biomass pyrolysis
reaction will initially be undertaken with representative model biomass
compounds of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin before the investigation of
pyrolysis of natural biomass. This modern approach to catalysis will allow for
unprecedented insight into the fundamentals of biomass pyrolysis over solid acid
mixed oxide catalysts. The fundamental studies during pyrolysis with well-
defined mixed oxide catalysts and model biomass compounds will unravel the
fundamental structure-activity relationships for catalytic biomass pyrolysis.

The proposed research program has the potential to significantly advance the
fundamental catalysis aspects of biomass pyrolysis and also showcase the modern
approach to heterogeneous catalysis research. The new fundamental insights that
will be generated for biomass pyrolysis metathesis by solid acid mixed oxide
have the potential to also influence applied biomass pyrolysis research by
stimulating the development of advanced catalysts for biomass conversion to bio-
oils. The modern, molecular level approach that will be developed and applied to
the proposed research program will also be applicable to other areas of cutting
edge heterogeneous catalysis research.

This multidisciplinary project will broadly educate both graduate and
undergraduate students. Specifically, this project focuses on several key
technology areas including nanotechnology, material synthesis, spectroscopy,
surface chemistry of carbohydrates, reaction kinetics and problem solving of
cutting edge energy issues. The students involved in the proposed research
project will be mentored to develop their critical thinking skills, experimental
design and data analyses approaches, and effective oral and written
communications skills. An emphasis of the proposed program is to provide the
participating students an international research experience that will broaden
their educational and cultural experiences.