* 1236761
* Pollutant formation during oxy-combustion of coal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* BIHTER PADAK, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 272,000.00

Carbon dioxide emissions from combustion of fossil fuels is of great concern for
global warming. A technology being considered for carbon capture and
sequestration in power plants is oxy-coal combustion. Thus, the operational and
environmental impacts of oxy-coal combustion need to be evaluated. Sulfur
dioxide emissions can also be reduced with oxy-firing compared to air combustion
due to high concentrations of sulfur trioxide in the flue gas resulting in
sulfur retention on fly ash and ash deposits in the furnace. Higher sulfur
retention on the ash particles reduces the sulfur dioxide emission rates, on the
other hand it creates problems utilizing the fly ash for cement and concrete
production. Further research regarding the sulfur dioxide emissions under oxy-
firing conditions needs to be performed, specifically to investigate the fly ash
retention. In comparison to the emissions of nitrogen and sulfur oxides, the
subject of trace metal emissions in oxy-fuel combustion has not received much
attention in the literature and little information has been reported on the
mercury transformations under oxy-fired conditions. One area of concern is that
the pollutants such as mercury and sulfur trioxide cause corrosion in carbon
dioxide compressors and recirculation lines. The characteristics of oxy-
combustion and air-combustion are fairly different and this results in changes
in the behavior of pollutants in the flue gas, thus the emissions. As research
in this area is beginning to grow, the fundamental understanding of pollutant
formation remains to be elucidated and before developing removal technologies,
one needs to understand the speciation and behavior of these pollutants under
oxy-fired conditions. The objective of this project is to investigate the
differences in pollutant behavior under air- and oxy-fired conditions. This
research is unique in the fact that it will be the first comprehensive
investigation of pollutant formation during oxy-fuel combustion at a fundamental
level combining bench-scale experiments, kinetic modeling and molecular
modeling. Two major milestones that will be achieved by the end of this project
are the following: 1) Gas phase chemistry of sulfur oxides and trace metals will
be elucidated by both bench-scale experiments and kinetic modeling and effects
of other flue gas constituents and the recycling will be determined 2)
Heterogeneous chemistry of sulfur oxides and trace metals on fly ash will be
investigated by bench-scale experiments and molecular modeling and the mechanism
of sulfur retention on fly ash will be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will provide useful information for the oxy-fired power plants
regarding the risk of corrosion associated with the pollutants in the flue gas
as well as the extent of sulfur retention on fly ash that could prevent them
selling the fly ash to concrete producers. Besides the practical knowledge, it
will also provide a fundamental understanding of the pollutant chemistry that is
taking place in the flue gas and on the fly ash surface. Experimental data that
will be produced from this project will be made available in the literature and
could be used to validate the existing models in the literature. Additionally,
the graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will gain an in-
depth knowledge of combustion chemistry as well as excellent experimental and
modeling skills.