* 1236514
* Multiscale Modeling of the Nanocarrier-Cell Ahesion Interface in Targeted Drug Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Portonovo Ayyaswamy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

1236514 PI: Radhakrishnan

Targeted drug delivery is an emerging application of nanotechnology. It involves
designing pharmaceuticals by packaging them into nanocarriers and targeting them
for intravenous delivery directly to the diseased tissue. Benefits of this
approach include optimal drug dosage in-terms of the drug reaching diseased
tissue (enhanced therapeutic efficacy) and a concomitant decrease in drug
reaching normal tissue (reduced toxicity). Success is directly dependent on the
design and synthesis of carrier particles that have specific features such as
particle size/shape and surface coverage with binding molecules specific to the
biomarkers (target receptors) of diseases being treated. Optimal design leads to
the desired, and necessary, initial event, namely, selective binding and arrest
of the carrier particle to endothelial cells in blood vessels within the
diseased tissue, followed by carrier internalization into the cells post arrest.
Using computational modeling and engineering principles, the project will
investigate experimental and design parameters such as receptor density on
nanocarriers, nanocarrier size & shape, and binding response to blood flow in
order to optimize the targeting the nanocarriers to specific (diseased) cells.
The model will integrate multiple length and time scales involving blood flow,
nanocarrier arrest, cell membrane mobility, and biomolecular receptor-ligand
interactions, all of which contribute to the physical environment for
nanocarrier binding, and collectively define the efficacy of nanocarrier arrest
on the target cell. The model will delineate nanocarrier binding and arrest
influenced by hydrodynamic forces resulting from blood flow, expression-levels
of specific (target) receptors on the endothelial cell surface, their lateral
diffusion on the membrane, the presence or absence of a glycocalyx, and cell
membrane mobility. The model will be validated against quantitative cellular and
animal experiments and will be employed to make predictions for optimal design
of nanocarriers.

Success of targeted drug delivery protocols relies in part on the development of
rational technologies designing nanocarrier pharmaceuticals and clinical methods
for injecting such functionalized, targeted drug carriers into the blood stream
close to the disease tissue. The results of the project will lead directly to a
design platform for targeted nanocarriers to endothelial cells, which line blood
vessels. The versatility of the modeling combined with experimental approaches
will then enable their utility in context specific pharmacological applications,
e.g., designing carriers for specific/different disease states, preventive
(prophylactic) versus therapeutic targeting, targeting in arteries versus veins,
and exercising control on toxicity. Project results will directly facilitate the
optimal engineering design, as well as impact the clinical translation of such
drug delivery systems for targeted disease treatment.