* 1236029
* Impact of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Growth and Reproductive Parameters in Fish
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Nancy Denslow, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1236029&lt;br/&gt;Sabo-Attwood,
Tara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials (NM) have emerged as high-
performance entities with application in numerous sectors, including electronic,
optical, medical, and structural composite technologies. Because of their
anticipated role in large-scale industrial production, there is little doubt
that select NM will ultimately find their way into our aquatic environment.
There is a lack of fundamental studies that have investigated the effects of
single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) biological interactions and effects in
aquatic organisms, particularly through chronic dietary exposure routes, and
even fewer that have addressed mechanisms of action. Therefore we have limited
understanding of the potential toxicity associated with environmentally relevant
exposures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to fundamentally
understand the sub-lethal effects of SWNTs with a focus on elucidating their
role in limiting growth and reproduction in largemouth bass (LMB), a well
characterized environmentally relevant freshwater model for reproductive
toxicological assays. We are particularly interested in investigating the
ability of pristine non-surface functionalized SWNTs to alter the
gastrointestinal (GI) environment through direct tissue damage and/or
sequestering proteins vital to digestion and absorption of dietary constituents.
The study design involves a systematic top down approach spanning in vivo fish
exposures to mechanistic in vitro assays. We will accomplish these studies
through the following specific tasks; (1) Track SWNT distribution using a custom
built near-infrared fluorescent (NIRF) imaging system and assess growth
following dietary exposures to LMB; (2) Assess the impact of SWNTs and estrogen
enriched diets on reproductive endpoints including measurements of vitellogenin
and steroids (17&amp;#946;-estradiol and 11-keto-testosterone) in plasma by
ELISA and determination of estrogen receptor binding and activation using
fluorescence polarization and gene reporter assays, respectively; (3) Determine
suites of proteins bound to SWNTs in intestinal tissues and blood using
proteomics strategies. The proposed research will fill a critical gap in the
scientific literature by providing a systematic understanding of the growth and
reproductive effects of ingested SWNTs. This will also be the first study to
address specific mechanisms of action (MOA) by employing a suite of molecular
assays and proteomic strategies. These studies will be fully novel, as there are
no fundamental mechanistic reports that have examined the impact of SWNTs on
growth and reproductive processes through disruption of the GI tract and
endocrine system in fish. Results of this study may lead to biological relations
for SWNTs in aquatic environments, allowing a priori predictions of their fate
and effects and therefore meets the definition set forth by the NSF for
transformative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The expected
research outcomes and benefits include systemic tracking of SWNTs in whole
animals; advanced understanding of chronic dietary exposures to SWNT on the
endocrine system; revealing the interactions of SWNTs with biological molecules
and specific MOA including receptor activation and cell production of steroids .
This increase in basic scientific knowledge will ultimately lead to
understanding relevant environmental exposure scenarios and sub-lethal biologic
effects that could impact aquatic organisms at the population level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed activity will generate
critical knowledge to better understand the environmental implication of a
commercially important class of nanomaterials. The majority of requested funds
are directed toward the training of a postdoctoral associate in an emerging and
interdisciplinary research topic. This research will provides for mentoring and
cross training (molecular signaling and proteomics) in a novel and highly
relevant area that is of immediate and critical importance to our society. The
postdoctoral training program integrates classroom and hands on laboratory
training and the opportunity to mentor minority graduate and undergraduate
students recruited to work in the lab. Dissemination of the research results is
planned through conference presentations, peer-reviewed publications and
research symposiums.