* 1236303
* Photolysis of free chlorine to hydroxyl radical by sunlight and ultraviolet irradiation for enhanced disinfection of chlorine-resistant waterborne pathogens
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* John Meschke, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 354,139.00

1236303&lt;br/&gt;Dodd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Free available chlorine (FAC)
remains the most widely used disinfectant in drinking water practice worldwide.
It is cheap, easily utilized as a disinfectant, portable, and in general highly
effective for achieving the inactivation of a wide variety of waterborne
microbial pathogens. However, it is known to be relatively ineffective as a
primary disinfectant of such important pathogenic agents as Cryptosporidium
parvum, Mycobacterium avium, and Giardia lamblia, This has led to widespread
adoption of more effective, but often substantially more capital-, equipment-,
and energy-intensive alternative disinfectants such as UV light and ozone.
Recent findings suggest that inactivation of chlorine-recalcitrant microbial
pathogens may actually be achievable at considerably lower expense by utilizing
sunlight or monochromatic UV light to photolyze FAC to such highly-reactive
oxidant species as hydroxyl radical, atomic oxygen, and ozone during
conventional chlorination. In such an approach, FAC and photochemically-
generated oxidants may act in tandem to yield substantially greater inactivation
of various waterborne pathogens than would be achievable using chlorine alone.
This investigation will utilize a combination of chemical and microbiological
tools to quantify inactivation of chlorine-resistant viral, bacterial, and
protozoan pathogens during conventional chlorination processes enhanced by FAC
photolysis. The primary objective of this work will be to evaluate the use of
sunlight for photochemical enhancement of chlorination processes. However, the
investigation will also focus on potential applications of monochromatic and
polychromatic UV light sources, on account of their growing frequency of
application in drinking water treatment. The project team will develop and
optimize experimental and analytical procedures for quantifying pathogen
inactivation during photochemically-enhanced chlorination by first utilizing two
common surrogates for waterborne pathogens B. subtilis spores and MS2
bacteriophage, followed by the chlorine-resistant human pathogens M. avium,
Coxsackievirus B5 (CVB5), and C. parvum. These procedures will subsequently be
utilized to examine the influence of such critical parameters as pH, water
temperature, alkalinity, and matrix oxidant demand on inactivation efficiency
for each pathogen under simulated sunlight, natural sunlight, and various
artificial UV light sources in buffered laboratory reagent water systems, as
well as in real water matrixes acquired from municipal water utilities in the
Puget Sound region. Particular emphasis will be placed on development of kinetic
models for pathogen inactivation that take into account measured water quality
parameters and spectral irradiance data. Finally, formation potentials of
organic and inorganic DBPs likely to be generated during application of
photochemically-enhanced chlorination (e.g., trihalomethanes, haloacetic acids,
ClO3-, ClO4-, and BrO3-) will be quantified under a variety of scenarios
relevant to full-scale application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
establishing a theoretical framework for modeling chlorine-resistant pathogen
inactivation during photochemically-enhanced chlorination, this project will
provide an extensive dataset for M. avium, CVB5, and C. parvum inactivation
under a wide variety of conditions applicable to full-scale water treatment
(including variable irradiation wavelength, intensity, temperature, pH, and
alkalinity). This research could support the photochemical augmentation of
conventional drinking water chlorination processes at full-scale, with minimal
equipment and process retrofit. Application of such an approach could have
substantial benefits over existing alternatives to chlorine-based disinfection
processes. First, chlorination is used in the vast majority of water treatment
facilities. Second, utilization of solar radiation in particular as a light
source could net significant cost and energy savings in comparison to processes
utilizing ozone or artificial UV light. In addition, if a UV process is already
in place at a facility, that process could quite easily be adapted for
photochemically-enhanced chlorination simply by dosing FAC upstream of the UV
reactor(s). Furthermore, sunlight-enhanced chlorination could prove
exceptionally useful for ensuring disinfection of chlorine-resistant pathogens
during point-of-use applications in developed and developing societies, on
account of its expected low costs and ease of implementation.