* 1236892
* Extinction and instability mechanisms of premixed turbulent flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Ronney, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 327,000.00

Experiments will be conducted to develop a more comprehensive understanding of
the burning properties of fuel-air mixtures highly diluted with excess air or
exhaust gas and thereby obtain knowledge that could be applied to improve the
efficiency and reduce harmful emissions from internal combustion engines and
other energy conversion devices. Both hydrocarbon-air and hydrogen-air mixtures
will be tested; hydrogen is entirely different from other fuels because of its
lower minimum flame temperatures supporting combustion, low ratio of mixture
thermal diffusivity to fuel mass diffusivity and lower heat losses, which lead
to unique flame properties that are difficult to quantify. Three sets of
experiments will be performed. First, to study the effects of turbulence,
experiments in a jet-stirred combustion chamber will be conducted. Burning
rates, conditions for flame extinguishment and emissions will be examined for
varying mixtures and turbulence conditions. Second, to assess the effects of
flame stretching, the burning rates and shapes of flame edges at the boundary
between burning and extinguished regions of the flames will be studied in a
turbulence-free apparatus. Third, to study the effects thermal expansion without
hydrodynamic strain (other than that generated by self-induced flow), the
propagation rates and stability properties of flames propagating in narrow
channels (i.e. Hele-Shaw cells) will be studied. This is considered especially
relevant since most laboratory experiments are conducted in open apparatuses
where thermal expansion is relaxed in the directions parallel to the flame
plane, whereas combustion in most practical devices (e.g., IC engines) occurs in
very confined geometries where this relaxation cannot
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of fuel-air mixtures (particularly hydrogen-
air mixtures) highly diluted with excess air or exhaust gas is an
environmentally friendly way of operating internal combustion engines but the
ability to employ these mixtures in engines is hindered by the lack of knowledge
of the rates at which these flames burn, the flame shapes they produce, and
if/when these flames will extinguish. While many hydrogen fueled vehicles use
fuel cells, it is still likely that for many applications, internal combustion
engines will be the best power system due to the vastly superior power to weight
ratio of engines compared to fuel cells even though the engine efficiencies are
slightly lower than fuel cells. Moreover, most of harmful emissions concerns of
hydrocarbon-fueled engines are practically eliminated using hydrogen fuel. The
information obtained in this work will provide a better understanding of
combustion of hydrogen, hydrocarbon and hydrogen/hydrocarbon mixtures. This data
will be beneficial not only for engine design, but also in reducing fire and
explosion hazards associated with fuel manufacturing, transportation and
storage. The proposed work will support a graduate student and two
undergraduates, the support for one of which is reserved for a member of an
under-represented group.