* 1236309
* Self-Assembly of Plasmonic Nanoclusters Mediated by Localized Steric Repulsion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Lilo Pozzo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2016
* USD 292,315.00

1236309 PI: Pozzo

The implementation of new technologies harnessing plasmonic effects depends
strongly on improving our capacity to reliably and economically produce complex
structures from nanoscale metallic building blocks. Unfortunately, the
organization of large quantities of nanomaterials via ?bottom-up? strategies
that are scalable, cost-effective and that achieve precise structure control is
still limited. This project will research a new strategy to assemble complex
structures from nanoparticle building blocks by exploiting local steric
repulsion and short-ranged attraction. In this new approach, the formation of
structured clusters or will be controlled through the use of engineered
nanoparticle surfaces containing mixtures of end-grafted polymers to regulate
steric repulsion and small functional molecules to induce attraction. Steric
repulsion and attractive interactions will be precisely adjusted by altering the
surface composition to control particle assembly and to manipulate the
morphology of the multi-particle structures. Diverse colloidal clusters with
controllable optical and electronic properties will be generated using this
robust strategy. Small angle scattering of x-rays and neutrons will be used to
selectively probe the nanoparticle configuration (SAXS) and the conformation of
the polymers (SANS) in order to develop a complete and self-consistent
description of the assembly process. Structural experiments will be complemented
by direct comparisons to simulations. The primary goals of the project will be
to: 1) Experimentally determine the role of polymer interactions in mediating
nanoparticle self-assembly 2) Reduce the structural polydispersity of self-
assembled clusters 3) Predict equilibrium cluster structures with Monte Carlo
simulations and 4) Increase the structural diversity of colloidal molecules.
Achieving these objectives will contribute significantly to the advancement of
plasmonic applications that utilize nanoparticle clusters.

Plasmonic technologies exploit the unique interactions between visible light and
delocalized electron clouds in small metallic particles. For example, plasmonic
effects are used to develop sensors for the rapid identification of trace
amounts of chemicals and environmental contaminants in complex samples. They
also advance less invasive and more effective medical diagnostic and treatments
tools such as photoacoustic imaging and photothermal cancer therapy. Plasmonic
approaches are also used to develop advanced solar cells that are more efficient
and less expensive than current technologies. Nonetheless, the successful
deployment of these and other applications requires significant advances in the
scalable fabrication of nanostructures with controllable optical and electronic
properties. This project will research a new approach that is suitable to
fabricate large numbers of plasmonic nanomaterials while maintaining accurate
structure control and with methods that are scalable, robust and versatile.