* 1236182
* Insights to Selenium Cycling and Remediation Revealed by Stable Oxygen Isotopes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Philip Larese-Casanova, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 304,657.00

1236182&lt;br/&gt;Philip Larese-Casanova&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selenium (Se)
pollution of surface waters and sediments is pervasive in the western U.S. due
to erosion, mining, combustion, petroleum processing, and irrigation activities
that involve Se-rich soils, shales, and ore. Its accumulation in lakes and
sediments has lead to adverse biological effects in wildlife and to health
threats to humans, prompting a need for large-scale monitoring and
bioremediation efforts. The mobility and bioavailability of Se in water strongly
depends on the chemical form of Se. This project will investigate mechanisms of
mobilization of dissolved Se oxyanions (selenate and selenite) and their
immobilization in natural and remediation systems under diverse biogeochemical
settings using a novel isotopic technique. Over the past decade, stable Se
isotope studies from other researchers have provided valuable insights to Se
biogeochemistry and environmental Se source identification. However, stable
oxygen isotopic studies of Se oxyanions, so far lacking, will provide a new
approach to characterizing Se redox cycling and expand applicability of isotope
fractionations to reactions previously not sensitive to Se isotope
fractionation, such as oxygen atom addition via oxidation. The objective of this
project is to develop a stable oxygen isotopic approach and apply it to answer
key knowledge gaps within aqueous selenium biogeochemistry. Laboratory
experiments will examine reaction pathways including: (1) describing how
dissolved selenate and selenite form from the oxidation of parent minerals and
enter waterways, (2) probing interfacial oxygen exchange mechanisms that occur
during oxyanion sorption to environmental metal oxides, and (3) assembling
oxygen isotope fractionation indicators specific to oxyanion immobilization
pathways such as reduction and uptake reactions with minerals, bacteria, algae,
and fungi. Stable oxygen isotope values of oxyanions, water, oxides, and
oxidants will be monitored during reactions using isotope ratio mass
spectrometry. The oxygen isotope tracing experiments will identify likely
sources of oxygen incorporation and exchange during oxyanion formation and
interaction with oxides, leading to a clearer conceptual model of Se pollutant
dynamics. Like Se isotopes, the measured oxygen isotope fractionation values are
expected to be unique to different reduction pathways and therefore can be used
to distinguish between chemical and microbial reactions responsible for
dissolved Se processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the
scientific knowledge of how selenium oxyanions form and transform in aquatic
systems through reaction pathway tracing with isotope labeling. A better
understanding will be developed for the chemical and microbial controls on
selenium mobilization and immobilization. The results are expected to form the
basis of improved field site monitoring and remediation efforts by using
isotopic information that directly reveal field site reactions. The stable
oxygen isotope approach to evaluating mechanisms will have broad applicability
to evaluating other inorganic oxyanion contaminants such as arsenic and
chromium. This project will provide research opportunities for one graduate
student and several undergraduate students, high school students, and K-12
teachers within a multidisciplinary setting that investigates chemical,
biological, and mineralogical agents interacting with metallic water
contaminants. In addition to engaging experiential learning through hands-on
laboratory engagement, these K-12 participants will also develop educational
materials, in the form of field trip demonstrations and curriculum modules, for
the instruction of broad audiences about the principles of water contamination
and treatment.