* 1236957
* Workshop on Production Mechanism, Number Concentration, Size Distribution, Chemical Composition, and Optical Properties of Sea Spray Aerosols; Raleigh, NC; June 4-6, 2012
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Nicholas Meskhidze, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides partial support for a June 2012 workshop to address the most
urgent open science questions for improved quantification of sea spray aerosol-
radiation-climate interactions. Discussions will cover different aspects of
marine aerosol-radiation-climate interactions to explore what simultaneous
information is needed and what steps need to be taken to acquire such
information to gain insight and answer the most critical research questions. A
major goal of the workshop is to bring together established researchers and
young researchers with new and different perspectives. To achieve this goal and
to provide opportunities for professional interactions in a focused and
productive forum, one third of invited researchers are early career scientists
(PhD students, postdoctoral researchers and young research scientists who
received their PhD after 2005). Broader impacts of the workshop derive from its
main tangible product, a prioritized plan for conducting and facilitating novel
research to improve the understanding of sea spray production mechanism,
atmospheric sea salt aerosol distribution, chemical composition, radiative
properties and lifetime. Additional impacts result from the opportunity for
young scientists to meet, network, and exchange ideas with leaders in the
atmospheric and marine sciences.