* 1236462
* A comprehensive computational framework for analysis and optimization of wave energy converters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Geoffrey Cowles, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 368,221.00

PI: Raessi, Mehdi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236462&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth&lt;br/&gt;Title: A comprehensive
computational framework for analysis and optimization of wave energy
converters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable energy extraction from ocean waves
represents an enormous source of renewable energy and promises to contribute
towards the energy independence of the United States while addressing rising
environmental concerns over fossil fuels. However, the process of bringing a
wave energy converter (WEC) design from the lab to commercial deployment is long
and costly and is hindered by the complexity of the underlying &amp;#64258;ow
physics. There are several critical scienti&amp;#64257;c concerns that are
di&amp;#64259;cult or impossible to study in the lab at early design stages of
WECs. They include assessing the performance of a full scale array and
engineering a WEC that is optimized for a speci&amp;#64257;c deployment site to
achieve maximum performance. Computational methods can provide the ability to
address such concerns early on in the development process and are capable of
shortening the timeframe and associated costs of the design
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, almost all computational tools for
analysis of WECs are based on linearized hydrodynamic equations in place of the
full Navier-Stokes equations. As a result, they are unable to capture non-linear
e&amp;#64256;ects, e.g. wave breaking, turbulence, and &amp;#64258;uid-structure
interactions, that signi&amp;#64257;cantly impact the performance of WECs.
Without capturing these e&amp;#64256;ects, a typical linear model will have a
very limited scope in the development process of WECs. Thus, there is an urgent
need to bridge the gap between WEC development e&amp;#64256;orts and
computational modeling techniques by introducing a comprehensive computational
framework for design and optimization of WECs that includes all important
e&amp;#64256;ects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize a
comprehensive computational framework for analysis and optimization of WECs
under real-world conditions. The proposed computational tool incorporates non-
linear e&amp;#64256;ects and provides site-speci&amp;#64257;c simulations
including (a) a turbulent (both direct numerical simulation, and large eddy
simulation), two-phase &amp;#64258;ow solver driven by wave &amp;#64257;elds
derived from phase-averaged wave model for realistic and site-speci&amp;#64257;c
in&amp;#64258;ow conditions, (b) a &amp;#64258;uid-structure interaction model,
and (c) an uncertainty quanti&amp;#64257;cation model to guide sensitivity
analysis and optimization studies of WEC design. To enable rapid turnaround of
simulations, the PI will continue e&amp;#64256;orts in migrating these modules
to a heterogeneous CPU/GPU computing environment. The PI will use the
experimental datasets available publicly (Salter?s WEC) and from an industry
partner (Resolute Marine Energy) to validate the proposed computational tool.
The PI will then perform design and optimization studies on, among other
devices, a WEC developed at UMass-Dartmouth (UMD) for small-scale, wave-driven
generators for remote areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed computational
tool can accelerate the development and deployment of cost-e&amp;#64256;ective
WECs, which can potentially transform renewable energy e&amp;#64256;orts in the
United States. The project will train two graduate and three undergraduate
students. The outreach and dissemination plans target a wide spectrum of
audience including high school students/teachers, local communities of New
Bedford and Fall River, international scienti&amp;#64257;c communities of marine
renewable energy, engineering, and computational sciences, and members of social
media.