* 1236909
* Entrainment and Detection of Engineered Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Flagan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-1236909&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses the need to understand
workplace exposures to engineered nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;in two ways: (i) by
investigating fundamental mechanisms by which engineered
nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;may become airborne; and (ii) by developing aerosol
instruments suitable for routine workplace and&lt;br/&gt;personal monitoring of
nanoparticles in the 1-500 nm size range with the ability to follow
transient&lt;br/&gt;that may be responsible for most exposure from well-designed
nanoparticle synthesis systems.&lt;br/&gt;Controlled laboratory experiments will
also be conducted to develop a fundamental understanding&lt;br/&gt;of mechanisms
for nanoparticle release to the air, beginning with studies of the
aerodynamic&lt;br/&gt;entrainment from nanoparticle-coated surfaces. The long-
standing need for suitable instruments&lt;br/&gt;for monitoring workplace
exposures will be addressed by creating a small, simple, and low
cost&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticle opposed migration aerosol detector (NOMAD) that will
enable exposure assessment&lt;br/&gt;with sufficient resolution to estimate lung
deposition patterns. The NOMAD performance will be&lt;br/&gt;compared with
conventional approaches to exposure monitoring in nanotechnology laboratories,
and&lt;br/&gt;provide personal exposure data that is not presently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed research will
survey sources of airborne nanoparticles using&lt;br/&gt;size resolved
instruments with better time response, and broader coverage of the potential
size&lt;br/&gt;range than employed in previous studies, thereby enabling
detection of transient release events, and&lt;br/&gt;facilitating identification
of nanoparticle sources. Subsequent controlled laboratory experiments
will&lt;br/&gt;quantify the forces required to entrain nanoparticles from
different kinds of surface deposits, and the&lt;br/&gt;extent of agglomeration
the airborne nanoparticles that result, thereby laying the groundwork
for&lt;br/&gt;a fundamental understanding of potential exposure mechanisms. The
new instruments will enable&lt;br/&gt;health effects studies that are clearly
needed to understand the risks of nanotechnology, but are&lt;br/&gt;not
presently possible due to the cost and complexity of present instruments. With
these tools,&lt;br/&gt;continuous exposure data will become a valuable tool in
both health effect research and in worker&lt;br/&gt;protection. They will
further enable studies of exposures to nanoparticles in the use of
consumer&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology products, and from conventional pollution
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposed research will
provide new insights into incidental processes&lt;br/&gt;that contribute to the
release of engineered nanoparticles into workplace air, and the risks
associated&lt;br/&gt;with such releases. The new airborne nanoparticle detectors
will enable researchers and industry to&lt;br/&gt;monitor nanoparticle exposures
with rigor that is not now possible. Moreover, these new
detectors&lt;br/&gt;should become the enabling technology for health effects
studies that are clearly needed, but not&lt;br/&gt;presently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates will have the opportunity to become involved
in the project through Caltech?s&lt;br/&gt;Summer Undergraduate Research
Fellowship (SURF). In addition, the Flagan laboratory will
recruit&lt;br/&gt;participants from the Minority Undergraduate Research
Fellowship (MURF) program as it has in&lt;br/&gt;4 of the last 6 years. We will
work with Caltech?s outreach program to invite local area students
to&lt;br/&gt;lectures and visits to our laboratory, as well as talk to the
students in their schools. Students from&lt;br/&gt;local high schools,
particularly those near freeways, will be recruited to undertake science
projects&lt;br/&gt;involving measurements of nanoparticles in their home or
school environments.&lt;br/&gt;As he has done for 10 years, the PI will continue
to co-mentor a First Robotics team at Ramona&lt;br/&gt;Convent Secondary School,
a girls high school in Alhambra, CA that has 60% minority
enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;This has proven to be a most effective mechanism in
stimulating interest in pursuing STEM studies&lt;br/&gt;in college by showing
the students that engineering is fun.