* 1236349
* Rational Design of Optimal Cellulase Enzyme System for Biofuels Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Ganti Murthy, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 319,922.00

PI: Murthy, Ganti Proposal Number: 1236349 Institution: Oregon State University
Title: Rational Design of Optimal Cellulase Enzyme System for Biofuels
Production

While advanced biofuels have potential to reduce dependence on fossil fuels and
emissions of greenhouse gases, this has not been realized due to various
challenges in production and conversion of feedstock into biofuels. This
proposal addresses some of the challenges in the conversion of feedstock. Many
researchers have demonstrated that the high price of cellulase enzymes up to
$1/gal of ethanol (30-35% of ethanol production costs) is a stumbling block for
commercialization of advanced biofuels. Any strategy that can reduce these costs
could have significant and immediate practical impact on economics of cellulosic
ethanol production. As cellulose is the most abundant biopolymer on earth that
is metabolized by many organisms, a wide variety of cellulase enzymes exist in
nature. Utilization of this wide array of cellulases for advanced biofuels
production is challenging as many of these enzymes have different modes of
action, temperature and pH optima. Currently the only way to determine the
optimum enzyme ratio is to perform extensive experiments with different
substrates. There is a critical need to develop a rational design framework that
can optimize the mixture of different cellulase enzymes subject to various
process, economic constraints; thus significantly reducing the total cost of
enzymes used in ethanol production process.

The overall goal of this integrated proposal is to develop methods for rational
design of cellulase enzymes using stochastic/kinetic models and control
theoretic approaches. New methods of analysis for complex biochemical systems
using tools from control theory will be developed. These analytical methods will
have wide ranging application in bioprocessing and biofuels production. These
techniques will be demonstrated on a laboratory scale system using pure enzymes
and commercial enzyme mixtures.

This project will utilize stochastic modeling techniques and kinetic models with
control theory approaches to develop a framework for rational design of
cellulase enzymes. Since cellulose hydrolysis proceeds efficiently in the
presence of multiple enzymes working in a synergistic manner, action of multiple
enzymes will be modeled using two approaches: Kinetic models and stochastic
molecular simulation models. Linear and nonlinear control theory methods will be
applied in a novel way to identify and quantify the optimal enzyme composition
for various design constraints. Control theory techniques will be used to
evaluate the suitability of the optimal enzyme compositions for real world
applications. This theoretical framework can also be used to aid model driven
hypothesis formulation for design of cellulase mixtures that can be
experimentally verified. Analysis techniques that will be developed in this
project will have applications in the areas of bioprocessing and biofuels
production.

A significant effort in this project will be devoted for conducting structured
training and mentoring programs for graduate, undergraduate and high school
students, curriculum development and outreach programs for wide dissemination of
knowledge developed in this project. One new graduate level course will be
developed and a laboratory section will be developed for an existing
undergraduate course. A dedicated website will be developed for effective
dissemination of the course materials developed in this project. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be directly mentored and trained in research methods
to create a knowledge base and serve as a catalyst for further innovation.