* 1236403
* Long-Term Solutions to Acid Producing Coal Mine Spoils Using Industrial Wastes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Xu Liang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 343,324.00

1236403 (Liang). Around the world, mining exposes fresh mineral surfaces that
have never been in contact with the atmosphere and often creates oxidation
enabled pollution. Historically, the mining industry has utilized the target
mineral and dumped materials deemed not useful as ?refuse piles? that often
became small mountains that produce acid discharges. These discharges are
commonly manifested in the Appalachian region of the USA as acid mine runoff
that has become prevalent since coal mining became a major industry over 100
years ago. Not only are these acid discharges environmentally damaging to
watersheds, the coal refuse piles themselves are barren lands that are virtually
useless, as game, forest, or agricultural lands. Such legacy mining issues are a
blight and have one of the most detrimental environmental impacts in the
Appalachian region where metal compounds from the refuse piles, including ferric
and ferrous iron, aluminum, and manganese (sulfate and chloride as the most
common counter-ions), are continuously leached from these coal refuse piles
and/or abandoned coal mines causing the acid mine drainage (AMD). The produced
AMD deteriorates water quality throughout a watershed by decreasing the pH in
soil pore water and river flow. AMD has not only been a significant
environmental problem in the coal production Appalachian regions in the US, but
also will certainly become a significant and harmful environmental problem in
the coal production regions around the world as coal is used as one of the most
inexpensive forms of energy to power the ever increasing world population.
Therefore, it is necessary to have an economically sound and technically
effective long-lasting approach to deal with the AMD problem. This research
project addresses this need using an industrial ecology based approach to mix
the surface materials of these refuse piles with brown mud, a residual of
Bauxite processing from aluminum manufacturing. In this project, an objective is
to determine the longevity and permanence of this industrial ecology-based
remediation approach, as many previous remediation efforts fail over time due to
eventual loss of alkaline material to neutralize the ever ongoing acid
production via iron oxidation. Using such a combined approach to investigate the
long-term effectiveness of the new industrial ecology-based remediation approach
is critically important because this new technology has the potential to be
installed at a mass scale with costs that may be minimal in comparison to the
widespread installation of active treatment systems. Therefore, at the watershed
scale, this type of technology may lead to a paradigm shift in AMD remediation
strategy.