* 1236905
* LTER:  MCR IIB: Long-Term Dynamics of a Coral Reef Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Robert Carpenter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2018
* USD 4,632,747.00

Intellectual Merit: The Moorea Coral Reef (MCR) LTER was established in 2004 to
investigate community and ecosystem effects of pulsed perturbations and slowly
changing environment from local and global stressors. The site is the coral reef
complex surrounding the island of Moorea, French Polynesia, which includes a
lagoon system (with fringing reef and back reef habitats) and a steeply sloping
fore reef offshore. The core issue that unifies MCR research centers on
ecological resilience, specifically the processes and attributes that affect the
capacity of a coral reef to absorb perturbations and reassemble to a community
dominated by stony corals without degrading to an alternative state (e.g., one
dominated by macroalgae). At the end of MCR I, virtually all of the coral on the
outer fore reef surrounding Moorea was killed by a natural but brief outbreak of
a coral predator, which was followed by storm waves that removed dead coral
skeletons from the fore reef on one of the three shores of the island. These
perturbations had little effect on corals in lagoon habitats. Spatial variation
in the landscape scale effects of these qualitatively different perturbations
provides the MCR with an unparalleled scientific opportunity to address
fundamental, unresolved questions regarding disturbance and recovery of coral
reefs, together with the effects of community structure on reef functioning. The
MCR research program addresses two time horizons and hence research activities
are organized into two corresponding themes. Research Theme 1 (Resilience of
Contemporary Reefs) focuses on factors that promote or inhibit the return of a
perturbed reef community to a coral-dominated state under current levels of
stressors from Global Climate Change (GCC) and Ocean Acidification (OA).
Research Theme 2 (Structure and Function of Reefs in the Future) addresses the
longer time horizon and seeks insight into how forecasted changes in GCC- and
OA-related drivers may alter the structure of the benthic community, together
with the consequences of those changes to ecosystem processes. This integrated
research program for these inter-related themes includes question-driven time
series measurements, long term field experiments, shorter-term field and
laboratory experiments and measurements, and modeling and synthesis activities
to integrate and generalize the results. The six goals of MCR IIB are to: (a)
contribute to understanding what factors influence reef resilience and how GCC-
and OA-related drivers will affect coral reefs; (b) continue our long term
datasets on community dynamics, ecosystem processes and physical and chemical
drivers; (c) maintain 3 long term field experiments and initiate 1 new one; (d)
develop and test ecological theory; (e) continue to enhance our information
management system to more fully meet the needs of the LTER network and the
broader scientific community; and (f) maintain the effectiveness of MCR outreach
components. Broader Impacts: Coral reefs are not just ecologically important -
they yield upwards of $375 billion annually in goods and services (most of it in
the developing world) that are vulnerable to human activities and climate
forcing. Hence this research has relevance and application to resource managers,
policy makers and stakeholders worldwide. LTER findings are presented annually
to the Minister of the Environment of French Polynesia and have been used in the
development of Marine Protected Areas for Moorea. Broader impacts arising from
LTER educational activities include postdoctoral mentoring, research that
integrates undergraduate and graduate training, active participation of faculty
researchers and K-12 teachers in MCR research, incorporation of MCR findings in
teaching curricula, progress towards an ethnically diverse MCR student
community, and involvement of faculty and students from predominantly
undergraduate and minority-serving institutions. Additional impacts are realized
by MCR outreach efforts, including partnerships with three local schools that
serve socioeconomically disadvantaged and minority students, with the University
of California - Santa Barbara REEF (Research Experience &amp; Education
Facility) that exposes over 10,000 K-12 and public visitors annually to MCR
research, and with the Atitia Center on Moorea to reach Tahitian school children
and the public.