* 1236974
* Conference: Exploring Frontiers in Synthetic Biology; to be held May 15-16, 2012 in Heidelberg, Germany
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Christopher Rao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 04/30/2014
* USD 49,895.00

Intellectual Merits Synthetic biology is a relatively new field that sits at the
intersection of biology and engineering, where practitioners use engineering
tools and systems approaches to design novel biological systems, including
genetic circuits and whole cells, with which to explore governing principles
behind complex biological processes or to develop new functionality that can be
exploited.

The specific objectives of the workshop are to bring together leading
researchers in the field of synthetic biology to: 1. Explore and identify areas
of joint interests, needs, and opportunities associated with the rapidly
emerging discipline of Synthetic Biology.

2. Identify grand challenges and explore potential limits of the field from both
biology and engineering perspectives. In addition, recognizing the future of
science research will be increasingly transnational, this workshop seeks to
establish new ties and collaborations between researchers in the United States
and Germany.

Broader Impacts The workshop will contribute to the enhancement and improvement
of scientific, engineering and/or educational activities by bringing together a
leading group of international researchers to define the frontiers in synthetic
biology. In addition, this meeting will provide the foundation for international
collaborations between researchers in the US and Germany.

The meeting sponsors will produce a report of the meeting that will be
distributed to the participants and sponsoring organizations (NSF and DFG) and
will also be posted for the public on sys-bio.org. We will also explore
publishing a meeting report in peer-reviewed journal such as ACS Synthetic
Biology.

The workshop's organizers will ensure that workshop includes attendees from
underrepresent groups in Science and Technology and also attendees who are at
early stages of their career.