* 1236447
* Evaluating sustainable production and consumption dynamics in complex product systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anna Christina Tyler, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,610.00

1236447 (Babbitt). This project will adapt concepts and models from the field of
biological community ecology and apply them to analyze adoption dynamics,
environmental impacts, and sustainable management strategies for an entire
"community" of consumer products. Research goals are to 1) formulate a new
industrial ecology framework based on community ecology to link sustainable
production practices with consumption trends; and 2) apply this framework to
address sustainability challenges of consumer electronic products, a rapidly
growing and evolving component of global society. The research is grounded in
fundamental concepts and models of biological community ecology and implemented
in three interconnected lines of inquiry: 1. Adapt community ecology-based
diversity metrics to characterize the structure of the community of consumer
electronics products owned by households and investigate the underlying trends
in product function and consumption dynamics; 2. Evaluate the environmental
impacts (energy, materials, waste) for this entire product system using
"community-level" life cycle assessment and material flow analysis and then
determine how this impact changes as a function of evolving community diversity;
and 3. Use ecological models to identify the exogenous forces and community-
level product interactions that determine the community structure and its
attendant environmental impacts so that future environmental management
strategies can effectively target system leverage points. The community ecology
perspective pioneered in this research brings a new perspective to long standing
challenges in the sustainable management of products. Current approaches such as
life cycle assessment and energy efficiency analysis focus on "per product"
impacts. Environmental gains from incremental changes to a single product or
material, however, are often offset by increased consumer demand. Treating
groups of related products as an ecological community brings analytical tools
such as diversity analysis and structural equation modeling to bear on
sustainable production and consumption. The models evaluated can potentially
transform the way we assess and manage electronic products, as demonstrated in
this project, but are also translatable to other sectors with high levels of
interaction (e.g., renewable energy systems). The multidisciplinarity embedded
in this research is enabled by a project team with expertise spanning
sustainability assessment, electronic products, biological ecology, and
technological modeling. Electronics have unique sustainability challenges that
span the products? life cycles, including rapid increases in energy consumption,
greenhouse gas production, demand for scarce minerals, and waste generation.
Knowledge developed for electronic products can inform policy making, guide
sustainable product design, communicate best practices to consumers, optimize
recycling systems, and minimize life cycle environmental impacts. For the
industrial ecology field as a whole, there is transformational potential
associated with connecting to new ecological domains and tools. This work could
stimulate further innovation to identify and utilitize previously unexplored
ecological metaphors and models. To realize these benefits, broader impact
activities will 1) promote multidisciplinary collaboration and education through
curriculum development and broad research dissemination; 2) enhance engagement
of underrepresented faculty and graduate and undergraduate students in STEM
disciplines; 3) increase public scientific literacy through digital outreach and
education efforts; and 4) improve industry-academic partnerships by translating
research findings for an industrial education and training program in industrial
community ecology.