* 1236467
* Metal Oxide Gasification of Lignocellulosic Biomass: Tar Cracking Mechanism
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Liang-Shih Fan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Fan, Liang-Shih Proposal Number: 1236467 Institution: Ohio State University
Title: Metal Oxide Gasification of Lignocellulosic Biomass: Tar Cracking
Mechanism

Biomass Chemical Looping (BCL) has been recognized as a promising way to utilize
biomass efficiently in recent years. The BCL process can convert biomass to
valuable biofuels and its precursors such as H2, while capturing CO2 at a low
energy cost. This proposed project seeks to explore the reaction mechanisms
during the gasification of lignocellulosic biomass by metal oxides (the oxygen
carriers). Tar, generated during biomass pyrolysis, complicates the process.
Thus, the removal of tar with high efficiency is greatly desired. The target of
this project is to identify the decomposition pathway of tar at a molecular
level and to synthesize an oxygen carrier with high performance. The experiment
assembly consists of using a thermo gravimetric analyzer (TGA), a micro
fixed/fluidized bed (MFB), and various gas and solid analysis instruments. The
TGA will act as a tar generator where biomass pyrolysis takes place in a
controlled manner. The generated tar will subsequently go into the MFB to react
with the oxygen carrier. The gaseous species will be sampled and analyzed by gas
chromatography (GC), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and mass
spectroscopy to identify the composition as well as important intermediates.
Post-experiment analyses will also be carried out on the oxygen carrier to
reveal the metal-support interactions. In addition, naphthalene, phenol, and
benzene will also be directly fed into MFB as typical primary, secondary, and
alkyl tertiary tar species, respectively. Furthermore, oxygen carriers of
various compositions will be tested to reveal the effect that different primary
metal-support interactions could have on the reaction mechanism. These results
will be combined to interpret the complex non-catalytic gas-solid reaction BCL
system.

Tar conversion is one of the obstacles that impedes the utilization of biomass
materials, clean energy and carbon-negative fuel sources. Currently, catalytic
decomposition is the most widely used method to remove tar. However, this method
requires extensive capital and material resources as a separate tar
decomposition reactor is necessary after the gasifier in order to achieve
desirable removal results. In the BCL process, previous experiments have
indicated that the synthesized composite oxygen carriers have the potential to
convert all biomass pyrolysis products, e.g., volatile, tar, and char, in a
single reducer reactor. Among these pyrolysis products, tar decomposition is
considered to be a complex reaction network. In order to avoid a both labor and
time intensive trial-and-error method in oxygen carrier development,
understanding the tar decomposition mechanism is key. Early researchers have
investigated the mechanism of tar catalytic decomposition process with some
aromatic species as tar model molecules, such as naphthalene, benzene, and
phenol. In the BCL process, the oxygen carrier acts as a lattice oxygen donor
rather than as a catalyst (that largely remains unchanged in composition). The
oxygen carrier oxidizes the tar, thereby, changing the composition such that the
solid-solid interactions between the primary metal and the supports are more
complex. Multiple experimental methods will be combined to investigate the
reaction mechanism by identifying the important intermediates. With the
knowledge on the tar decomposition mechanism at molecular level, the rational to
synthesize an efficient oxygen carrier can be developed.

By highlighting the fundamental mechanisms behind biomass pyrolysis with metal
oxide oxygen carriers, this proposed research aids the continuous development of
clean and economical energy conversion processes. This research would lay the
scientific groundwork for the emerging BCL system, which could provide
affordable energy sources for biomass-rich communities. The MFB development
provides a novel fundamental tool for thermochemical reaction analysis. Beyond
potentially transforming the biomass energy landscape, this proposed study will
present enriching opportunities for students. The results completed through this
study will be incorporated as curriculum material of undergraduate and graduate
classes. Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in this research.
The proposed K-12 outreach programs will promote the scientific research for
future scientists and engineers. This research will be able to enhance the
potential commercialization of BCL, a crucial and innovative technology for
thermochemical biomass conversion.