* 1236466
* Nanofiber-based Novel Electrode Architecture for Lithium-Air batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Vibha Kalra, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 369,957.00

PI: Kalra, Vibha Proposal Number: 1236466 Institution: Drexel University Title:
Nanofiber-based Novel Electrode Architecture for Lithium-Air batteries

Despite recent advances in the state-of-the-art lithium ion batteries, their
energy and power densities are insufficient for transportation applications.
This project will examine a novel battery chemistry, namely, Lithium-air, which
can exhibit a theoretical energy density of almost 2 orders of magnitude higher
than lithium-ion batteries. However, before the promise of Li-air batteries can
become a reality, a serious challenge that needs to be overcome and will be the
focus of this work is the development of ?nanostructured air cathodes? that
optimize transport of all reactants (oxygen, Li+ ions, and electrons) to the
active catalyst surfaces and provide enough spaces for incorporation of solid
lithium oxide products during battery discharge.

The specific objective of this proposal is to fabricate and study process-
structure-performance correlation in a novel, hierarchically-ordered nanofiber-
based architecture with the aim to develop efficient cathodes for Li-air
batteries. A unique triaxial electrospinning technique will be used that will
allow core-shell architecture to achieve well-controlled directed material
assembly via a simple synthesis procedure. In addition to providing well-defined
multi-phase reaction surfaces, the proposed electrode design will exhibit a
hierarchical two-level pore structure; macropores from inter-fiber spacing
inherent to electrospinning and mesopores, which will be created in the carbon
core via controlled nanoscale material assembly. This structure will help
optimize oxygen mass transport and surface area and provide sufficient pore
space for incorporation of solid discharge products necessary to maximize
discharge potential. Owing to the complexity of the proposed architecture, PI?s
approach is to first independently understand the electrospinning behavior and
process- structure correlation in each of the functional layers of the core-
shell nanofiber and then leverage these learnings to study the complete
architecture.

If successful, this work will develop batteries that possess significantly
higher energy storage density than the current state-of-the-art Li-ion
batteries. Such ability will allow them to successfully compete in the
transportation sector and achieve a satisfactory driving range. In addition, the
fundamental knowledge gained through this work on materials processing,
structure and electrode design will also benefit supercapacitors and other
battery chemistries. This project will involve 1 PhD graduate, several
undergraduates and K-12 students/teachers, particularly females and those from
under-represented minorities in interdisciplinary research activities via
workshops, research-based course and hands-on research experiences.