* 1236124
* Towards First-Principles Based Wake and Wake Interaction Models for Wind-Farm Layout Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Lafayette Taylor, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2017
* USD 303,210.00

PI: Sreenivas, Kidambi Proposal Number: 1236124 Institution: University of
Tennessee Chattanooga Title: Towards First-Principles Based Wake and Wake
Interaction Models for Wind-Farm Layout Optimization

Wind energy has become a promising renewable energy source over the years with
large wind farms being built worldwide. These wind farms produce hundreds of
megawatts (MW) of power utilizing multi-megawatt wind turbines. The operation of
a wind turbine is affected by many factors, however the ingestion of wakes from
other turbines results in reduced power output and increased dynamic loading on
the turbine blades. In an effort to minimize the cost of the wind farm, turbines
are typically located in close proximity, resulting in the interaction and
merging of many wakes in the wind farm. Previous studies indicate that estimated
power losses due to wakes can range from 5% to 20%, depending upon the wind farm
layout.

Although modeling of wind turbine wakes has been a research topic for nearly 30
years, analysis of wake interactions has typically used simple wake models that
predict velocity and other flow variables in the wake using a set of explicit
equations or analytical expressions. With today?s computational resources it is
now possible to perform high-resolution simulations for multiple wind turbines
with rotating blades by solving the Navier-Stokes equations without introducing
a wake model. Although this approach would provide a higher fidelity
representation of wind-turbine flow with wake interaction, the computer run time
would range from days to weeks. Thus, there is need to have improved field
simulation models and wake models that are both high fidelity and sufficiently
economical to perform the large number of simulation cases required to
effectively design and optimize the layouts of wind farms so as to minimize the
adverse affects of wake ingestion. Additionally, such a combined model could be
used to improve estimates of power production from existing wind farms by
integration with continually updated wind climate (speed and direction)
forecasts. Accurate power production forecasts are necessary for economical
operation of the wind farm and to reduce power-grid stability issues.

This project will explore two new, high-fidelity, low-cost computational models
for wind-turbine wakes and wake interactions. The first is a new Parabolic
Navier-Stokes model based on a primary/secondary flow approximation that allows
spatial marching solution without any approximation for pressure gradients. It
can be used in steady mode with time-independent turbine-disk models or in
unsteady mode with rotating-blade models. It will improve upon existing models
by being applicable not only in the far wake but also in the near-wake region.
Its computational cost for simulating flow through a wind farm would be
substantially lower (orders of magnitude) than a Navier-Stokes simulation. The
second model for wake and wake-interaction will involve decomposing Navier-
Stokes simulations into modes using techniques such as Proper Orthogonal
Decomposition or Dynamic Mode Decomposition. This model will significantly
reduce the computational cost compared to the Parabolic Navier-Stokes model. In
the area of wind farm layout optimization, this study will address methods for
coupling a global optimization algorithm with a gradient-based algorithm to
mitigate their deficiencies and reduce overall wall-clock time for optimization.

The SimCenter, an integrated research and education center within the University
of Tennessee at Chattanooga, has been involved in a broad range of STEM
activities that support the goal of stimulating interest among students in K-12
in science and math related disciplines. It regularly hosts dozens of groups of
K-12 students over the course of the year. It also maintains a website dedicated
to STEM related resources. As part of this proposed effort, these activities
will be expanded to respond to interest from local museums in collaborations to
reach a wider audience. A table-top model of a wind farm will be created and
used as part of the tours that are conducted. This will enable students to have
hands-on experience with functioning wind turbines. High school, undergraduate
and graduate students will be involved in various aspects of this activity. The
high-school and undergraduate students will be involved in developing the table-
top model and will also develop software applications for the SimCenter website.
In addition, undergraduate students will assist in the generation of
computational grids required for the simulations, and graduate students will
implement the approaches outlined in this proposal.