* 1236451
* Intramyocellular Biotransport and Muscle Quality in Aging and Obesity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* John Georgiadis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,999.00

1236451

PI: Georgiadis

Aging and obesity are associated with reductions in lean body mass and increases
in fat mass, both leading to declines in strength and physical function. Elderly
women are particularly prone to disability as they have more fat mass, less
skeletal muscle mass and strength, and are less physically active compared to
their male counterparts. Determining fitness for the elderly who are overweight
or obese by using non-invasive means will facilitate intervention by diet and
exercise. This project is motivated by the need to measure the relative benefits
of these interventions to increase leg muscle quality, which is a measure of
physical fitness. Recent research has demonstrated that Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) can measure the local properties of directional water diffusion
and lipid concentration in the human muscle. A systematic study of the thigh
muscles of 47 elderly women differing in weight and fitness level has just been
completed, including a follow-up study after exercise training and weight loss
of the obese subgroup. Strong correlations were found between overall fitness
and MRI measures related to transport of water inside the muscle fibers. The
overarching aim of this project is to interpret these results by simulating the
way MRI encodes information and applying these simulations to understand the
transport of metabolites within the muscle fiber. Human muscle is a complex
hierarchical tissue, so the focus of this project is on a multiphase model that
can accommodate the muscle structural changes relevant to aging and obesity.
Starting from the MRI data acquired, the model will include an ordered or
disordered array of myofibrils and lipid domains inside the muscle fiber, and
multiphase transport of water, certain metabolites, and calcium ions will be
simulated numerically. The model parameters will then be altered judiciously to
study various scenarios of mass transport related to impaired metabolism inside
the muscle fiber. The key objective of the proposed research is the combination
of numerical modeling with data obtained from non-invasive imaging techniques,
such as MRI, which will offer insights into muscle physiology and metabolism
previously only available from invasive techniques requiring muscle biopsy. The
connection between local directional diffusion and the distribution of the
lipids inside the muscle has not been explored, because ostensibly such
measurements have not been possible until now.

Among the 81 million baby boomers currently living in the US, 70% of women over
60 years of age are overweight or obese. The transformative part of this project
is the use of MRI technology available in the local clinic to connect the
physical fitness of the individual with the physics of mass transport inside the
muscle. In addition to helping plan the clinical intervention in order to
prevent the onset of disabilities, this project will improve scientific
knowledge of how the aging muscle utilizes energy derived from lipids. Knowledge
gained from this research effort can be incorporated into classical engineering
courses, or new interdisciplinary courses. The future establishment of an NSF
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program focusing on Transport
Phenomena in Muscle and Central Nervous System is also planned.