* 1236035
* Spontaneous Dispersion of Particles in Liquid Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Pushpendra Singh, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 311,000.00

1236035 Singh

The aim of this research is to investigate the physics of particle adsorption
and the spontaneous dispersion of particles that occurs when particles come in
contact with a fluid-fluid interface. The dispersion of small particles, e.g.,
flour, pollen, etc., can occur so quickly that it appears explosive, especially
on the surface of mobile liquids like water. This interfacial-force-driven
dispersion of particles is important because it causes particles sprinkled over
a small area to almost instantaneously disperse into a monolayer over an area
that is several orders-of-magnitudes larger. While the Weber and Bond numbers,
and the contact angle are the important dimensionless parameters that govern the
motion of particles normal to the interface, it is not completely understood
what parameters govern the lateral motions of the particles. Our main objectives
are: (i) use experiments and direct numerical simulations to determine the
dependence on important parameters of the speed at which particles disperse, and
to quantify the enhancement resulting from dispersion in the rate of spreading
on liquid surfaces of small particles including microbes and viruses. (ii) Model
the fluid dynamics of the two-dimensional pollination process in hydrophilous
plants. (iii) Model the mechanism that causes the breakup and spreading of
agglomerates on liquid surfaces. Intellectual Merit. The focus of the past
studies has been on understanding the mechanisms by which particles already
trapped on fluid-liquid interfaces interact. The proposed study will, for the
first time, consider the role of the sudden dispersion, which will improve our
understanding of biological processes occurring over the surface of water,
developing improved estimates for the rate at which small particles, including
microbes and viruses, spread on interfaces, and improving the modeling of
processes in the pharmaceutical and food industries that involve breakup and
spreading of powders on liquid surfaces. Broader Impacts. This research will be
fully integrated with education and outreach, involving graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly women and under-represented minorities,
with synergistic activities in our courses at the university, and in workshops
in NJIT, and BBG educational programs for inner-city pre-college students to
encourage then to explore careers in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM). The proposed work will further our capability to understand
and model the role of particles adsorbed at air-liquid and liquid-liquid
interfaces which play an important role in many physical and biological
processes, e.g., pollination of hydrophilous plants, the spread of microbes and
germs on liquid surfaces, and formation of monolayers at fluid-fluid interfaces.
This project has the potential to make a significant contribution to the
understanding of the physics underlying the mechanisms that have evolved in
plants that possess abiotic two-dimensional pollination systems.