* 1236939
* Modeling Late Prehistoric Pastoral Adaptations and Interregional Interaction in Northern Mongolia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Bryan Hanks, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 24,564.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Bryan Hanks, Julia K. Clark will investigate
pastoral adaptations, inter-regional interaction and settlement patterns
diachronically in northern Mongolia's Darkhad Depression. This will be done to
elucidate the ways in which this area contributed to broader social, political
and economic change in the late prehistoric period. Using a combination of
survey and excavation as well as ethnoarchaeological interviews the project will
generate empirical data to address the following objectives: 1) correlation
between current and late prehistoric/early historic land use practices, 2)
correlations between prehistoric ritual monuments and areas of human activity,
3) inter-regional interaction, 4) nature of subsistence practices and their
change over time, 5) diachronic shifts in habitation location, organization
and/or intensity associated with large scale political formations (Xiongnu).
Numerous models have been proposed to explain the transition from an
agricultural economy to an agro-pastoral or fully pastoral economy. However,
there are far fewer explanatory models for the incorporation or adoption of
pastoral strategies into existing hunting, gathering and/or fishing economies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists in Mongolia have long relied upon ritual
monuments to inform their interpretations of prehistoric behavior. In the early
historic period, ritual monuments and written documents from ancient China have
supplied the bulk of the information on this period. Only recently have some
archaeologists turned their attention toward habitation sites in central
Mongolia. Recent archaeological research in the Darkhad Depression has
investigated the ritual landscape, and has concluded that the monuments in this
region, while not particularly large, are the oldest of their kind known in
Mongolia. If these monuments were underwritten by a new pastoral economy and
hierarchical social organization, as many have suggested, this could be an
important region in understanding the introduction of pastoralism into Mongolia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is twofold. First,
this research aims to use comparative case studies both within and beyond
Mongolia in order to model early pastoralist adaptations, early social
complexity, and diachronic regional demographic shifts. Secondly, this project
will speak to more regionally specific issues such as the impact of both the
adoption of pastoralism in regions that had long supported hunter-gatherer-
fisher economies as well as the emergence of the Xiongnu Empire upon peripheral
regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include: the operation of long-
term, collaborative ties with international colleagues, training opportunities
for archaeology students (Mongolian, American and foreign), and the
dissemination of the results in journals and volumes.