* 1236786
* Optimization of bio-butanol fuel blend composition based on spray and combustion performance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Chia-fon Lee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 272,735.00

A transformative approach for the development of novel bio-fuels will be
developed that will constitute a departure from current technological practice
that focuses on the production of pure fuels from agricultural sources (e.g.
ethanol). Production and utilization of butanol will be used in order to
establish this new paradigm. In particular, it has been shown that during the
production of bio-butanol, which has the potential of combining production from
renewable sources with almost-gasoline-level energy density, mixtures of
butanol, ethanol, and acetone are produced, usually referred to as baelene.
These mixtures can clearly be used themselves as fuels, without the need to
resort to pure bio-butanol. In fact, the underlying biological processes can be
controlled in order to produce the butanol/acetone/ethanol proportion that is
optimal for the energy conversion process in the engine chamber. The main
objective of the research is to introduce a methodology that will control bio-
fuel production processes through knowledge of the properties of the fuel
mixture that relate to its atomization and combustion. To this extent a
characterization of baelene sprays will be performed as a function of its
composition utilizing a novel Planar Droplet Sizing technique that will be based
on the high acetone content of the fuels under consideration. Also, novel
atomization technologies will be developed that will be based on the increased
electric conductivity of the bio-butanol containing mixtures, which paves the
way for electrostatic manipulation of atomization and combustion. Additionally,
ignition delay and turbulent flame propagation will be measured in an accurately
controlled combustion chamber for a wide range of fuel compositions. The
approach will be both experimental with the use of advanced, mostly laser-based
diagnostics and computational with emphasis on modeling fuel properties and
sprays and providing an extensive data base of high-quality data that will guide
?upstream? fuel production.

The research will establish an alternative to the currently dominant mentality
in bio-fuel production which involves the production of well-defined chemicals
(bio-ethanol, methyl-esters) that are required to operate in engines that have
been designed for drastically different fuels. Instead, a methodology will be
developed that will take intermediate products of the biological processes,
utilize them as fuels, optimize their composition for atomization and combustion
performance, and then guide the biological process towards the production of
optimized intermediates without the need to resort to pure chemicals. In this
manner, clean and efficient combustion of renewable fuels will be achieved with
a reduced cost of processing the raw agricultural material.