* 1236297
* Biological conversion of methane to methanol using monooxygenic pathways in autotrophic ammonia oxidizing bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Kartik Chandran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 224,049.00

Biological conversion of methane to methanol using monooxygenic pathways in
autotrophic ammonia oxidizing bacteria
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBET
1236297&lt;br/&gt;Kartik Chandran&lt;br/&gt;Columbia
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States is investing significant
resources to become a leader in bio-based chemicals. While ethanol has been of
primary focus, it should be noted that other biofuels and chemicals such as
methanol can be as, if not more, attractive. Methanol is widely used as an
additive in gasoline blends, as an electron donor in fuel cells, as a trans-
esterfication agent to convert long-chain fatty acids and lipids to biodiesel
and as a precursor to synthesize dimethyl ether (also a fuel). In addition,
methanol is still one of the most widely used chemicals for enhancing
denitrification in wastewater treatment. Most methanol in the States is produced
by chemical oxidation of methane. The chemical catalysis pathway is expensive,
energy intensive and redundant; involving initial oxidation of methane to CO2
and H2 and then reduction of CO2 back to methanol. In this project, the
metabolic versatility of ammonia oxidizing bacteria will be engineered to
biologically convert "dirty" digester off-gas, which contains a mixture of
methane and CO2 (both co-substrates for methanol producing ammonia oxidizing
bacteria) to methanol. Specifically, as part of this project, pure culture
ammonia oxidizing bioreactors will be developed for the partial oxidation of
methane to methanol. The metabolic pathways and nutritional requirements of
ammonia oxidizing bacteria associated with methane to methanol oxidation will be
characterized. Finally, using the pure culture data, metabolic models will be
developed and used for the design and operation of a system for biomethanol
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful implementation of this project
could potentially convert wastewater treatment plants into biorefineries
producing methanol, and promote utilization of digester off-gas in the form of a
liquid fuel-source. At the same time, pathway redundancies in chemical
conversion of methane to methanol could be avoided. This project therefore
follows a potentially translational paradigm based on harnessing existing, but
poorly studied microbial pathways and optimizing such pathways via process
engineering. Of many possible applications, the methanol produced can also be
used as a carbon source during the removal of nitrogen (nitrate) from
wastewater. However, the benefit is that the source of carbon to achieve this
nitrogen removal is not petroleum or fossil based. Therefore, this project could
also be a strong catalyst for resource neutral biological nitrogen removal. This
project is expected to contribute to the overall concept of resource recovery
from wastewater, landfill gas and other sources of methane by engineering
appropriate bioprocess technologies. Further, this project will provide an
exciting platform for improving science education by involving students from a
minority school in Harlem, NY as well as science teachers who are part of an
ongoing NSF STEP Teacher Training Program.