* 1236788
* GOALI:  Towards Predicting Fire Suppression Performance:  Quantifying Fire-Spray Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Andre Marshall, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 326,999.00

Strategically delivering water to burning commodities is one of the most
effective and robust means of suppressing accidental fires. Because of its
unparalleled performance and versatility, water-based fire suppression is used
extensively. Although the basic cooling (gas and surface) and O2 displacement
mechanisms associated with water-based fire suppression are easy to identify,
developing detailed models to support fire suppression analysis remains a
challenge because of the turbulence, stochastic process, separation of scales,
and complex chemistry important to the physical processes governing suppression
performance. The enormous complexity of the fire suppression problem is
daunting. As such, progress to establish analytical capabilities for evaluating
suppression performance has been slow. The absence of this analytical capability
has locked the fire safety industry into a costly empirical spiral inhibiting
innovation. Dispersed spray interactions (with hot gases, flames, and thermal
radiation) and delivered spray interactions (with burning and heated target
surfaces) are important in determining fire suppression performance. These
dispersed and delivered spray interactions represent rich kinematic, thermal,
and chemical processes worthy of exploration. Canonical laboratory-scale and
full-scale configurations will be used to isolate and evaluate these phenomena
through parallel experimental and numerical activities. Advanced spray
characterization and flow diagnostics will be employed to gain insight into
local suppression phenomena (useful for model formulation) while simultaneously
measuring relevant integral quantities (useful for model validation). Spray
transport, extinction, and radiation modeling techniques will be explored and
developed for application to large-scale turbulent multi-phase reacting flows
(i.e. fire) based on the corresponding canonical experiments. This research
offers a comprehensive foundation for validating suppression performance
including detailed canonical experiments, well-instrumented full-scale tests
relevant to industry, and harmonized analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water-based
fire suppression systems (e.g. sprinklers, water mists, hose streams) represent
truly ubiquitous forms of engineering used for life safety and infrastructure
protection. The underlying suppression technology is anchored largely in
phenomenological observations, empiricism, and qualification tests. The
University of Maryland Fire Protection Engineering Department has partnered with
industry leaders in an ambitious effort to perform the focused experiments and
model development required to equip computational based modeling tools used in
fire safety analysis with validated models enabling a major step forward in CFD
based evaluation of fire suppression performance. This capability will equip
engineers with tools required for performance based fire suppression analysis
and design perhaps leading to new technologies and engineering practices for
life safety and infrastructure protection. The effort would produce 5 Ph.D.
students with expertise in fire suppression and close connections with industry
while providing numerous undergraduate research opportunities. This effort would
also support an annual fire suppression modeling workshop hosted by UM providing
a forum for research advances, industry challenges, and new engineering
approaches.