* 1236406
* Engineering All-Inorganic Quantum Dot Heterojunction Photovoltaics Through Surface Chemical Manipulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Cherie Kagan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Kagan, Cherie&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236406&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;Title: Engineering All-Inorganic Quantum
Dot Heterojunction Photovoltaics Through Surface Chemical
Manipulations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal semiconductor quantum (QDs) promise
low-cost, large-area, high performance solar photovoltaics (PVs) as they may be
processed from solution like inks and they have size, shape, and composition-
dependent electronic and optical properties uniquely allowing the design and
fabrication of all-inorganic materials from nanoscale building blocks. The
challenge is to harness the prized electronic properties of these solution-
processable QDs in solid thin films where facile charge transport and doping are
required to engineer junctions for efficient solar PVs and more broadly for
semiconductor electronic and optoelectronic devices. The large area surface (to
volume), stoichiometric balance, and coupling between QDs greatly affect charge
carrier type and transport in QD solid thin films. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will carry out chemical transformations to manipulate the surface
chemistry and stoichiometry of QDs in solid state thin films while probing in-
situ their surface chemistry and electrical properties to design high mobility,
n- and p-type QD thin films and high efficiency pn heterojunction PVs. For
example, wet-chemical synthetic methods yield macroscopic quantities of
colloidal semiconductor QDs that may be tailored in size, shape, and composition
and deposited like inks by spin- casting and dip-coating to form large-area,
uniform QD thin films. Here, the PI will exchange the QDs in thin films using
the recently developed ammonium thiocyanate treatment to form strongly
electronically coupled and nearly bare QDs, providing sites for subsequent
chemical transformations. Electrochemical, optical and electrical measurements
will be used to characterize the energy levels and carrier type, trapping, and
mobility as we modify QD films. High mobility, long carrier lifetime QD films
with electronic structures tailored to define large junction offsets will be
integrated into solar cells and optimized to form broad band, high absorption QD
films for efficient solar PVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
activities will develop understanding of the role of surface, stoichiometry, and
extrinsic atoms in weakly quantum confined, wider band gap and more strongly
quantum confined, smaller band gap QDs. The role of the surface is important in
designing high carrier mobility, n- and p-type materials that impact not only
solar photovoltaics, but the design of a broad range of sustainable electronic
and optoelectronic devices; low-power electronics, energy harvesting
thermoelectrics, and low-power light-emitting diodes; pursued from solution-
processable QD materials. The fundamental understanding and technological
developments will expand knowledge and teaching of nanostructured materials and
of processes for chemical transformations and design of materials, applicable to
the growing toolbox of nanostructured materials. The program will provide an
interdisciplinary research experience for undergraduate and graduate students.
It will also provide an opportunity for the students and PI to share the science
and engineering of sustainable and nanoscale technologies with K-12 students and
teachers, the public, and the scientific community through demos, presentations,
and formal and extramural coursework.