* 1236708
* Simultaneous Isomerization and Reactive Extraction of Biomass Sugars for Efficient Furan Production via High Yield Ketose Intermediate
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Sasidhar Varanasi, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2017
* USD 349,524.00

PI: Varanasi, Sasidhar&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236708&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Toledo&lt;br/&gt;Title: Simultaneous Isomerization and Reactive
Extraction of Biomass Sugars for Efficient Furan Production via High Yield
Ketose Intermediate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cost of biofuels can be lowered by
reducing the process steps needed for production. FConversion of biomass sugars
with high yields to their ketose forms can immensely facilitate one-pot
synthesis of fuels/chemicals. Aldose to ketose isomerization, however, has a
very unfavorable equilibrium, and high yield conversion to ketoses in a manner
that allows for further conversion economically has yet to be demonstrated. The
goal of this project is to develop a novel simultaneous isomerization and
reactive-extraction ? followed by back-extraction ? strategy that produces high
yield, high concentration ketose sugars (in pure form) from biomass hydrolysate
without significant energy inputs. Another feature of the technology with
significant economic implications is the ability to produce separate, high-
purity xylulose and fructose sugars from hydrolysate containing glucose and
xylose, affording flexibility with downstream processing options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology will allow for the direct back-
extraction of ketoses into acid-containing, benign reaction media (such as room
temperature ionic liquids); such media are ideal for high yield conversion of
ketoses to furans under facile conditions. Hydrogenation products of these
furans, such as dimethylfuran and dimethyltetrahydrofuran, are suggested as
?drop-in? liquid transportation fuels.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed
project - The potential impact of the proposed technology is immense due to its
green and sustainable features. This technology (i) allows for recovery of the
sugars in a form (ketose) that is readily amenable to conversion to value-added
products with fewer processing steps, leading to reduced processing costs; (ii)
eliminates the need for hydrolysate conditioning and the accompanying solid-
waste disposal issues; (iii) eliminates energy-intensive evaporation-based
sugar-concentration methods; (iv) is based the recycle and reuse of the
isomerization catalyst, the sugar complexing agents, and the organic extraction
media; (v) requires facile temperature and pH conditions that prevent sugar
degradation and minimize cost associated with pH and temperature adjustment; and
(vi) allows for in situ room temperature production of furans in high yields
with no disposable waste streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential part of this
project is the training and education of graduate and undergraduate students.
The wide scope of this project, from renewable biomass feedstock to the end
product of liquid transportation fuels, will allow student researchers to
acquire broad-based training in green engineering methods, analytical
techniques, biomass pretreatment, enzyme catalysis, and reactions and
separations. Additional outreach activities will allow for a wide dissemination
of biofuels knowledge and training of students at large.