* 1236030
* Collaborative Research: A Micropatterned Wettability Approach for Superior Boiling Heat Transfer Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Constantine Megaridis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 151,826.00

CBET-1235867&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Daniel Attinger (Iowa State Univ.) and C. Megaridis
(UIC)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This cross-institutional project straddles the areas
of thermofluid engineering, materials science and optimization, with main goal
to design, fabricate and study novel surfaces that are called ?superbiphilic.?
These micro- and nanostructured surfaces juxtapose superhydrophobic areas (with
strong affinities for water) with superhydrophobic areas (with strong affinities
for water vapor). As such, they show superior performance in pool boiling by
controlling the transport of the vapor and liquid phases in a parallel and
optimal manner. The study will develop a novel coating-on-metal process, which
is scalable and relevant to industrial heat exchangers. The main scientific
challenge lies in understanding, controlling and optimizing boiling phenomena on
the superbiphilic surfaces. For the first time, biphilic and superbiphilic
surfaces will be fabricated on technically relevant, metallic substrates. The
technology is based on sprayed-on patternable coatings, an industrial sector
where US leadership is challenged from overseas. The research will develop a
theoretical science base for boiling enhancement on biphilic and superbiphilic
surfaces. The work is challenging because boiling involves multiphase and
multiscale transport phenomena (evaporation starts in a sub-micrometer thick
film, while detaching bubbles are millimeter-sized) and severely transient
processes. To assist with the design and experiments, a modeling effort will be
carried through. For simple surface topographies (or patterns of hydrophobic and
hydrophilic domains), analytical models will be developed to explain the pool
boiling enhancement in a qualitative manner. Computational fluid dynamic
simulations will also be performed, to help understand the experimental data,
identify the dynamic mechanisms responsible for the boiling enhancement, and
evaluate the performance of complex surface topographies. The effort will
feature a pattern design optimization approach to determine optimum topographies
for boiling performance. The performance of the novel superbiphilic surfaces
will be evaluated by a series of experiments, including surface wettability
measurements, coating physical characterization, high speed visualization, as
well as nucleation and pool boiling curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research,
which involves rich fundamental phenomena in a variety of multidisciplinary
topics, intends to deliver an innovative solution to transferring heat at
superior rates in boiling configurations. The developments from this work will
affect -among other technologies- heat exchangers, which are widely used in most
energy-intensive industries, which collectively consume over 15 quadrillion
Btu/yr in the US alone. Consequently, the non-incremental improvements resulting
from this research have the potential to generate tremendous energy savings, and
in turn, reduce energy waste and environmental pollution. Two graduate students
will be educated in this program, and the team will reach out to
underrepresented minorities in the Chicago area.