* 1236312
* Biomimetic Advanced Composite Polymer for Wind Turbine Blade
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Ryo Amano, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 381,566.00

PI: Amano, Ryoichi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236312&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee&lt;br/&gt;Title: Biomimetic Advanced Composite
Polymer for Wind Turbine Blade&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind turbines are emissions-
free and wind is renewable and cost-free; however, the amount of electricity
generated and obtained by wind energy conversion systems is unsteady, relatively
expensive, and difficult to integrate into traditional electricity systems
because of the variation in wind source and unresolved energy storage issues.
Furthermore, the vast majority of available wind is too slow, which makes
collecting wind power more difficult, and the easy-to-collect wind energy is
primarily confined to remote locations, which makes electricity distribution
difficult. In order to achieve economic feasibility in enhancing the power in
medium- to low-wind areas, significant advances in turbine design are necessary
for increased power collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
a blade breakage self-repair system with an innovative self-healing approach.
The proposed project builds upon the PI?s experimental research of an
innovative, power-efficient wind turbine blade to improve wind turbine
performance, reduce noise radiation, and to implement a self-repair mechanism to
correct wind turbine failure during operation. The task will be achieved by
introducing a polymer-based self-healing concept to repair the wind turbine
blades. The proposed research will be conducted in the Energy Center at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM). Along with the Center?s partner
companies, the PI will create a test bed and experimental datasets for wind
turbine diagnosis and prognosis research that can be used by other researchers
in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The composite blades are manufactured using
a laborious, hand lay-up technique with glass fiber reinforcements. The use of
fiber-reinforced composite materials has grown rapidly and such composites are
often used in aerospace and other applications; however, concerns remain about
the structural integrity of composite materials following impact loading, as
they are susceptible to cracks or delaminations that form deep within the
structure. With the success of the self-healing technology for wind turbine
blades, any cracked parts in wind turbine blades can be healed during operation
without any system shutting down. Therefore, this research will shed light on
the existing wind turbine failure prevention methods, and provide new concepts
and approaches for new materials of turbine blades suitable for the 21st century
wind energy era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be fully integrated with
the curriculum currently being developed by the Southeast Wisconsin Wind Energy
Educational Collaborative program, a joint project with Milwaukee Area Technical
College that is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. This curriculum will
complement existing wind energy courses at UWM, reach undergraduate and graduate
students, and increase the supply of engineers in the workforce. In addition,
the PI will work with minority and female students through the UWM "College for
Kids/Teens" summer program to provide research opportunities to pre-college
students. The research findings will be disseminated at an international
workshop organized by the PI and his collaborators in Sweden, where
participants, including young faculty, underrepresented groups and women, and
graduate students will be invited.