* 1236280
* Chemical Morphology of Carbonaceous Particulates and Their Precursors in Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* J. Houston Miller, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,392.00

A bright yellow glow is a ubiquitous feature of most fires and flames and is
associated with combustion by anyone who has ever seen a candle or a fire in a
fireplace or outside. This emission is from very hot, nanometer-sized particles
of mostly carbon, along with smaller quantities of some other elements,
especially hydrogen. Given the central role that these particles hold in the
human experience with fires and combustion, it is remarkable that the details of
how they are formed are not fully known. How can this be? One reason is that the
processes that occur happen very quickly. These particles, that contain perhaps
a million carbon atoms, are assembled in times of less than a second from
molecules that contain only a few carbon atoms. Thus, this chemistry involves
thousands (perhaps millions) of successive steps and just as many intermediates.
To compound the problem, the suite of laboratory diagnostics that have been
applied to the study of "soot" formation typically gives us information about
very small or very large intermediates, leaving a great deal of uncertainty
about what happens in between. In this grant, a team of researchers at George
Washington University is applying a suite of laser-based diagnostics to a study
of soot formation in simple and well-characterized, laboratory flames. In
addition to "traditional" diagnostics available in this laboratory, a new suite
of measurements will be introduced based on a class of emerging "super
continuum" light sources. In essence, these sources are "white-light lasers"
where a beam of light is created covering a wide range of colors. One of these
sources produces visible light (and light just beyond the range of human
perception) and will be used to study the behavior of electrons in the smallest
soot particles. The second produces infrared light that provides additional
information on particle structure; specifically how individual carbon atoms are
bound to one another. Both types of diagnostics are intended to provide insight
to the structure of "nascent" soot particles formed at the earliest stages of
molecular growth. In addition to this experiment work, computational tools will
be used to predict particle structures, with a goal of validation of the
laboratory results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soot formation on earth plays a
critical role in energy generation (from the soot coating of furnace walls in a
commercial boiler, to soot particle impingement on the turbine blades of a
commercial aircraft engine) and in the environment (from increasing mortality in
urban areas to contributing to climate change). Remarkably, the same types of
species (perhaps formed through similar processes) are found throughout the
universe and are thought to be responsible for some of the most intriguing (and
elusive) astronomical observations. A primary focus of this and the Miller Lab's
entire prior NSF supported work has been the education of doctoral students.
There has been a proven record of success by laboratory alumni. Four of the last
five Ph.D.s to be awarded from this research group applied for and were awarded
prestigious government postdoctoral fellowships. At least three of the alumni
have grown into senior management positions at laboratories of the Department of
Defense, Commerce, and NASA. One now serves in the Office of Science and
Technology Policy at the White House. Further, the laboratory has a proven
record of education of traditionally underrepresented genders and races in STEM
fields. In this grant, the tradition will be continued by providing research
experience for doctoral students, undergraduates, and high school students drawn
from District of Columbia high schools.