* 1236759
* GOALI:  Low-Ash Lignin Biofuel from Black-Liquor Streams
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Mark Thies, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,998.00

PI: Thies, Mark&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236759&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Clemson University&lt;br/&gt;Title: GOALI: Low-Ash Lignin Biofuel from Black-
Liquor Streams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lignin is one of the most common organic
compounds on earth, comprising about 30% of all organic carbon and about 30% of
wood on a dry basis. Only cellulose is more abundant. If lignin could be
isolated from the black-liquor by-product stream of a pulp and paper mill in a
dry, low-ash (&lt; 0.5% ash) state, the result would be an excellent biofuel
with essentially the same energy content as coal. Recently, Clemson and LLC2
researchers have discovered that lignin can be precipitated from kraft mill
black liquor in the form of a low-viscosity, easy-to-handle liquid phase by
contacting the black liquor with gaseous CO2 at moderate temperatures and
pressures. Furthermore, this liquid-lignin phase, which has reduced ash content
vs. the starting black liquor, can subsequently be further reduced in ash
content by acidification with organic, renewable acids. Based on this discovery,
the team envisions a liquid-lignin low-ash purification (LLLAP) process for
recovering a clean, low-ash (&lt; 0.5%), biofuel lignin from the black-liquor
stream of a pulp and paper mill. If 50 of the 100+ large pulp and paper mills in
the United States implemented this change, 3 million tons of biomass fuel would
be generated a year as a coal replacement for electric power production,
enabling a reduction of 15 million tons of CO2/yr. If in the longer term all
pulp and paper mills sent all of their black liquor to the LLLAP process, there
would be a 2% reduction in the use of coal for U.S. electric power production.
These are significant numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
project are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a. Design and construct a
continuous-process, research-scale unit of the LLLAP process and use to
investigate the effect of LLLAP operating parameters on several measurements of
lignin product quality, including yield, ash purity, and oligomeric
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b. Determining the effect of LLLAP operating
conditions on product quality will be difficult unless one can better quantify
the molecular nature of kraft black liquor in general and of liquid lignin in
particular. Thus narrow fractions of liquid lignin will be isolated via a
modification of the LLLAP process, that is, by successive incremental pH
reduction with compressed CO2 down to a pH of ~9. Then the bulk and molecular
properties of this lignin will be characterized. For example, for absolute mass
and oligomer information, MALDI mass spectrometry will be
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;c. Fractionate the liquid lignin for molecular
characterization in the acidified, salt-free form, where a more well-behaved
relationship between properties such as molecular weight and propensity for
precipitation should exist. Previous work with other oligomeric systems has
demonstrated that multi-stage, supercritical extraction followed sequentially by
high-temperature gel permeation chromatography gives excellent selectivities,
and individual species can even sometimes be isolated. Characterize resulting
micro-fractions in terms of their oligomeric composition via MALDI mass
spectrometry. Use the results with those from the above ?pH? fractionation step
to establish a relationship between the salt content and oligomeric composition
of liquid lignin cuts, and their propensity for CO2-induced precipitation, and
use these results to modify LLLAP so as to achieve a lower-ash
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 20 paper and pulp companies around the
world have expressed interest in the LLLAP process and liquid lignin technology,
so there will be significant licensing opportunities if our low-ash targets can
indeed be achieved. Finally, from an outreach standpoint, the research team will
disseminate results to the general public through the SC ETV Radio program Your
Day.