* 1236510
* Genetic and environmental factors driving E. coli attachment to particles in streams
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Michael Thompson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 304,553.00

1236510&lt;br/&gt;Soupir&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmful microorganisms are the
leading cause of impairments in the 300,000 miles of rivers and shorelines and 5
million acres of lakes that do not meet U.S. water quality standards. Modeling
microbial transport in surface streams requires numerous assumptions because of
the lack of understanding about the mechanisms driving microbial attachment to
particles. Attachment to particles may be influenced by a genetic predisposition
of bacteria to express outer membrane features that facilitate attachment, by
physiochemical characteristics of organic particles or sediments, by water
chemistry or environmental conditions, or some combination of these factors. The
goal of the project is to improve our understanding of the genetic and
environmental factors influencing E. coli attachment to organic particles and
stream sediments. The objectives of the project are to (1) evaluate the
attachment of E. coli to model stream particles under environmentally relevant
conditions and determine the relative contribution of surface proteins and EPS
to this attachment; (2) determine the effect of outer membrane proteins and EPS
on attachment and identify the genes enabling expression of these features; (3)
compare attachment and detachment behavior of E. coli with a demonstrated
propensity for attachment; and (4) assess the mechanisms of E. coli attachment
to actual stream particulates by comparison with attachment to model
particulates. We will identify genetically encoded factors that mediate E. coli
attachment to environmental particles. All findings will be confirmed by gene
deletion experiments to verify the role of proposed attachment-mediating genes
on attachment under environmentally relevant conditions. Experiments will
identify particle characteristics enabling E. coli attachment and environmental
changes encouraging detachment of E. coli from environmental particles. The
knowledge gained about the interactions between E. coli and particles is needed
to improve understanding and modeling of microbial environmental fate and
transport processes, which are important for the protection of high quality
water supplies and identifying conditions when a risk to public health may be
present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how pathogens flow through streams
is important for predicting when public health might be at risk. Pathogens
attach to particles when they move through waters, but it is unknown if this is
because of the genetics of the bacteria, properties of the particle, or the
environment surrounding the microorganism. This project will explore the many
factors influencing the interactions between pathogens and particles in
freshwater streams. This new knowledge will improve models of microorganism fate
and transport, which are frequently used in watershed-scale, water quality
assessments. We will also develop discovery-based learning modules for
underserved minority middle school students and provide educational
opportunities for several graduate and undergraduate students.