* 1236089
* A Facile Route to a Novel Bilayer Hollow Particulate System
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Gary McPherson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 12/31/2016
* USD 367,958.00

1236089&lt;br/&gt;PI: John&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is based on the
finding that an aerosol based process can be designed to prepare hollow
submicron particles in a consistent and rapid manner. The novelty of the finding
is that the shells of these particles can be designed to constitute two distinct
layers, an outer hydrophilic silica layer and an inner hydrophobic carbon layer.
Additionally, the particles contain iron based nanoparticles which makes them
magnetically responsive. The concepts behind the research are all based on a
simple hypothesis that specific salts form bridging complexes with surfactants
that negate the templating effects of the surfactant in the synthesis of ordered
mesoporous materials. Rather, a thin ceramic shell forms that locks in chemical
constituents in the core of a hollow particle. This sealing of the particle can
be exploited to design a variety of new particulate morphologies including
silica-carbon and silica-titania bilayer systems and a system of protrusions
leading to the generation of a nanohorn type particulate system. All these
particle morphologies are new, and are consistently obtained at appropriate
constituent levels. The research attempts to firmly understand the formation of
the particulate morphologies and validate the hypothesis behind the shell
formation and understand its generality. In addition to fundamental research to
understand the process, new applications will be developed in stimuli induced
delivery, in photocatalysis and in the development of novel classes of
colloidosomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hollow submicron particles are intrinsically
of much relevance to a variety of technologies including encapsulation and
controlled delivery. Titania based hollow particles have a host of applications
in photocatalysis and solar cell technologies, and magnetic hollow particles can
be used in imaging technologies. Additional applications of the research include
the development of materials to stabilize oil droplets and is thus relevant to
oil spill mitigation technologies. The research will be integrated strongly with
graduate education, undergraduate research experiences, and outreach efforts at
the community college level.