* 1236656
* High Energy Density, High Thermal Conductivity Latent Heat Storage using Inorganic Nanocomposites
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 292,579.00

CBET-1236656&lt;br/&gt;PI: Robert Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores the use of inorganic nanocomposites as a medium for thermal energy
storage. Energy density and charging/discharging time are two very important
metrics for this field. The intellectual merit of this project is that it can
potentially lead to large improvements in both metrics simultaneously. The
nanocomposites in this project consist of a solid inorganic matrix with embedded
metallic phase change nanoparticles. The common thermal storage analogue to
these composites is a solid polymer matrix with embedded organic phase change
materials (e.g. paraffin). This project?s nanocomposite design leads to higher
volumetric energy densities because metals have much higher enthalpies of fusion
than organic phase change materials. This nanocomposite design also leads to
faster charging/discharging times because inorganic materials have much higher
thermal conductivities than polymers. An additional benefit of using metallic
nanoparticles is that their melting temperature is size-dependent. This means
that the thermal storage temperature of these nanocomposites is not inextricably
linked to chemical composition and can be a flexible design variable.
Furthermore, since inorganic materials have excellent thermal stability, these
nanocomposites can operate at temperatures inaccessible to polymer-based
composites. To investigate the thermal storage potential of these composites,
the melting temperature, enthalpy of fusion, and thermal conductivity will be
measured for nanocomposites of varying composition, nanoparticle size, and
nanoparticle volume fraction. Thermal cycling experiments will also be done to
test the stability and durability of these materials. These nanocomposites will
be synthesized using solution-phase chemistries, which allow variation of the
matrix material and elegant control over nanoparticle size, shape, composition,
and volume fraction. The precise control over composite microstructure of this
fabrication technique will allow fundamental studies on phase change and
materials design rules for thermal energy storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project are that its unexplored nanocomposite concept
could significantly improve the performance of thermal storage materials; hence
it could change the breadth and scope of thermal energy storage applications. On
large manufacturing scales, this nanocomposite concept could improve thermal
storage for solar thermal power generation and buildings thermal management. On
small manufacturing scales, this nanocomposite concept could improve electronics
thermal management by quenching transient power spikes. This project also
includes a comprehensive outreach plan that addresses multiple education levels.
This plan: (1) Engages K-12 students via interactive on-site presentations in
their classrooms that focus on thermal energy and related topics. (2) Designs a
laboratory module on colloidal nanoparticle synthesis for incorporation into
curriculum at the community college level.