* 1236370
* GOALI: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Thermal Transport in Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuits (3D ICs)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Dereje Agonafer, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 01/31/2016
* USD 216,641.00

CBET-1236370&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jain, Ankur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vertical
stacking of multiple Silicon substrates containing microelectronic circuits,
often referred to as a three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC) promises to
provide substantial performance improvement while also exacerbating the thermal
management challenge. 3D IC technology introduces several new materials and
interfaces whose thermal and thermomechanical performance remains poorly known.
The objective of this research is to investigate and measure fundamental thermal
transport and thermomechanical properties of materials and interfaces in 3D IC
technology. Time-domain Joule heating methods will be used to characterize
thermal transport through die-to-die interfaces in 3D ICs. Thermomechanical
properties of such interfaces will be measured. This research will improve the
understanding of thermal transport in 3D ICs. Experimental data obtained in this
work will help validate several analytical and simulations-based models that
have recently been developed. The long-term goal of this research will be to
develop a complete understanding of the interaction between thermal transport
and electrical design of 3D ICs and other advanced microelectronic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that by addressing thermal management
concerns in 3D ICs, the proposed work will enable 3D ICs with improved
electrical performance. This work will contribute to a More-than-Moore approach
for design of next-generation microelectronics wherein cost-effective
performance improvement is achieved not just by dimensional scaling, but also by
vertical integration. The work will be tightly-integrated with industry partners
which will facilitate technology transfer of key thermal management principles
in 3D ICs to the industry. While the industry will benefit from the fundamental,
enabling nature of the work, graduate students will also benefit from mentorship
by leading industry technologists and internships. Undergraduate students will
be included in this research through senior capstone projects and through REUs
during the summer. Research findings from the project will be incorporated into
graduate-level and upper-level undergraduate courses being taught at the
University of Texas at Arlington.