* 1236344
* Workshop on Strategies for Setting Occupational Exposure Limits for Engineered Nanomaterials, Washington, DC, September 10-11, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* George Gray, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

CBET -- 1236344&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a workshop titled
"Strategies for Setting Occupational Exposure Limits for Engineered
Nanomaterials" at George Washington University in Washington, DC, on September
10-11, 2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This workshop will
advance our understanding and ability to measure, mitigate, and prevent adverse
effects of nanotechnology in the workplace by bringing many stakeholder groups
together to advance a common goal of better managing potential occupational
health risks from engineered nanomaterials. Approximately 100 occupational
health experts from academia, government, industry and non-governmental
organizations will present and discuss new information and ideas for
establishing occupational exposure limits (OELs) for engineered nanomaterials
(ENMs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main topics to be addressed by the workshop
are:&lt;br/&gt;--What should trigger the need for setting an OEL for an
engineered nanomaterial (if an OEL already exists for the bulk
form)?&lt;br/&gt;--Approaches Used and Proposed for Setting OELs for Engineered
Nanomaterials&lt;br/&gt;--Categorical OELs for Engineered Nanomaterials
--approaches and issues&lt;br/&gt;--Comparing Methods Used and Proposed for
Setting OELs for Engineered Nanomaterials --Advantages, Limitations, Data
Requirements and Research Needs&lt;br/&gt;--Practical Workplace Issues Related
to Setting and Using Engineered Nanomaterial OELs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: An intended outcome of the workshop will be a report for publication in
a refereed journal. The report will recap the workshop proceedings, identify
areas for which there is general consensus among workshop attendees, areas where
there is a lack of consensus and areas needing additional research to address
issues and questions raised during the workshop. It is anticipated that the
authors will also offer specific recommendations as to the types of additional
data that would help to address these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
U.S. occupational health professionals are targeted audience for this first
workshop,an additional objective will be to identify potential opportunities for
future collaboration with international organizations with the objective of
working toward the development of consistent global strategies for setting OELs
for ENMs.