* 1236764
* Tensiophoresis: Label Free Droplet Sorting in Surfactant Microgradients
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Amar Basu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,784.00

1236764&lt;br/&gt;PI: Basu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capillary migration, a well-
known phenomenon, is the directed transport of a droplet when the continuous
phase presents a gradient in interfacial tension (IFT).The vast majority of
prior literature has focused on thermocapillary migration, where the IFT
gradient is due to a temperature profile. Due to the relatively weak coupling
between temperature and IFT, the resulting forces and migration velocities are
limited. The objective of this project is to investigate the capillary migration
of droplets in gradients of surfactant concentration. This approach exploits
microfluidic techniques to generate precise two-dimensional surfactant gradients
in microchannels, orthogonal to the direction of flow, which are then used to
control the capillary migration of droplets. Due to the strong coupling between
surfactant concentration and IFT, this can achieve greater than two orders of
magnitude capillary force and hence substantial migration velocities without
heating the droplet. A novel feature is that the migration velocity of the drop
is inversely related to its interfacial properties, which in turn depends
strongly on its chemical composition. As a result, tensiophoresis has the unique
ability to passively sort droplets by their chemical contents, without
additional chemical labels or actuators. This project, primarily experimental in
focus, will build a fundamental understanding of the phenomenon and demonstrate
its application through the following specific aims: 1) Design microfluidic
devices which generate linear and logarithmic gradients in surfactant
concentration; 2) Verify the scaling of droplet migration over several
operational regimes determined by surfactant concentration, geometric length
scales, and viscosity; 3) Investigate the impact of surfactant properties and
dynamics on transport regimes; and 4) Use tensiophoresis for label-free droplet
sorting based on protein concentration. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The life sciences
industry is moving towards progressively smaller reaction volumes in order to
reduce the costs and environmental footprint of high throughput screening.
Performing such assays in microdroplets can reduce reaction volumes by 3-6
orders of magnitude compared to conventional technology. This dramatically
reduces reagent consumption, improves assay throughput, and enables novel types
of biological assays (for example, single cells) not possible with conventional
tools. This research will contribute the first label-free method for sorting
droplet reactors based on their chemical composition. Given the critical
importance of high throughput screening in modern biological research, this
technology will ultimately benefit medical diagnostics, environmental analysis,
and basic science. On the fundamental level, this project contributes to two
scientific areas. In the context of multiphase processes, it will discover novel
ways to control and apply the phenomenon of capillary migration, and build a
unique experimental platform for studying non-equilibrium physicochemical
hydrodynamics at liquid-liquid interfaces. In the context of separation science,
tensiophoresis can be considered a new category of phoretictransport phenomena
which enables the sorting of liquid droplets on the basis of their interfacial
properties. The interdisciplinary nature of this work will provide a valuable
training environment for graduate students, including women and underrepresented
minorities recruited through Wayne State SURA program.