* 1236839
* Processing conformal polymer photovoltaic thin-films on textured topographies for photonic management
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Sumit Chaudhary, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 399,484.00

PI: Chaudhary, Sumit&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1236839&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Processing conformal polymer photovoltaic
thin-films on textured topographies for photonic
management&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic photovoltaic (OPV) technology is a
potentially widespread approach for sustainable and economical solar-electric
conversion owing to its promise of roll-to-roll fabrication on
&amp;#64258;exible substrates, using a solution-phase process. In an OPV device,
a thin &amp;#64257;lm (active-layer) is coated on a &amp;#64258;at substrate
from a biphasic solution consisting of two organic materials (electron donors
and acceptor). However, optical losses in such a device are high and
efficiencies are low. This project introduces a new processing paradigm for
light-trapping and higher efficiencies ? coating conformal layers of polymeric
OPV blends on sub-micron scale textured topographies. (1) Active-layers of OPVs
will be spin-coated on textured topographies and processing-structure-property
correlations will be established. (2) A theoretical framework to model
&amp;#64258;uid-&amp;#64258;ow and evaporation while coating on textured
topographies will be developed to inform the experimental task of best
topographical dimensions and appropriate processing conditions. Knowledge
discovery emerging will then be used to fabricate textured OPV cells using
doctor-blading technique (a prototype for roll-to-roll manufacturing). Overall
objective of this project is to establish a library of topographies and
processing conditions that are amenable to achieving conformal polymer
&amp;#64257;lms on such surfaces, so that effective light trapping and higher
solar-electric conversion efficiencies are realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research takes the thin-&amp;#64257;lm paradigm into the third
dimension (textured approach), thus promising to overcome the classic OPV trade-
off pertaining to dissimilar photonic and charge-transport scales. Intellectual
merit and transformative nature of proposed research lies in the attempt to
answer the following fundamental question ? What should be the dimensions of
underlying topographies and processing conditions, such that not only effective
optical absorption is achieved in ultra-thin polymer layers, but it is also
possible to coat such &amp;#64257;lms, conformally on these topographies?
Fabrication and characterization, including optical and device modeling will be
coupled with &amp;#64258;uid-&amp;#64258;ow modeling to achieve this overall
objective. Other than the &amp;#64257;eld of OPVs, the proposed research will
also have implications on a more general problem of thin &amp;#64257;lm coating
over functional substrates containing topographical features. This problem is of
enormous signi&amp;#64257;cance for various engineering, industrial and physical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is highly interdisciplinary
combining elements from experimental work on photovoltaic devices, and
computational work on &amp;#64258;uid-mechanics and phase-transformation. The
multidisciplinary components of the project will be integrated into a larger
educational effort to offer students a solid foundation in scienti&amp;#64257;c
computing and renewable energy. Our education and outreach plans further include
(1) modules for existing course on organic electronics and a new course in
multiscale mdoelling, (2) developing a mentoring program, linking graduate with
undergraduate students, with special emphasis on underrepresented groups ? with
an objective of increasing recruitment and retention, and (3) outreach
activities that demonstrate to the K-12 community the crucial role of computing
in science and technology. To this end, the PIs will create educational modules
involving immersive simulations of OPV processes which will be demonstrated to
Ames high school students, (4) preparing modules for the lesson and hands-on
components based Toying With Technology program, in place at Iowa State for the
current and future K-12 teachers, (5) continuing to work with ?Women in
Mechanical Engineering? in engaging women and minority undergraduate students.