* 1236971
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Possibilities for Itelmen language revitalization in Kamchatka, Russia
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Tatiana Degai, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2016
* USD 24,999.00

This project will document and evaluate a range of ongoing efforts to revitalize
Itelmen - an endangered indigenous language spoken in northwest Kamchatka. The
proposed research will be to critique the effectiveness of language
revitalization tools and programs in the Itelmen context. It is anticipated that
this research will contribute to a deeper understanding of language and cultural
revitalization programs not only among the Itelmen of Kamchatka but has great
potential to inform about these programs world wide. In addition, the student
researcher's, Tatiana Degai's, scholarship can contribute much to the
development of de-colonized methodologies, a growing field of study among many
indigenous scholars and other social scientists. In addition, the broader
impacts of the proposed project are compelling. The preservation of this
language in the face of centuries of assimilation programs enacted by Russian
Imperial and later Soviet administrations is significant. The most significant
broader impact is what other Indigenous communities in a similar situation to
the Itelman can learn from this community's struggles and efforts. In addition,
as an indigenous scholar Degai stands to empower her own study/heritage
community and to inspire other indigenous scholars.