* 1236757
* Soot Source Identification by Laser Derivatization (SSILD)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Randy Vander Wal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 342,879.00

1236757 Vander Wal

Soot varies, in physical structure and chemical composition, as dependent upon
its source, primarily diesel engines, combustors or power plants. Prior studies
have shown the near atomic level structure of soot to be dependent upon the
source via quantification of physical structure parameters extracted from HRTEM
images. In principle this permits identification of the soot source and its
contribution to any particular receptor site. Yet many structural aspects are
subtle and the variable chemistry of the particles remains unaddressed. This
project will investigate the process of transient laser processing to highlight
compositional and structural differences, thereby distinctively and uniquely
identifying the source of the soot. The significance of pulsed laser processing
is that the material transforms to yield distinctive patterns, dependent upon
the combination of initial chemistry and structure. The goal is then to develop
the laser-based processing as an analytical tool and identify the process
conditions and operational parameters for optimal transformation. Specific
objectives directed towards achieving this goal include identifying laser
operational parameters, defining dependence upon initial structure and
composition, demonstrating differentiation between soot from different sources
and quantifying the structural changes statistically.

Soot is routinely emitted from heavy-duty trucks, power plants and even jet
aircraft such as upon takeoff. Soot is the byproduct of incomplete combustion.
Its formation reflects combustion inefficiency and its release imposes health
risks and environmental concerns. According to the EPA, soot from anthropogenic
sources is responsible for many negative health consequences including asthma,
heart arrhythmias and even hospitalizations. New findings show soot may be
contributing to climate changes happening near the North Pole, such as
accelerating melting of sea ice and snow and changing atmospheric temperatures.
Although black carbon is hydrophobic (water hating), chemical and physical
changes occurring at its surface can cause it to become hydrophilic (waer
loving). Such changes determine soot's contribution to cloud formation, its
susceptibility to atmospheric washout and its participation in atmospheric
heterogeneous reactions. All such processes significantly impact the atmospheric
radiative balance. Recent estimates place black carbon radiative forcing as
nearly half that attributed CO2. Therein tracking soot dispersion and source
identification is a starting point to address these issues.