* 1236633
* Mechanical dispersion of viscous liquids in sheared particulate systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Ariel Muliadi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,596.00

1236633 PI: Wassgren

This research project focuses on developing an improved understanding of the
transfer of liquid through particle-particle contacts, often referred to as
?mechanical dispersion?, in particulate systems. In particular, this project
seeks to improve our scientific methodology, understanding, and quantitative
predictive ability of these systems by developing (1) a novel experimental
approach for investigating the spatial distribution of liquid in particulate
systems and (2) an experimentally validated computational model for predicting
the liquid dispersion in more complex, industrially relevant manufacturing
equipment. The experiments will be performed in-situ using an x-ray tomography
method, therefore retaining the liquid spatial distribution and time evolution
of the mechanical dispersion process. These in-situ measurements differ from
those reported in the literature, which assessed the evolution of the liquid
dispersion process by removing particles from the experimental device. The
experimentally validated computational model will simulate the dynamics of
particles in a sheared system, taking into account inter-particle contacts and
the effects of the liquid ?bridge? joining two or more particles.

The dispersal of a binding or coating agent, such as a liquid or solid material,
onto particles is commonplace in many industrial processes. In the
pharmaceutical industry, for example, such a mechanism is used to combine
inactive and active ingredient powders into granules, which are then used to
make tablets or capsules. Most previous work focused on systems involving liquid
coatings that dry quickly and do not transfer significantly from particle to
particle. The transfer of liquid through mechanical dispersion has rarely been
investigated, which is unfortunate since in many industrial processes the
coating liquid is too viscous to be sprayed and, thus, is poured onto the powder
bed and dispersed through particle contacts. At present, the design and
optimization of these systems are carried out through trial and error, resulting
in significant time for development, loss of materials, and potentially reduced
product effectiveness. Successful completion of the objectives of the present
study will greatly enhance our understanding of the processes involved in the
mechanical dispersion of liquid in particulate systems, as well as our ability
to quantitatively predict and design the operation of a mechanical dispersion-
driven system.