* 1236760
* Thermal Properties in Biomaterials:  The Need for Microscale Measurement in Thin Tissue Systems.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Chris Dames, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 324,663.00

CBET 1236760&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bischof&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal transport
measurement and modeling in tissues is of increasing importance in
cardiovascular biomedicine such as focal therapy or biopreservation where the
controlled and reproducible use of a thermal process can either preserve or
destroy tissues with characteristic dimensions at the millimeter scale.
Unfortunately, precise knowledge of the thermal properties that govern heat
transfer within thin (mm scale and below) and anisotropic (i.e. multi-layered
and directionally oriented) cardiovascular tissues is currently lacking in the
literature. Fundamentally this is because the current standard techniques for
measuring thermal properties of biological tissues involve mm-scale probes and
cm-scale tissue samples. This project will address this limitation through
adaptation of the 3 omega technique for these measurements. It will yield a
number of important new intellectual contributions including: (1) A modified 3
omega test configuration which accommodates biological soft tissue for
measurement with precise temperature and optical access; (2) A new set of
property measurements in tissues with characteristic sizes from 1 mm to 10s of
microns; (3) An assessment of the importance of anisotropy in cardiovascular
tissue thermal properties (i.e. impact of layers and directionality in the
tissue structure); and (4) A quantification of interfacial effects including
contact resistance during thermal treatments in target and adjacent tissues
(i.e. esophagus, lung and nerve impact of heart thermal treatments). In
addition, although the initial focus will be on cardiovascular applications,
this study will lay the groundwork for thermal property characterization
necessary for other important preservation or therapy treatments in as yet
uncharacterized biological tissues including fascia, neural, gastro-intestinal
and other thin multi-layered tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
measure the thermal properties of biological tissue with small-scale dimensions.
It will utilize a measurement method used to determine properties of thin
inorganic materials with suitable modifications to be applied for biological
tissue. The measured data from this research will greatly contribute to the
formalization of a thermal property database for many types of biological tissue
not currently known, and to the development of more reliable thermal prediction
models. This project will influence the development of future enhancements to
biomedical devices utilizing thermal energy for disease treatment, and it could
help identify new strategies for more effective preservation of pharmaceutical
and food products.