* 1236242
* Collaborative Research: Microrheology of colloidal glasses and gels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2015
* USD 162,437.00

1235955 / 1236242&lt;br/&gt;PI: Furst / Brady&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why and how
do colloidal gels form? What is the relationship between gels and glasses,
states that occur when particles crowd each other to the point of dynamic
arrest? There is long-running debate regarding the mechanism of colloidal
gelation, particularly at moderate to high particle volume fractions and
relatively weak attractive interactions. The aim of this work is to investigate
the microrheology of colloidal glasses and gels to determine whether there is a
direct relation between these states. The work is accomplished through the
development of optical trapping experiments and Stokesian dynamics simulations
that measure the response of individual probe particles in colloidal
suspensions. Since theories of colloidal glasses and gels are microrheological,
but few studies to date have examined and attempted to validate these theories
on microscopic length scales, such work is
timely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal gels are an arrested, non-equilibrium
state of matter that impact shelf life of consumer care products, agrochemicals,
coatings, pigments and inks?potentially any product or material in which
particles are suspended at high concentration in a fluid phase. Moreover,
glasses and gels are ubiquitous states of matter in molecular, macromolecular
and colloidal materials. The insights gained under this project have broad
implications for our fundamental understanding of many materials. Through an
integrated education and professional training of graduate students from
underrepresented backgrounds in STEM disciplines and outreach activities
involving undergraduate research experiences and research experiences for
teachers, this work enhances the capacity for US innovation in the chemical and
advanced materials industries.