* 1236620
* Role of Low-Level Clouds in the Accelerated Warming of the Great Lakes - A Dual Observational and Regional Modeling Assessment
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Sergey Kravtsov, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2016
* USD 680,937.00

This is a study of the warming trends in surface temperatures of the Great Lakes
since the mid-1980s. Great Lakes surface temperature trends have been upward
during this period in all seasons, especially in summer, and the summer surface
temperatures in lakes Huron and Michigan have increased by 4 degrees Celsius.
This rate of warming, in excess of 1.3C per decade, is greater by a factor of 10
than regional surface air temperature trends over the same period. The warming
of the lakes has a number of consequences, including a reduction in lake level
due to evaporation, which historically has been a second-order effect compared
to rainfall variations but has recently become comparable in magnitude due to
the higher temperatures. The prevailing hypothesis for the rapid warming is that
reduced winter ice cover leads to earlier springtime stratification and an
increase in the number of heating days through the summer, thereby accounting
for the large trend in warm season temperature. But the impact reduced ice cover
may not be sufficient to account for the observed warming without additional
amplifying mechanisms. Research conducted in this project tests the hypothesis
that the temperature increase is amplified by feedbacks involving fog and low
cloud cover, in which warmer lake temperatures lead to reductions in fog and low
cloud, which in turn expose lake surfaces to increased insolation. The impact of
changes in fog and low cloud, as well as other warming mechanisms, will be
examined using a suite of numerical modeling simulations. Expected outcomes of
the research are 1) the identification of various factors that are driving the
observed water-surface temperature increases in all of the Great Lakes; 2)
estimation of future water-surface temperature increases; 3) assessment of
current and future lake-level decreases which will result from increased
evaporation; 4) identification of regional climate impacts stemming from global
warming induced changes in the Great Lakes' behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work will have broader impacts beyond the scientific questions addressed.
Warming lake temperatures have a number of undersirable consequences for the
Great Lakes ecosystem and fisheries, including excessive primary production,
algal blooms, and consequent hypoxia as excess organic matter decomposes. These
effects are associated with "dead zones" and fish kills. The Principal
Investigators are active members of the Wisconsin Initiative on Climate Change
Impacts (WICCI) and pledge to share their findings with relevant working groups
of WICCI including the Coastal Communities, Water Resources, and Coldwater Fish
Working Groups. In addition, the project supports and trains two graduate
students and a postdoc, thereby providing for the next generation of researchers
in this area.