* 1236532
* Transport of  Nanomedicine in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Mustafa Akbulut, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2017
* USD 236,826.00

1236532&lt;br/&gt;Akbulut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have estimated
that more than 200 nanotechnology-based drugs and delivery systems have entered
pre-clinical, clinical, or commercial development and over 40 nanomedicine
products have been on the market, with nanomedicine sales estimated to have
reached 20 billion dollars in 2011. With the increasing consumption and
production of nanomedicine, the occurrence and fate of nanomedicine in the
environment as well as the potential consequences for human health have been
increasingly recognized. Currently, polymeric nanoparticulate drug delivery
system (PNDDS) filled with therapeutic agents represents the one of the most
commonly used forms of nanomedicine due to their ability to solubilize water-
insoluble molecules as well as their higher payload capacity, extended blood
circulation times, and excellent structural stability in aqueous media. While
these properties of PNDDS are beneficial in terms of pharmaceutical science, it
can be detrimental from that of environmental science, as it facilitates the
transport of potential ecological hazards. The main objective of the proposed
work is thus obtaining a better understanding of the transport phenomena of
PNDDS in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed activity
primarily seeks to determine the relative importance of the diffusion,
convection, adsorption, release, and degradation processes taking place during
the transport of nanomedicine in the environment. Another fundamental issue in
this work is determining how these processes depend not only upon the structural
and physicochemical properties of the nanomedicine and the environmental
surfaces involved but also upon environmental conditions such as pH and
temperature. The working hypothesis is that the transport of nanomedicine in the
environment is modulated by a synergistic combination of nanomedicine properties
such as size and chemical functionalization as well as environmental conditions
such as flow rates, temperature, roughness, and the chemistry of environmental
surfaces. The hypothesis will be tested through quartz crystal microbalance
studies using model environmental surfaces such as silica, calcite, and
cellulose, as well as various types of nanomedicine with different sizes,
charges, compositions, loading properties, and functionalities. The generated
data will be described with environmental transport models. The PI's unique
combination of expertise in surface and interface science, nanotechnology, and
the drug delivery area has enabled him to generate promising preliminary results
in the support of the project's working hypothesis and will allow him to
successfully manage this work. &lt;br/&gt;Overall, the proposed activity is
significant from an engineering science perspective, as it will advance
knowledge and understanding of nanoparticle transport near adsorptive surfaces
in aqueous environments. Such knowledge is critical to properly assess the
distribution and fate of nanomedicine and to develop successful strategies for
minimizing its dispersal in the environment. The outcomes of this project are
also anticipated to benefit other fields and applications relying on controlling
the adsorption of nanoparticles and bioparticles such as filtration, xerography,
protein and cell separation, as well as food emulsion and foam
stabilization.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed work has three components
for integrating research and education. The first component strives to increase
the participation of underrepresented students in academic research, the second
concerns curriculum development, and the third involves training graduate
students who are capable of functioning successfully as independent
investigators in academic or industrial research positions. The PI is actively
involved in mentoring underrepresented undergraduate students in a project that
is directly related to the proposed work. Through this project, we aim to
recruit and train more minority and underrepresented graduate and undergraduate
students and to teach the general public about the environmental aspects of
nanotechnology. This project will also provide graduate students with
multidisciplinary training in environmental science, chemical engineering, and
nanotechnology. The work will be broadly disseminated through presentations by
the PI and students at informal public science talks, conferences, and
departmental seminars.