* 1236224
* A Comprehensive Analysis of Petroleum Hydrocarbons in Storm Water: Application of Natural Carbon Isotopes to Evaluate the Efficacy of Bioretention Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jay Martin, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 320,446.00

1236224 (Martin). Bioretention systems are increasingly used as storm water best
management practices (BMPs). While successfully employed in many aspects of
storm water management, there is as yet no real understanding of whether or how
these systems reduce the total range of petroleum hydrocarbons typically found
in storm waters. Exceedingly high hydrocarbon (HC) concentrations from sources
such as driveway dust and oils from parking lots, highlight the need to find
effective methods to remove these carcinogenic and mutagenic pollutants from
storm water before they accumulate in downstream water bodies. The proposed
study will address this need by using a natural carbon isotope approach to
evaluate the effectiveness of bioretention systems in reducing total petroleum
HCs found in storm waters in order to improve environmental quality and human
health. Past studies of the effectiveness of water treatment technologies have
been limited because conventional approaches and analytical methods of analysis
for petroleum HCs (i.e., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons [PAH] and/or "total
petroleum hydrocarbons" [TPH]) only track selected compounds present in storm
water. Because of the ability to differentiate between 'new carbon' from
contemporary sources and ?fossil carbon? from petroleum HCs, analysis of natural
14C and 13C can identify the contributions of all petroleum-derived HCs present
in storm water. The proposed research is significant because it will: (1) be the
first to assess whether a storm water treatment technology - in this case
bioretention systems - can reduce total petroleum HCs as opposed to proxy
subsets of these harmful compounds as tracked by conventional analyses, and (2)
determine if conventional monitoring of subsets of petroleum HCs in storm water
is sufficient and can be used as proxies for total HCs, or if more extensive
monitoring is warranted. Knowledge gained from this study should improve the
design of bioretention systems to maximize water quality improvements, and offer
important insights into monitoring approaches for HCs in storm water to protect
public and environmental health. This research will be linked to education by
the sinvolvent of students who will be mentored by an interdisciplinary group of
researchers with expertise in ecological engineering, carbon isotope
biogeochemistry, and organic chemistry. Experiential learning will take place as
students from the Ecological Engineering student club at Ohio State work with
students from a local high school to design and construct a bioretention system
on the high school campus. Because the majority of the high school students are
minorities, this collaborative arrangement will enhance the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM education. To broadly disseminate results, there
will be collaboration with the Central Ohio Rain Garden Initiative to include
project findings on their public webpage and in press releases. An additional
societal benefit from this research will be design and management guidelines to
enhance the reduction of storm water flows and pollutants by affordable and
effective bioretention systems.