* 1237646
* Meeting:   Physiological Responses to Multiple Stressors in a Changing Climate, A symposium for the 2013 SICB annual meeting in San Francisco, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Jonathon Stillman, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Habitats around the globe are increasingly impacted by anthropogenic activities
that alter the climate, introduce species, and increase pollution. Understanding
the impacts of global change on the distribution and abundance of organisms in
the context of their habitats is at the forefront of integrative organismal
biology. Biologists working to understand how the distribution of organisms will
be impacted by biotic and abiotic habitat changes have long used carefully
controlled laboratory experiments that manipulate a single environmental
variable (e.g., habitat temperature) to determine some aspect of organismal
performance (e.g., temperature tolerance). Those performance parameters are
subsequently used to infer ecological responses. The majority of studies done by
physiologists examine one environmental variable at a time, yet in nature
organisms are simultaneously exposed to multiple types of environmental
variables, including habitat shifts that may affect different physiological
systems within an organism. Whether those multiple shifts in environmental
variables have an additive, an antagonistic, or a non-linear synergistic effect
on performance is a critical issue to understand in order to properly link
ecological responses to simultaneous shifts in multiple habitat characteristics.

This grant will fund a symposium at the 2013 Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology meeting in San Francisco that will focus on physiological
studies where multiple environmental variables are simultaneously examined to
test the additive-antagonistic-synergistic response possibilities. By bringing
together leading researchers, the PIs hope to establish the necessary next steps
to increase our ability to predict how organisms respond to a multivariate
changing environment. It is expected that this symposium will establish novel
collaborations among researchers actively investigating physiological responses
to a multivariate environment, and broaden the number of researchers conducting
such studies. Speakers in the symposium are engaged in research on insects,
reptiles, freshwater and marine fish, and marine invertebrates, and study
environmental variables including temperature, oxygen, acidification, salinity,
desiccation, altitude, latitude, pollution, disease, and physical forcing
(flow/turbulence).

Recruitment of underrepresented minority participants will be emphasized by the
PIs to all of the symposium participants. Merit-based travel awards will be
provided to junior colleagues to support their participation in a contributed
paper session linked to the symposium. Presentation manuscripts will be
published in the SICB journal Integrative and Comparative Biology
(http://icb.oxfordjournals.org/).