* 1237691
* Summer Workshop, June 24-29, 2012, Princeton, New Jersey
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Chung Law, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Princeton-CEFRC Summer School in Combustion is
an intensive one-week seminar series held annually at Princeton University,
during which advanced graduate students and researchers in combustion and energy
will take two courses of 15 hours each. The participants are outstanding senior
graduate students sent by their respective supervisors, from all across the
country, as well as faculty members and research staff from government and
industrial labs. These participants hold strong potential to be leaders in the
combustion and energy R&amp;D community. Scholarships are available to students
enrolled in U.S. academic institutions to cover local expenses. The 2010 and
2011 sessions drew in 122 and 140 participants respectively. Videos of the 2010
lectures by Professor Norbert Peters on Combustion Theory, and by Drs. Stephen
J. Klippenstein and Charles K. Westbrook on Combustion Chemistry and 2011
lectures by Professor Moshe Matalon on Combustion Theory, Professor Michael
Pilling on Combustion Chemistry, and Professor Marcus Alden on Advanced Laser
Diagnostics are available on the Princeton University website. For more
information on the Summer School, please visit
http://www.princeton.edu/cefrc/combustion-summer-school/ .&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 session is scheduled to be held on June 24 to June 29. It is
expect this year?s applicants pool to surpass the previous two years, as we have
expanded the program provide an even broader variety of topics, something very
much sought after, based on feedback from previous year participants. This year,
a five-day lecture series is offered on: ?Frontiers of Combustion? covering
topics in Policies and Issues in Energy and the Environment, given by Professor
Robert H. Socolow; New Developments in Combustion Technology, given by Dr.
George A. Richards; Alternative Fuels Including Biofuels, given by Professor
William H. Green; Cyber-Combustion, given by Dr. Jacqueline H. Chen; and
Nanoengineered Reactive Materials and Their Combustion and Synthesis, given by
Professor Richard A. Yetter. In addition to this exciting new offering, the
foundation courses of Combustion Theory and Combustion Chemistry are still
offered, and will be taught by Professors Heinz G. Pitsch and Hai Wang,
respectively. And adding to these foundation courses, Internal Combustion
Engines (Gas Turbines and Reciprocating Engines) will be jointly given by
Professors Timothy C. Lieuwen and Rolf D. Reitz.