* 1237968
* American Chemical Society Symposium:  Dynamics and Jamming in Complex Environments; August 19-23, 2012; Philadelphis, PA. USA
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Laura Kaufman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 04/30/2013
* USD 5,000.00

Each of the two annual national meetings of the American Chemical Society
includes several symposia in the Physical Chemistry Division. The topics of
these symposia represent some of the most exciting areas of physical chemistry
and chemical physics research. This year one of these featured symposia is
Dynamics and Jamming in Complex Environments. The dynamics of particles in
crowded and complex environments is intriguing from fundamental and applied
points of view. Indeed, crowding determines particle dynamics in many physical,
chemical, and biological systems, especially those far from equilibrium.
Examples include liquid-to-solid transitions, dynamics in viscous liquids and
particulate systems, and dynamics of biomolecules in living cells. Such physics
is also of applied interest: indeed, at stake is our ability to design new
materials and predict their static and dynamic properties. Inhomogeneity and
lack of periodicity limits the utility of conventional bulk experiments to
detail molecular motions in these systems. Moreover, such experiments, as well
as direct computational studies, are complicated by the enormous range of
dynamics displayed by these systems. Emerging experimental, simulation-based,
and theoretical approaches to investigating these complex systems can address
questions that have evaded clear answers about the nature of these slow
relaxations, broadly termed glassy dynamics, and the glass transition despite
decades of effort.&lt;br/&gt; The co-organizers of this symposium request funds
to help defray registration and travel costs for speakers and poster presenters
at this meeting. In particular, these funds will be used primarily for graduate
student and postdoctoral presenters. The symposium will bring together diverse
scientists: they are diverse in their areas of research, in their chosen
experimental and/or theoretical tools, and in their nationality, age, and
gender. In particular, members of underrepresented groups have been recruited to
participate via presentation of both invited and contributing talks -
advertisements featuring such speakers then, in turn, encourage additional
participation from members of these groups as attendees and poster presenters at
the symposium. The set of invited speakers represent a much broader community
than those typically present at conferences on glasses, which tend to focus on
either molecular glasses or soft matter or granular systems and do not generally
include both experimentalists and theorists. The support requested will broaden
the community participating in this symposium and in turn encourage new
synergies between researchers in diverse communities. The chief goals of this
symposium are (1) exploring the commonalities in the various systems in which
crowding is an important determinant of dynamics and (2) continuing to develop a
common language with which to discuss glassy behavior.