* 1237211
* Deep Time Paleoclimate Liaison Position to Support Community Use of the Paleoclimate CESM
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Bette Otto-Bliesner, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2016
* USD 151,610.00

Climate simulations of pre-Quaternary or deep-time periods provide an important
complement to simulations for the Quaternary. They consider a wider range of
forcing factors, particularly for the composition of the atmosphere, than for
Quaternary climates. Although the geography can be quite different from today,
these periods can also challenge our understanding of how today's land
distribution, topography, and ocean gateways influence the atmospheric and ocean
circulations. These climate simulations also enable scientists to consider the
role of various feedback processes in the climate system.

Combining geological, paleontological and isotopic data with climate simulations
provides invaluable information for reducing uncertainties in key climate
concepts such as climate sensitivity. The Community Earth System Model (CESM) is
a comprehensive fully coupled Earth system model developed by the scientific
community. The management of this activity is based at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR). It has evolved over the last few years from a model
coupling the physical aspects of the climate system to a model that considers
the simulation of aerosol chemistry, biogeochemical processes and ice sheets.
Underway is the implementation of isotopes and other geotracers in CESM.

To provide adequate support to the university community requires a liaison at
NCAR. This position would provide support for configuring the CESM for various
time periods of the geologic past, carry out simulations of time periods on
supercomputers at NCAR, and disseminate model simulation output to the
paleoclimate community as a whole. The liaison would also provide support for
diagnosing model simulations. The creation and funding of this position would
insure that a strong connection exists between climate modeling and climate
data. It will provide a synergism that is essential for enhancing the climate
sciences. This position would also enhance the services provided by NCAR to the
university community.