* 1237624
* Research Starter Grant:  Investigating the impacts of loline catabolizing bacteria on fitness of their tall fescue host
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Elizabeth Roberts, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,970.00

Loline alkaloids are made by the endophytic fungus Neotyphodium sp. as part of a
symbiotic relationship to keep insect herbivores from consuming their tall
fescue host. Previous research has indicated that some epiphytic bacterial
colonizers of tall fescue can use these alkaloids as a sole carbon source. Such
bacteria grow to higher population sizes on loline containing grasses than other
bacterial strains. It is thought that a multi-trophic symbiosis is occurring on
the grass phyllosphere between the loline catabolizing bacteria, the host, and
the endophytic fungus. This project will test the potential positive impact of
loline catabolizing bacterial epiphytes on growth of the host. The bacteria will
be screened for production of the plant growth regulators, auxin and cytokinin,
through growth assays, microscopy, and biochemistry. Additionally, the
protective impacts of loline catabolizing bacteria on the host grasses will be
investigated by screening them for the antimicrobial production. The ability of
the bacteria to protect their hosts via niche exclusion will also be examined. A
combination of culturing and biochemistry techniques will be conducted for these
tests. Finally, the potential to take advantage of the affinity of loline
catabolizing strains to Neotyphodium sp. harboring grasses for the
bioremediation of the major pollutant Atrazine will be tested.

The data collected from this work will have broad implications on the current
scientific knowledge concerning microbe:microbe interactions. Potentially, this
work may result in an efficient way to remove atrazine from the environment,
which would generate safer ground water for future generations.