* 1237407
* Circulation at the Entrance to the Gulf of California
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Curtis Collins, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2015
* USD 47,162.00

Intellectual merit: An eight-day survey of waters at the mouth of the Gulf of
California will be conducted during the return transit of R/V Point Sur from
Palmer Station, Antarctica, to Moss Landing, California, in April 2013. Flow
rates and transports between the Pacific Ocean and Gulf of California will be
measured using closely spaced CTD observations which extend from the ocean
surface to the bottom as well as from observations of currents using vessel
mounted acoustic Doppler current profilers. Similar observations will be carried
out along the southern coast of Baja California in order to determine the fate
of waters formed in the Gulf of California when they reach the Pacific Ocean.

These observations will complement a 20-year program of observations carried out
jointly by the Universidad Autonoma de Baja California (UABC) in Ensenada,
Mexico, and the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) in Monterey, CA. Surface waters
at the mouth of the Gulf are highly productive, in part due to mixing of Gulf
and Pacific waters, while subsurface waters contain very little dissolved
oxygen, about 2-4 micro mole per kg. The latter is of concern as subsurface
waters which flow out of the Gulf along Baja California join the California
Undercurrent and flow poleward along the West Coast of the United States,
perhaps contributing to declining oxygen values in the Southern California
bight. 2013 observations of water properties at the mouth of the Gulf will be
compared to those obtained in 1991 to see if systematic changes of water
properties are occurring with time.

Broader impacts: This collaborative research will contribute to graduate and
undergraduate teaching programs at UABC and graduate programs at NPS. Students
will be involved with collection, processing, and interpretation of shipboard
data. The project will also foster continued cooperative ocean studies with
Mexican oceanographers which are necessary to understand joint management of
common ocean resources. Examples include "dead zones" which occur when low
oxygen waters flow onto the continental shelf and the ecological perturbations
which occur when Humboldt squid move northward into California waters. All the
collected data will be submitted to the National Oceanographic Data Center
(NODC) for archiving and distribution.