* 1237105
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Can Low-Angle Normal Faults Produce Earthquakes? A Paleoseismic Perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Laurel Goodwin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 72,217.00

The identification of low-angle normal faults, i.e. faults that have dips less
than 30 degrees, are problematic with respect to our current understanding of
the mechanics by which faults form. According to classic Andersonian fault
mechanics, such faults should not form in most geologic settings. Despite this
problem, they are observed in many geologic settings but the means by which they
form remain controversial. Hypotheses explaining these faults fall into two
categories: those that offer explanations (e.g., fault weakness, reduced
effective normal stress) for how the faults slip in suboptimal orientations, and
those that suggest they move at higher angles before rotating into their current
orientations. A key question is whether or not these relatively faults can
generate earthquakes. Of fundamental importance is the observation that low-
angle normal faults commonly display an unequivocal - yet poorly studied -
record of past seismic activity in the form of pseudotachylyte (frictional melt)
veins. The existence of these ?fossilized earthquakes? places an important
constraint on structural models that seek to explain the origin of low-angle
normal faults: they were clearly seismogenic at some point in their history. Our
goal is to determine the orientations at which low-angle normal faults from the
southwestern U.S. and New Zealand produced earthquakes by using the magnetic
remanence preserved in pseudotachylyte to quantify the potential effects of
subsequent tilting since seismogenesis. The degree of tilt (if any) will be
determined by comparing the magnetic vector of the sample with the expected
reference direction for the study area based on well defined apparent polar
wander paths. The age of pseudotachylite formation (and hence the age of
seismogenesis) will be determined using 40Ar/39Ar dating using a combination of
incremental heating analyses and UV laser-based in situ methods that will target
areas of neocrystalline material and avoid the deleterious effects of glass and
relict clasts on 40Ar/39Ar ages. This research will contribute to the resolution
of a long-standing controversy in the structural geology and tectonics
community. If our results show that these faults can only produce earthquakes at
higher angles prior to tilting, they will confirm a long-established theory of
the mechanics of earthquakes and faulting. If, however, our results show that
the pseudotachylites have resulted from faults that formed at angles 30 degrees
or less, our current concepts of earthquake mechanics must be either incomplete
or flawed, and the data will require a reconsideration of the fundamental
controls on earthquake mechanics. Regardless of outcome, our research will
contribute a much greater understanding of how much information can be gleaned
from pseudotachylytes, the sole rock record of paleoearthquakes. In addition to
the research objectives, the project will support the training of two female
graduate students at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The research results
will also be used co-design and evaluate "earthquake in a box" educational
activities with a focus group of 6th grade girls. The activities will be used in
both classroom and formal outreach programs of University of Wisconsin-Madison?s
Geology Museum in an effort to both disseminate results to the public and
encourage 10- to 14-year-old girls to remain involved in classes and enterprises
that will allow them the flexibility to follow career paths in STEM fields in
later years. The girls in our focus group will be full partners in our outreach
effort, and each girl will be included as a co-author on a resulting paper to be
submitted to a peer-reviewed journal in geosciences education. This project is a
collaborative effort between the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the
University of Minnesota.