* 1237928
* Interpreting Pleistocene Predator-Prey Dynamics: inference from dental growth and attrition
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Blaire Van Valkenburgh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Funds from this award will be used to develop new tooth and skeletal indicators
of mammal health that can be applied to fossil populations of mammals. To do so,
the association between overall health and the animal's anatomy will be
documented using jaws collected over the past fifty years from a well-studied
predator-prey pair, Isle Royale National Park gray wolf and moose, that are
known to have suffered multiple food shortages. Nutritional stress in predator
and prey will be assessed based on quantifiable microscopic and macroscopic
features of their teeth and skeletons. The ability to see these indicators in
fossils will then be tested on extinct bison from the Rancho La Brea tar seep
deposits of California that are between 50,000 to 11,000 years old. Assuming the
method works, it can be used to infer relative population sizes of predator and
prey in past communities, such as North America at the time of human arrival
about 12,000 years ago. If these prey animals show little evidence of food
stress, then their population densities were low, probably due to intense
predation by large predator carnivores. Under these conditions, the arrival of
human hunters would have been more likely to lead to the extinction of prey
species than if they were at high densities. Thus, this project can illuminate
the possible role of humans in the late Pleistocene large mammal extinctions.