* 1237936
* An Interdisciplinary Approach to Deciphering the Molecular Dialogue between the Plasma Membrane and Nucleus of Medicago truncatula
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Joshua Coon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* timothy nelson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 3,384,858.00

PI: Michael R. Sussman (University of Wisconsin - Madison)

CoPIs: Jean Michel An√©, Joshua J. Coon, and Sushmita Roy (University of
Wisconsin - Madison)

This goal of this project is to develop and apply genomic technologies for
understanding at a molecular level, how bacteria and plants communicate to
create a remarkable product of evolution, the nitrogen-fixing symbiotic nodule.
An important part of this conversation between the microbe and the plant is a
change in the chemical composition of proteins within the cell, i.e., in the
degree by which phosphate groups are added or removed to specific amino acids.
Using state of the art mass spectrometers to determine precisely which proteins
are being modified by phosphate, and by how much in the first hour in which the
bacteria meets the plant, the project will attempt to elucidate how the plant
changes its proteins in order to initiate all of the myriad changes in their
metabolism and gene expression that are required for the symbiotic nodules to
form. All project outcomes (e.g., data, peptides and germplasm resources) will
be provided to the public free of charge and without intellectual property
restrictions. Medicago transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome data
generated in this project will be deposited and accessible to the public at
long-term repositories such as National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), the Legume Information Service (LIS:
http://www.comparative-legumes.org/) and the PeptideAtlas
(www.peptideatlas.org).

The mass spectrometric technology being developed and used in this project could
be useful for understanding many different biological events, besides symbiotic
nitrogen fixation. In order to provide opportunities for researchers all over
the U.S. to access this sophisticated instrumentation and technology for use in
their research, the project will develop and hold a one-week long Plant
Proteomic Workshop. To be held each summer at the University of Wisconsin, this
workshop will provide two dozen participants (graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and professors) with hands-on, in-depth use of mass spectrometers
for measuring changes in the proteins from plants under study in their own labs.
This workshop will greatly facilitate the more widespread accessibility and use
of this technology for research in the general area of plant biology, and should
greatly help this country's goal of training our future plant scientists and
help them become comfortable with modern genomic "systems biology" experimental
techniques.