* 1237775
* RAPID: High-resolution sampling of plankton taxa, marine snow, and environmental variables across the north Atlantic subpolar gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Cabell Davis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2013
* USD 99,962.00

This project will use the opportunity of a ship crossing the North Atlantic at
high latitude to conduct a high-resolution sampling transect of mesozooplankton,
marine "snow" (biogenic aggregates), and environmental variables from Aberdeen,
Scotland to southern Greenland via a route south of Iceland, thence south across
the Labrador Sea and the Grand Banks to Woods Hole, MA. Sampling will be done
with the Video-Plankton Recorder II (VPRII). The VPR enables non-destructive
sampling of fragile plankton in situ, and through rapid tow-yo deployments
(continuous raising and lowering while under way), it provides high vertical
(top 150 m) and horizontal resolution of robust as well as fragile plankton and
aggregates and numerous environmental variables. The VPRII has now been deployed
in several locations around the world, but there is no comparable data set for
the far North Atlantic, an area of intense ecological interest. This opportunity
arises from the delivery of a new research vessel, R/V Falkor, to the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. The budget covers technician time, travel to the
ship, and supplies. The fact that ship time comes "free" because of the transit
makes this an exceptionally cost-effective way to sample. This project will
collect a major data set that will be available for analysis, and data that can
be quickly processed (acoustic, hydrographic, automated image analysis) will be
available to the community soon. Two Ph.D. students will participate in the
cruise, adding to their training in oceanography and high latitude marine
science.