* 1237712
* Symposium: Behavioral Plasticity and Evolution: Animal Behavior Society Symposium at Albequerque New Mexico, June 12-14, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Susan Foster, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Cushing
* 05/31/2013
* USD 18,068.00

Phenotypic plasticity is the ability of a single genotype to produce different
behaviors and body forms (phenotypes) when exposed to different environmental
conditions. Phenotypic plasticity is rapidly gaining traction as a driver of
evolutionary change. This symposium, to take place at the 2012 Animal Behavior
Society meeting, has two major goals. The first is to bring together senior
scientists studying the role of behavioral plasticity in evolution, with younger
scientists taking new approaches to the field. A second goal is to begin a major
discussion about the role of behavioral plasticity in the early responses of
populations to Human Induced Rapid Environmental Change (HIREC). The symposium
therefore includes those interested in basic, theoretical approaches to
understanding the role of behavioral plasticity in evolution and those
interested in applications and should facilitate advances in understanding of
the roles of plasticity in evolution from both theoretical and applied
perspectives. Among the broader impacts stemming from this funding will be the
inclusion (and funding) of doctoral and post-doctoral scholars conducting
research on behavioral plasticity in a linked poster session to be attended by
symposium participants, and related keynote and plenary address speakers. Turner
Scholars (undergraduate participants at the ABS meeting supported by NSF) will
also shadow the speakers during the linked poster session, including them in
discussions. The symposium should also result in the generation of new ideas
that will enhance our ability to predict and understand the ways in which HIREC
is likely to force the evolution or extinction of species - with a particular
focus on the role of behavioral plasticity in this process. The goal is to be
able to anticipate situations in which intervention is essential to prevent the
extinction of vulnerable species, and to avoid/prevent evolutionary transitions
that result in loss of unique population phenotypes without extinction.