* 1237543
* Using Anchoring Vignettes to Improve Measures of Teaching Practice
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Laura Hamilton, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 786,253.00

The accuracy of self report of teachers' perceptions of their instructional
practices has been a limitation in research and evaluation in education. This
project is using a mixed methodological approach to address the extent to which
the use of vignettes of teachers engaging in six different instructional
practices lead to more accurate teacher self-report on their own practices.
Researchers from the Rand Corporation and others in partnership with the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation Measures of Effective Teaching Extension study will
work with 220 teachers in grades 4-9. Research questions address the extent to
which teachers understand the instructional practices being portrayed at
different levels in the vignettes, the extent to which the use of anchoring
vignettes improve teacher self-report , the extent to which information in the
teachers' ratings of the vignettes can be used to improve the alignment of
teachers' self-rating and expertly-trained raters observations of videos of
these teachers, and how the vignette-calibrated teacher self-reports correlate
with estimates of other outcomes of teaching such as student achievement or
ratings of teachers. The research findings inform the research on the conditions
of instructional practices and hold promise for effective feedback to
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in this project have identified
important instructional practices and have developed expert-vetted vignettes
that describe several levels of the quality of the instantiation of these
practices. This project leverages the work conducted in the Gates MET project
and collects survey data and video of classroom teaching from a sample of those
teachers. The teachers rank the teaching as described in the vignettes and this
ranking is used to calibrate their self-reported rating of their own teaching
from surveys. The analysis of teacher videos is be used to provide another
measure of teachers' practices. The researchers use the calibrated survey
ratings of teaching to correlate with outcomes of teaching including value-added
models of student achievement and student and principal ratings to examine the
extent to which the calibrated surveys can be used as robust measures of
teaching.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Teacher evaluation as a policy area is an
increasingly important theme in educational reform. The evaluation methodology
that can provide more valid and reliable measures of teaching than simple self-
report provides better evidence of the current educational practices. Better
evidence of improvements in teaching practices as a result of selected
professional development for teachers results in more-informed selection of
those offerings. The findings from this study identify ways that robust
information about teaching practices can been identified in cost-efficient ways
that supplement the use of classroom observations.