* 1237069
* SHB: Type II (INT): A Goal-seeking Framework to Empower Personalized Wellness Management
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Shivakumar Sastry, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,285,613.00

Personalized Wellness Management (PWM) is a critical national priority that has
the potential to significantly reduce healthcare costs, which are presently
greater than 16% of the nation's GDP. To address growing societal challenges,
the current reactive approach to medical practice, which is focused on disease
management, must be transformed into a proactive approach that empowers
individuals to manage their personal wellness. We propose a multi-disciplinary
investigation into a novel systems framework that will empower individuals to
adopt permanent lifestyle changes that result in sustained
PWM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A goal-seeking systems framework
that enables the integration of medical protocols and behavioral analysis
protocols with emerging technologies and devices is developed in this project.
The approach empowers individuals by (a) suggesting actions that they are most
likely to perform, (b) ensuring that the resources required for the suggested
actions are accessible, (c) reinforcing their desire to achieve the target
consequences through incentives, and (d) enabling them to track their personal
progress toward their target consequences. The goal-seeking framework seeks to
find good-enough solutions and does not require a precise model of the
underlying solution. As long as the measured consequences of the selected
actions are within an acceptable tolerance limit, the decision-maker allows the
system to evolve. The ability to tailor the tolerance limit to an individual,
vary the limit over time, and incorporate humans in the decision-making loop all
make the approach attractive. The PIs have assembled an inter-disciplinary team
with representation from engineering, medicine, sport and exercise science,
psychology, and nursing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In this project,
undergraduate and graduate students across multiple disciplines work together in
all aspects of the investigation. The research outcomes will eventually be
integrated with ongoing courses in engineering and in sport and exercise
science. Results will be widely disseminated through traditional academic
publications and non-traditional avenues. For example, the team will start a
Personalized Wellness column in local community newspapers. Community
representatives will be invited to attend project workshops and presentations.
The systems-framework that is based on the goal-seeking paradigm has the
potential to fundamentally transform current practice in personalized medicine,
community psychiatric services delivery, substance-dependence reduction
programs, and reducing obesity among K-12 students. The Austen BioInnovation
Institute in Akron (ABIA) will use the software and other instruments from this
investigation in its Accountable Care Community Project. The ABIA has already
developed a Summit County (OH) Wellness Council comprising Pubic Health,
Medical, and Social Service organizations that are developing programs to
maximize health impact through prevention, reduce health disparities, and expand
the evidence base for local policy changes that impact community health.
Considering that about 80% of the students at The University of Akron are from
six adjacent counties in Ohio, and the fact that a very large percentage of
these students prefer to live and raise their families in this region, the
outcomes of this investigation are very likely to have a long-lasting impact on
the regional economy and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: Goal-seeking
Paradigm, Personalized Wellness, Technology Empowerment