* 1237815
* PFI-BIC:  Technology Enhancement of Hot Water Extraction
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gary Scott, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2016
* USD 599,822.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from SUNY College of Environmental
Science &amp; Forestry will improve and enhance the technology for Hot Water
Extraction (HWE) to carefully and completely deconstruct wood. The process that
is being developed and applied will sustainably and cost effectively extract
highly valuable carbohydrate and chemical assets from wood fiber. The enhanced
technology that will result from this research will facilitate the development
of valuable bioproducts that increase the rate of commercial implementations.
These HWE derived bioproducts will replace similar products which are made from
less sustainable and by less efficient means both in the U.S. and abroad. The
wood fiber (and its constituent asset elements that will be the focus of this
project) is currently primarily being burned for energy. In addition to the
production advantages of HWE technology, the production of these products within
the forested economic regions where industry needs them will reduce
transportation costs and environmental impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project will accelerate the building of capacity and
skill to strategically locate, engineer, design, fabricate equipment, and build
facilities to efficiently and cost-effectively make products from existing raw
materials; frequently on existing underutilized sites. Further, the partners
will gain significant technical expertise and market advantage in understanding
how to enhance the HWE process for these carbohydrate and chemical products. The
broader impacts of this research extend to all forested regions of the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Knowledge Enhancement Partners are the lead academic
institution , the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry and three
small for profit business: 1) Applied Biorefinery Sciences, Syracuse, New York,
Dr. Joel Howard; 2) Highland Engineering, Glens Falls, New York ( Mr. Patrick
Sullivan, and 3) Miller Mechanical Services, Glens Falls, New York , Ms.
Elizabeth Miller. RockTenn is a large for-profit forest products business and a
non-KEP partner; the liaison is Dr. Jose Iribarne at the Solvay, NY facility.