* 1237720
* PFI:BIC  An Innovation Partnership to Advance a High-throughput Plant Phenotype Screening Platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* M. Paul Scott, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2016
* USD 617,070.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from Iowa State University (ISU) will
accelerate fundamental understanding in plant science and breeding with a
screening platform that significantly reduces the time and costs for selecting
and developing new elite plant varieties. The immediate goal is to build upon
and re-engineer a promising near infrared (NIR)-based seed-screening platform to
increase its performance and accuracy and broaden its applications. The
envisioned platform is based on two complementary components: a) NIR molecular
spectroscopy and chemometrics integrated with automated, nondestructive high-
throughput screening of seeds and other plant materials, and b) customized
development of application methodologies that screen extant plant populations
based on biochemical phenotypes. This project seeks to meet the challenge
presented by the success of high-throughput DNA sequencing and analysis of plant
genomes, by establishing analogous high-throughput technologies to analyze a
plant's biochemical phenotype. This capability will enhance the ability of plant
scientists and plant breeders to utilize genomics and develop improved new
cultivars needed to accommodate the global population explosion anticipated in
the 21st century. The proposed phenotype-screening platform will have a
significant impact on food, feed, and bio-energy production systems because, for
the first time, plant scientists and breeders will have access to a unique
research tool that will routinely assess, at low cost, multiple plant traits
simultaneously and non-destructively based upon biochemical phenotypes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are societal,
economic, and learning related. At the societal level, plants have a remarkable,
multi-faceted impact on economies, jobs, health, fuel, climate change/carbon
sequestration, food security, world peace, the environment, and our overall well
being. Better understanding of plant biology, improving existing varieties, and
developing new ones are all key research areas where biochemical phenotype
screening will produce invaluable data for achieving sustainable and nurturing
ecosystems for a rapidly changing planet. At the economic level, these
improvements will greatly enhance the versatility of the screening platform,
expand the user base, and make lower cost screening accessible to more public
and commercial plant scientists and breeders. At the learning level, the KEP
participants will learn from each other. The project will be a vehicle for Iowa
State University faculty and students and small businesses to understand how
each other's abilities can be integrated to enable technological solutions to
real world-challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the
project are Brownseed Genetics (Bay City, WI), Genetic Enterprises International
(Johnston, IA), Kemin Industries (Des Moines, IA), MTEC BioAnalytics (Ames, IA),
Schillinger Genetics (West Des Moines, IA), and Sustainable Oils (Bozeman, MT).
Five ISU researchers and these six small businesses will collaborate in a
Knowledge Enhancing Partnership (KEP). MTEC BioAnalytics will bring NIR seed
screening technology expertise to the project while the other companies have
expertise in seed and other plant based products. MTEC BioAnalytics will provide
key highthroughput screening platform components (e.g., ultra fast fiber optic
switch), engineering design, and the others will provide the use of proprietary
and unique collections of characterized seeds that express variation in
desirable biochemical phenotypes.