* 1237931
* Causes and Consequences of Epigenetic Variation in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Damon Lisch, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2018
* USD 3,424,556.00

PI: Nathan Springer (University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Damon Lisch (University of California,
Berkeley), Matt Vaughn (Texas Advanced Computing Center, University of Texas -
Austin), and Irina Makarevitch (Hamline University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
it is clear that genetic changes play a major role in controlling phenotypic
variation there is increasing evidence that epigenetic changes may also play an
important role. There is considerable excitement about the existence of
epigenetic variation because it raises the possibility that a memory of
environmental or genetic conditions can be encoded and propagated independent of
changes in DNA sequence. This possibility has obvious and important implications
for both evolutionary biologists and plant breeders, but the relative role of
epigenetic variation in conditioning phenotypic variation, particularly in crop
species, remains poorly understood. This project will develop an understanding
of the prevalence, origin and effects of epialleles in maize, an agronomically
important species that is likely to be rich in epigenetic variation. This work
will provide an extensive catalogue of epigenetic variation in maize and
teosinte genotypes and will explore the extent to which processes such as
generation of doubled haploids or silencing of transposons can contribute to
that variation. Several experiments will also probe the mechanisms that underlie
the creation and maintenance of epigenetic variation. Others will be aimed at
determining the extent to which epigenetic variation can affect plant
phenotypes. Collectively, the experiments are designed to provide a
comprehensive view of epigenetic regulation in a key crop species. The genomic
datasets developed in this project will be publicly available through a project
website (accessible via http://www.cbs.umn.edu/labs/springer/) and at public
repositories such as NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), Gramene
(http://gramene.org), and MaizeGDB (www.maizegdb.org). Curated datasets and data
analysis tools will also be publicly available at iPlant and biological
materials will be available at public stock centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide a much more substantial understanding of the prevalence
and effects of epigenetic variation in populations of maize. It will also help
in determining the extent to which that variation contributes to quantitative
trait variation in this species, which may have a significant impact on
selection of ideal genotypes (or epigenotypes) during plant breeding. In a more
general sense, this work will inform the current understanding of the role that
epigenetic variation has played in maize domestication and the contribution of
epigenetic change to evolutionary change in plants. The project will also
develop computational resources that would enable powerful epigenomic studies in
maize by centralizing the data and interpretation of complex datasets. Finally,
this project will provide training and outreach opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students in a variety of settings. Particular
emphasis will be placed on including members of historically under-represented
groups and on the incorporation of teacher training into research activities.