* 1237134
* SHB: Type II (INT): Synthesizing Self-Model and Mirror Feedback Imageries with Applications to Behavior Modeling for Children with Autism
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Ramesh Bhatt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 798,912.00

This project is an interdisciplinary, integrated research and education program
to develop novel technologies in manipulating mirror images, aimed at studying
and enabling behavioral modeling of children with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD). Central to the research is a "virtual-mirror" device that combines a
network of calibrated depth and visual sensors to render a viewpoint-dependent
dynamic view of an arbitrary-shaped virtual mirror on a room-size see-through
display. Through multimodal and spatially-diverse sensors, the proposed system
provides high-fidelity, non-intrusive capturing of eye gaze, facial expression,
body pose, body movement, and other human behavioral patterns. New multimedia
processing algorithms will be developed for transferring 2D and 3D physical
appearances, as well as behaviors from a source individual to a target
individual with limited target training data to be rendered on regular displays
and the virtual mirror.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Children with ASD typically lack
interest in social interactions, but appear to be highly interested in their own
image in mirrors and others imitating their actions. The software and hardware
systems developed in this project can provide unprecedented capability in
creating novel behaviors of self in both traditional visual medium and immersive
devices. The system is expected to provide greater flexibility to therapists,
teachers, and caretakers in creating material for video modeling and self-
modeling therapy. Deployment over the web lowers the technology barrier,
increases access to evidence-based treatments, and promotes consistent practice
of behavioral modeling in home and beyond clinics. By combining visual feedback
and real-time rendering of new behaviors, the virtual mirror is expected to
deliver more effective behavioral modeling for children with ASD. Success will
indicate that the self/other system in ASD can be modified, and suggest that a
fundamental deficit in ASD is subject to environmental manipulation. The
proposed research program is a collaborative effort of PIs from electrical
engineering, psychology, medicine, and education. The educational objective is
to develop a research program in which problem identification, data sharing, and
problem solving occur collaboratively from the very beginning. Outreach programs
including device demonstrations at pediatric clinics, television documentaries
of research results, and visits to high schools in rural districts are planned
to promote the use of technologies in solving important health and societal
problems, as well as to broaden the participation of under-represented groups in
STEM activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about this project, including
but not limited to the description, personnel, acknowledgements, latest results,
and publications, will be posted at http://www.vis.uky.edu/mialab/NSF_autism.