* 1237457
* Important Areas for Future Biomaterials Investments
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2013
* David Tirrell, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 10/31/2013
* USD 165,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1237457 PI: Tirrell, David ORG: California Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Important Areas for Future Biomaterials
Investments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Biomaterials is a rapidly
emerging component of the materials research community. Research in the area
covers a broad range of activities that include the development of materials
used for (1) delivery of therapeutic and diagnostic agents, (2) construction of
medical devices that must be compatible with the living systems with which they
are in contact, and (3) scaffolds for tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine applications. Another aspect of the biomaterials field involves
exploiting mimicry of, inspiration by, or co-opting of biological systems to
enable creation of novel functional materials. For the purposes of the workshop,
the various aspects of the field have been captured under the following topic
headings: Cell-Material Interactions, Disperse Systems, Hard Materials and
Composites, Soft Materials, and Thin Films and Interfaces. Expertise in all of
these areas will be represented among the invited workshop participants. The
workshop will involve a mix of plenary speakers and breakout sessions devoted to
the topics just enumerated. A formal workshop report will be issued by the
steering committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The results of the
workshop will be published in a report that will be widely disseminated and
posted on a publicly accessible website. Additionally, a shortened version of
the report, highlighting the most important results from the workshop, will be
published in a leading journal. The steering committee also intends to return to
NSF headquarters upon publication of the report to present their findings. The
workshop report can be expected to guide the biomaterials community (educational
institutions, commercial organizations, and funding agencies) in directing their
resources toward the most critical and important biomaterials research
challenges. For the relevant funding agencies, the workshop will help to
identify their respective responsibilities in the biomaterials area and to
foster robust and durable lines of communication among these agencies as they
continue their ongoing investments. Workshop participants will include active
researchers with diverse backgrounds in terms of topical area of expertise in
biomaterials, career stage, institution, geography, gender, and ethnicity. These
efforts will help ensure the conclusions of the workshop are representative of
the biomaterials community, as a whole. Additionally, several graduate students
will be invited to serve as assistants, allowing them the opportunity to observe
the workshop and interact with prestigious members of the field. Finally,
government agency representatives and selected members of industry will be
welcome to attend the workshop.