* 1237548
* Research Starter Grant:   Single Molecule Fluorescence Study of the DNA Repair Mechanism of T4 Endonuclease V
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Elvin Aleman, California State University-Stanislaus
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,940.00

Single-molecule fluorescence (SMF) is a powerful technique to determine the
formation of one or more intermediates, and to study the kinetics of the
processes from the instant before an enzyme interacts with the DNA until the
release of the enzymatic product, one molecule at a time. Steady-state
fluorescence and other ensemble average techniques used in previous DNA base
flipping studies provide information about the average state of a large number
of molecules. Ensemble averaged measurements can mask fluctuations in the
formation of intermediate enzyme-substrate complexes and lead to different
interpretations of the enzymatic process. In the area of DNA base flipping it
still remains to be answered if the enzyme "pushes" the nucleotide out of the
helix (active mechanism) or if the enzyme binds to a provisional flipped base
(passive mechanism). New single molecule approaches to fully assess the kinetics
mechanism of the base flipping process are needed. UV irradiation causes
carcinogen-lesions within DNA, including the formation of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), which are the most common type of UV DNA damage. T4 endonuclease V
(T4 endo V) is a bacterial DNA repair enzyme that eliminates CPD. The crystal
structure of T4 endo V shows that when the enzyme is in a complex with a helical
DNA containing a thymine dimer, the 5' complementary adenine is flipped out,
binding the damage site. The long-term goal is to understand at the molecular
level how the enzyme finds the damage, and how, when, and why the base flipping
occurs to repair damaged DNA. The goal of this work is to fully understand the
repair mechanism of T4 endo V and to determine the conditions (salt, pH, etc.)
that could maximize the repair process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Damage to DNA
bases can result in mutations and lead to cell death. For example, UV
irradiation can result in mutations that could block replication if the systems
designed to repair these damages fail. However, living organisms have enzymes to
repair DNA, and many of these enzymes perform a base flipping process to
recognize, gain access to, and repair damaged nucleotides. This project will
study how this process works by looking at single molecules fluorescence instead
of using large-scale ensemble methods. The proposed project will be performed in
a Hispanic Service Institution, where the students that will participate in this
project will have opportunities to learn a variety of techniques that connect
the fields of Molecular Biology, Biochemistry, and Physical Chemistry. Many of
these techniques are increasingly used in many areas of biophysical research and
the experience will inspire students to continue graduate studies in this and
other related fields.