* 1237916
* PFI-BIC:  Raman Spectroscopic Platform for Analysis of Volatile Organic Compound Biomarkers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* James Sterling, Keck Graduate Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2015
* USD 599,858.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from the Keck Graduate Institute(KGI)
seeks to develop the key technical innovations for a compact, cost-effective,
and user-friendly platform technology that can enable infectious disease
diagnosis or industrial process monitoring at the point-of-care or point-of-use.
The platform will use Raman spectroscopy to analyze organic compounds in the gas
phase or in aqueous solution. A key technical challenge for VOC detection, which
this project will address, relates to identifying and distinguishing VOC
signatures at low concentrations in complex mixtures. Commercially viable
platforms for use in the field or at the point-of-care also must be highly
robust, easy-to-use, and cost-effective. This project employs a fundamentally
different approach than currently marketed systems. The platform involves a
disposable, VOC sample collection/pre-concentration device, which out-performs
more elaborate existing devices at lower cost. To enable sensitive VOC
detection, the platform uses an innovative Raman probe, which is more sensitive
than conventional Raman probes, but circumvents the reproducibility problems
encountered with Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy VOCs enriched and detected
at the Raman sensor surface in a unique manner which also increases selectivity.
The team will refine a preliminary variant of this sensor and will perform
initial experiments aimed at understanding key system parameters, while
simultaneously developing a second generation sensor probe with increased
sensitivity, that is small, robust, and capable of being interfaced with a
portable Raman spectrometer.The probe will further be adapted for measuring
compounds in the liquid phase, specifically in complex aqueous solutions such as
cell culture media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts
of this research include rapid, near patient, and non-invasive diagnosis of
ventilator associated pneumonia, wound infections, and active tuberculosis that
can benefit patients in the U.S. and globally. Bioreactor process monitoring
ensures a reliable supply of biopharmaceuticals. Enabling the development and
commercialization of a novel platform technology that can address these
applications has economic benefits for the small business partners directly
involved in this effort, and for potential future business partners in the
medical device and biotech industry, thereby enhancing U.S. competitiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are the lead
academic institution: Keck Graduate Institute (Claremont, CA), and an academic
partner, the chemistry department at Pomona College (Claremont, CA). The project
involves three small businesses as core Knowledge-Enhancement Partners: Tanner
Research, Inc. (Monrovia, CA), Claremont BioSolutions (Upland, CA), and Lambda
Solutions Inc (Waltham, MA). Other partners active in the specific targeted
applications areas will be involved in the effort, including large companies
such as KCI (San Antonio, Texas), leveraging KGI's strong connections with the
biotech and medical device industry.