* 1237077
* SHB: Type II (INT): Collaborative Research: Creating Learning Systems with Mobile Technology to Improve Coordination in Perioperative Services
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Kevin Taaffe, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 821,066.00

This project proposes to create a framework using a combination of mobile
technology, learning systems, data analytics, education, and training to enhance
cooperation and coordination of staff within and across perioperative services
departments (POS). Perioperative services comprise surgery preparation,
operating rooms, post-anesthesia care, sterile processing and a variety of other
services, such as radiology and endoscopy. The specific objectives of this
project are to: (1) enhance communication and coordination among POS staff to
improve the quality of care by gathering and using important workflow milestones
and introducing artificial intelligence techniques through the use of a smart-
app, (2) analyze workflow data gathered with smart-apps using data analytics to
provide intuitive displays of real-time information for frontline staff and a
daily performance dashboard for managers, and (3) induce behavioral and cultural
change in healthcare systems through training and education. While existing
information technology capabilities such as natural language processing,
artificial intelligence, and speech recognition technology are promising
developments in computing, their uses in health care are limited and thus need
to be thoroughly investigated before they can be used in health care
effectively. To accomplish these objectives, the research team will work closely
with the partnering healthcare organizations, Greenville Hospital System (GHS),
Palmetto Health (Palmetto), and the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC),
in developing the tools and models which will be pilot-tested at these
organizations by their staff.

The developed tools and models will be widely disseminated among health care
providers in South Carolina. In addition, the smart-apps and agent-based
simulation model will provide the team with a teaching and training tool that
can be used in the classroom at Clemson University and the University of South
Carolina (USC) to teach students across a variety of fields, such as business,
engineering, science and healthcare students about information and workflow
management techniques.