* 1237250
* I-Corps:  Streamlined Embedded Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Shuvra Shikhar Bhattacharyya, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The project proposes investigating the commercial feasibility of novel design
methods and software tools that have been evolving through research in the
Maryland DSPCAD Research Group at the University of Maryland. The research has
been founded on new models algorithms and design processes that expose and
exploit the structure of signal processing systems in novel ways. The research
has been demonstrated also in the development of advanced prototypes that
provide novel capabilities for applications in the area of software defined
radio, surveillance, building energy management, and instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation investigated in this project will enhance
scientific and technological understanding; helping to rigorously integrate
considerations related to usability and end use integration into formal modes
and methods for design and implementation of embedded systems. Also, the
research that this project aims to transition has the potential to bring about
significant advances in the efficiency and reliability of hardware and software
for signal processing systems. Signal processing systems have a wide
applicability to a vast to a vast range of applications in the consumer
electronics, enterprise data processing, healthcare, and national security. The
proposed technology transfer investigation therefore has potential to improve
the quality of products and services in all these areas. The investigated
innovation will provide a unique opportunity for the Entrepreneurial Lead and PI
to gain valuable knowledge and experience in customer discovery and
commercialization strategy, which they will apply to their future efforts. The
project will also provide the I-Corps mentor and PI with valuable knowledge and
tools that they can use to deepen the integration of innovation into research
and education at the Institution.