* 1237866
* PFI-BIC: Modulation-Assisted Machining
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Leah Jamieson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,938.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from Purdue University is aimed at fully
enabling the commercial application of Modulation-Assisted Machining in the
discrete products sector. By superimposing a low-frequency/small-amplitude
modulation on the cutting tool, Modulation-Assisted Machining produces small,
discrete chips, while dramatically reducing friction and energy dissipation in
machining. The Modulation-Assisted Machining research platform will expand the
range of application of this technology from the current stationary drilling
configurations (developed and commercialized via prior NSF support) to a wide
range of rotating tool applications in drilling, turning, boring, trepanning,
and related processes. Benefits include greater than two-fold increases in
production rate, and large reductions in tool wear and machining emissions.
Equally important, the platform will provide for development of robust methods
for effecting power transfer to rotating tools and machines in the discrete
products manufacturing sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are higher productivity, improved product quality, greater use of
higher performance alloys that cannot be manufactured economically by
conventional machining, and major reductions in machining emissions with
associated environmental benefits. These are a consequence of enabling the
implementation of Modulation-Assisted Machining across high-performance
machining applications. The platform will also offer new cost-effective routes
for powder materials manufacturing, and improved cutting techniques for
orthopedic surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the
project are Purdue University (Schools of Industrial, Materials and Electrical
&amp; Computer Engineering), M4 Sciences LLC (West Lafayette, IN; Type II small
business) and American Micro Products (Batavia, OH; Type I small business), all
Knowledge Enhancement Partners; complemented by other partners: Cummins Inc.
(Columbus, IN; large business), Seco Tools (Fagersta, Sweden; large business,
now part of the Sandvik Corporation), Purdue College of Veterinary Medicine
(part of Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN) and the National Technical
Institute for the Deaf, Rochester Institute of Technology (Rochester, NY; non-
profit).