* 1237941
* Travel Support for Students to Attend a Symposium on the Influences of Behavior-Based Robotics on the Field
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Holly Yanco, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2013
* USD 11,250.00

This is funding for approximately 50 students to attend a full day symposium on
the impact of behavior-based robotics on over 25 years of robotics research and
development, which will be held on Friday, March 9, 2012, on the MIT campus,
immediately following the ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction which takes place this year in Boston. The symposium's primary focus
in on possible future research trajectories; to this end, the symposium will
examine the impact of the approach on both academic research and commercial
development. For example, the relationship between the subsumption-based robots
of the late 1980s and the Roombas being sold today is clear: the Roomba very
much resembles the insect-like robots Genghis and Attila in its programming and
behaviors. Are there such connections to all robot systems currently under
development? The symposium will examine several questions, including the
successes of behavior based robots, the adaptations made to this paradigm in
order to develop robots for more complicated tasks, and the likely trends in
robotics research and development over the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
symposium is structured into four main sections. The first section will address
the early years of behavior-based robotics and the subsumption architecture,
exploring the initial controversy and early work in this domain. The second
section will look at the global impact of the work, discussing related research
in labs around the world and how behavior-based robotics have been used and
expanded in many different robotics domains. The third will look at the
connections between behavior-based robotics and other research areas such as
multi-agent learning and computer vision. The final section will explore the
legacies of the work, both in terms of research and commercial robot
development, and the future prospects for behavior-based
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Student attendees at the
symposium will have an opportunity to meet and network with a community of top
robotics researchers, opening up channels for collaboration and mentoring.
Faculty advisors will be able to introduce their students in-person to the
field's luminaries (as most students will have their faculty advisor present);
these introductions, combined with the relatively small size of the gathering,
promise to provide a more personal, more memorable, and, thus, more influential
experience for the students. This event will provide students with many
opportunities for making connections with faculty, with people working in
robotics companies, and with other students. These networking opportunities may
lead to future collaborations and research.