* 1237606
* RSG:  The evolution of vibrational communication in island endemics: function, fitness implications, ontogeny, and phylogeny of seismic signaling in the New Zealand Deinacrida
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Daniel Howard, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,993.00

Understanding the functional mechanisms and evolutionary origins of animal
communication through substrate borne vibration is an important problem in
behavioral ecology. The availability of technologies such as portable laser
Doppler vibrometers, highly sensitive piezoelectric films and transducers, and
portable neurophysiology preparations allow investigators to address a broad
array of questions associated with vibrational communication. This research
tests hypotheses regarding the form, function, fitness implications, ontogeny,
and phylogeny of vibrational communication among the extant New Zealand
Deinacrida. This work addresses the following questions with respect to each of
the eleven species of New Zealand giant weta: 1) Does the species produce
vibrational signals for the purpose of intraspecific communication, and if so
what are the spectral and temporal characteristics of the signals? 2) What is
the neurophysiological range of response to seismic stimuli in the species? 3)
Under what social contexts are the signals produced, and does signal character
change with context? 4) What are the fitness related implications for
vibrational signaling in the species (assessment benefits in inter male
contests, female assessment of mate condition)? 5) How does the use of vibration
change over the course of development in the species (predator avoidance to
reproductive function)? 6) How do the form and function of vibrational signals
compare between species? , and 7) Is there a relationship between vibrational
signaling and ecological niche? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last two decades
there has been a growing interest in understanding the functional mechanisms and
evolutionary origins of animal communication. New technologies such as portable
laser Doppler vibrometers allow investigators to address a broad array of
questions associated with vibrational communication in insects. This work will
improve understanding of the selective pressures and evolutionary patterns that
have resulted in the prevalence of vibrational signaling for communication.
Using laser Doppler vibrometry in the field, extracellular electrophysiology in
the laboratory, together with sound and high-speed video analysis of the New
Zealand giant weta, key hypotheses in vibrative communication will be tested.
Data collection and analysis will be performed by undergraduate research
students from Augustana College and by students of Maori descent enrolled at
Victoria University of Wellington.