* 1237476
* Workshop on the Next Generation Financial Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The Great Recession of 2008, and its reverberations that are being felt all over
the world even several years later, have highlighted significant limitations in
the ability of regulators and analysts/researchers to monitor and model the
national and global financial ecosystem. Specifically, there is an urgent need
for financial cyberinfrastructure to ingest and process numerous streams of
financial transactions, as well as the accompanying data streams of economic
activity, in real time. Also absent are open standards and shared semantics so
that this data can be used to populate models of individual markets, financial
networks and the interconnected ecosystem representing the global financial
system. This calls for focused efforts aimed at developing computational
research frameworks, models and methods, as well as the necessary
cyberinfrastructure for regulating systemic risk in financial systems on par
with efforts in other areas of national priority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Against
this background, this workshop (and related activities) aims to bring together
an interdisciplinary group of academics in Computer Science, Finance, Economics
and Social Sciences to work closely with the OFR and other regulatory agencies,
and the financial and the computing industrises to: (1) Develop a blueprint for
next generation financial cyberinfrastructure for regulating and mitigating
systemic risk in financial markets (2) Identify the computational research
challenges that need to be addressed in order to realize a cyber-enabled
framework for regulating systemic risk; (3) Develop best practices for a cyber-
enabled regulatory framework; and (4) Prepare a diverse cadre of PhD students to
pursue multi-disciplinary research in Finance
Informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A one and a half day workshop will be
organized in Washington D.C. A doctoral consortium will be held concurrently
with the workshop and continued at the University of Maryland. The doctoral
consortium will be aimed at graduate students with strong backgrounds in
mathematics and computer science and an interest in some aspect of finance
informatics. The doctoral consortium participants will be exposed to a multi-
disciplinary curriculum that reflects many of research areas and methodologies
that are discussed in the report on computational research challenges. The
workshop report will be widely disseminated through a variety of venues.