* 1237890
* PFI-BIC:  A Small-Company-Centric Knowledge Enhancement Partnership to Accelerate Nanomaterials Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2016
* James Hutchison, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 05/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from the University of Oregon (Eugene)
proposes to develop the capacity to accelerate the commercialization of
inorganic nano-particle technologies. Inorganic nano-particles consist of an
inorganic (metal or metal oxide) core 1 to 100 nm in diameter surrounded by a
shell of molecular or polymeric coatings. The wide variety of the physical
properties of the core materials and the selective binding capabilities of the
ligands and coatings comprise a versatile tool kit with commercial applications
across nearly every industrial sector. However, commercialization of these
nanomaterials has been limited by difficulties in translating the synthesis
methods used during discovery research to reliable commercial scale production.
This project aims to address research problems at the frontiers of nano-science
by developing improved materials measurement and characterization techniques
that will enable nanoparticles to be produced and their properties optimized,
advancing the state of the art in nanoscience, and thus accelerating the
commercialization process itself.

The broader impacts of this project are related to economics, education, and
diversity. The small companies that participate in the knowledge enhancement
partners (KEP) group will develop production techniques that are reproducible,
reliable, scalable, fast, efficient, robust, precise, and inexpensive. These
improvements will enable large-scale economic opportunities in photovoltaics,
solid-state lighting and display technologies. The project will enable the
acceleration of the commercialization of nanoparticles in other sectors,
including: energy storage, catalysis, information technology, cancer treatment,
and environmental remediation. Students and faculty members who participate in
this project will learn to conduct basic research in an explicitly technological
and industrial context. The KEP will encourage the participation of under-
represented groups by offering summer research experiences to community college
students.

Partners at the inception of this project include lead academic
institution,University of Oregon,(Department of Chemistry, Materials Science
Institute, Center for Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR),
and Lundquist College of Business); Small businesses: QD Vision, Lexington,
Massachusetts; Voxtel, Beaverton, Oregon; Dune Sciences, Eugene, Oregon; and
Hummingbird Scientific, Lacey, Washington; and a Federal agency: The National
Institute for Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland. Other partner
organizations include: Academic (UO Lundquist Center for Entrepreneurship and
Office of Technology Transfer); Private (Life Technologies); Public
(NanoBusiness Commercialization Association, National Nanomanufacturing Network,
Oregon Nanoscience and Microtechnology Institute; Safer Nanomaterials and
Nanomanufacturing Initiative; and the University-Industry Demonstration
Partnership).