* 1237873
* PFI-AIR:Industry-Academia Research Partnership for Developing &amp; Implementing Non-Destructive Characterization and Assessment of Pharmaceutical Oral Dosages in Continuous Manufa
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Fernando Muzzio, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 04/30/2015
* USD 956,962.00

This NSF Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) project will establish a public-
private ecosystem for the development and implementation of innovative
strategies for non-destructive characterization and assessment of pharmaceutical
oral dosage forms targeted to continuous manufacturing processes. Non-
destructive testing also impacts the quality of health-care treatment,
circumventing the issues posed by destructive testing, in which dosages given to
patients can never be tested. Non-destructive testing additionally can provide a
foundation to better understand critical scientific issues such as within-
patient and patient-to-patient response variability since the variability
associated with the manufacturing process can be de-convoluted by this approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling non-destructive testing has significant economic
impact on the quality and control of therapeutics. From an economic perspective,
non-destructive testing can provide a pathway for advancing Real-Time Release
Testing (RTRT), which has the potential to reduce manufacturing costs associated
with large captive waiting-for-release inventories and failed batches. Moreover,
non-destructive testing can provide a competitive edge for high-quality
U.S.-based manufacturing by retaining and expanding U.S. manufacturing jobs in
the pharmaceutical sector.