* 1237558
* Conference: 2012 Plant and Microbial Cytoskeleton Gordon Research Conference being held August 12-17, 2012 in Andover, NH
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Laurie Smith, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Research to be presented at this conference employs
a diverse collection of organisms and experimental approaches, and is thus
highly interdisciplinary. The following two objectives exemplifying the
intellectual merit of the conference will be accomplished:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Communicate to all conference participants the most exciting advances in
understanding the regulation of cytoskeletal structure, dynamics, organization
and function in plants, fungi, bacteria and other microbes. This will be
accomplished primarily via 31 full length talks given by invited speakers,
approximately 15 short talks invited based on submitted abstracts, and poster
presentations given by most other conference participants. Discussions among
participants after each talk and during poster sessions, meals, and free time
will also play a key role in communicating advances, and stimulating ideas for
future projects and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;2. Promote understanding of, and
stimulate interest in mathematical, biophysical and computational approaches to
understanding cytoskeletal regulation and function. Two new areas of emphasis
for the 2012 conference program were chosen to accomplish this goal: use of
mathematical/biophysical modeling, and use of computational methods to achieve
single molecule resolution in fluorescence imaging of cytoskeletal and
cytoskeleton-interacting proteins. Seven full length invited talks will
illustrate use of these approaches to study the cytoskeleton, and it is
anticipated that short talk speakers employing these approaches will also be
chosen.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The Chair and Vice Chair are fully
committed to the goal of broadening participation in this conference and the
scientific community it represents. To this end, they will pursue the following
two objectives:&lt;br/&gt;3. Provide career building opportunities for young
scientists attending this conference. Eight of 31 invited speakers are within
the first six years of their first faculty position and untenured. Most of the
15 short talk speakers will be early career faculty, postdocs or Ph.D. students,
and virtually all other meeting participants will present a poster on their
research. The small size and highly interactive nature of this conference will
facilitate the ability of young scientists to interact with more established
ones. Thus, young scientists attending this conference will have excellent
career-building opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;4. Broaden participation in this
conference. The majority of invited speakers have never previously spoken at
this conference. The conference has been advertised widely to stimulate interest
from individuals who have not previously attended. To further broaden
participation, NSF-funded awards will be made to students, postdocs and early
career faculty who might not otherwise be able to attend for financial reasons
or who might not even have considered attending, with priority given to women
and URMs.