* 1237547
* Meeting:   Vertebrate Land Invasions:   Past, Present, and Future; A Symposium for the Annual SICB Meeting in San Francisco, CA
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Miriam Ashley-Ross, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2013
* USD 14,985.00

This award supports the symposium, "Vertebrate Land Invasions: Past, Present,
and Future," to be held at the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
annual conference on 3-7 January 2013, in San Francisco, California. The
transition from water to land was a major evolutionary event in vertebrate
history that precipitated a sudden explosion of species diversity. This
transition was met by numerous challenges for movement, support, respiration,
osmoregulation, and sensory perception. Recent fossil finds and popular accounts
of their discoveries have increased public appreciation for the significance of
the Paleozoic land invasion. Furthermore, building evidence for the effects of
global climate change on environmental conditions has also stimulated greater
interest in understanding organism-environment interactions. This symposium will
bring together eleven scientists at all career stages (graduate students,
postdocs, and assistant, associate, and full professors) to highlight their
research in paleontology, physiology, behavior, biomechanics, and robotics.
Topics are organized to synthesize a broad body of knowledge about water-land
transitions in the distant past and among current living species. In addition,
junior scientists (undergraduate, graduate, and postdocs) have been invited to
participate in Complementary Sessions, in which they will present relevant work
in oral or poster formats The program for this symposium and its complementary
sessions are designed to motivate conversations and collaborations that would be
difficult to begin otherwise, generating new directions for work in this
important area. This also provides an opportunity for new investigators to
participate in a prominent venue and receive feedback from authorities on the
topic. Presentations by these researchers will reach out to a wide audience
through the publication of articles in Integrative and Comparative Biology and
promotion by SICB through the symposium website
(http://sicb.org/meetings/2013/symposia/index.php) and the Public Affairs
Committee.