* 1237174
* SHB: Type II (INT): DELPHI: Data E-platform Leveraged for Patient Empowerment and Population Health Improvement
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* William Griswold, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,000,000.00

In response to a healthcare crisis of epidemic proportions, thousands of
software developers have been innovating new personal healthcare applications
and technologies that leverage advances in medical and computing technology.
Despite the endless streams of personal data that these tools process -- weight,
activity, diet, heart rate, etc. -- they are relatively data poor. Left out of
these applications is a comprehensive set of users' clinical electronic medical
records, genomic data, comparative data with relevant subpopulations, and data
on environmental influences important to health and quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are numerous barriers to incorporating such
data in applications, the dominant factors being the tremendous volume and
heterogeneity of such data, much of it streaming in real-time and spread across
disparate stakeholder platforms. A related problem is drawing inferences from
these data. With the advances in databases and machine learning proposed, we
envision a new era of health and healthcare where patients, providers and
consumers are empowered by data access and applicability that we characterize as
personalized population health. In particular, we anticipate a new category of
healthcare applications that infer one's health status - and help execute
interventions - in the perspective of one's entire life history and
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conducting fundamental and applied
research in support of a platform, called DELPHI, that enables integrated access
and analysis of all data relevant to health, and consequently promotes more
rapid development of empowering, data-driven health apps and tools by a broad
community of health-related software developers. The platform supports an
integrated "whole health information model" of the individual that provides
developers a single point of access that both (a) hides distribution and data
heterogeneities, and (b) facilitates drawing inferences from these "noisy" data.
The platform enables novel forms of analyses based on contextual and statistical
metadata. Scalability is achieved through theoretically proven and newly
proposed database and machine learning techniques. Our research is driven by
three disparate case studies and field trials: a clinician-facing type-1
diabetes intervention, a patient and consumer-facing hypertension application,
and a regional population health asthma and respiratory disease
scenario.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DELPHI
is yielding fundamental advances in databases and machine learning that enable a
wide community of programmers - from full-time professional to relative novices
- to program on top of a "live", streaming population-scale medical dataset.
Additionally, these techniques are being evaluated in at least three realistic
field trials, yielding new insights on both the nature of computing on medical
"big data" and the techniques we have proposed to make it
tractable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be
demonstrated through a personal well-being and population health applications
ecosystem, with three immediate beneficiaries: 1) The San Diego Beacon
Community, a model for health information exchanges currently under development
nationally. 2) Governmental and non-profit agencies who serve as an example of
public/private partnerships to promote community-wide health. 3) Private
industry, in this case Qualcomm Life's/2net platform where we demonstrate how to
utilize existing services in novel ways to handle health data. Finally, this
project will serve as a training ground in personalized population health for
graduate students, post docs and medical residents.