* 1237856
* PFI-BIC:  Novel Circuit Architectures and Design Methodologies for Low Power Digital Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sarma Vrudhula, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from Arizona State University is aimed
at developing a new approach to digital system design in order to significantly
reduce the power consumption and size of digital systems without reducing their
speed of operation. If successful, the results of this research can be used to
improve the energy efficiency of nearly every digital system, including desktop
computers, laptops, tablets, cell phones and other handheld digital devices.
This new approach employs threshold logic gates, which compute logic functions
in a manner that is distinctly different from the way conventional logic gates
operate. A threshold logic gate implements a complex logic function in a single
primitive cell, which would otherwise require a network of many conventional
logic gates. It is this absorption of logic into a single cell that is the
reason for the reduction in power and size. A novel architecture for a threshold
logic gate, called a differential threshold logic latch (DTLL), is proposed as
the primitive logic cell.&lt;br/&gt;DTLL cells are compatible with existing
logic gates, and can be used to replace parts of a digital circuit to reduce its
power and area and possibly improve its speed. The resulting circuit will be a
hybrid, consisting of DTLL cells and conventional logic gates. A significant
advantage of the proposed approach is that DTLL cells can be implemented as
efficiently as standard cells, making it possible to integrate threshold logic
technology with existing Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) design
methodology. To enable the integration of threshold logic with conventional ASIC
design requires the development of design infrastructure, which includes the
design of a threshold cell library, and a host of algorithms and software tools
that transform existing digital designs into hybrid designs. This project will
build such an infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
project will be benefits to performance of mobile electronic applications such
as smart phones, cameras, laptops, etc. These devices will benefit the most from
a reduction in power consumption delivered as a result of this project. A
fundamental advantage of the approach taken in this project to reducing power
consumption is that the technology of threshold logic is compatible with
existing logic. As a result, the proposed approach is fully compatible with
existing industrial design methodology. No new fabrication technology will be
required, and existing commercial back-end design tools (e.g., synthesis,
optimization, placement and routing) can be used for the hybrid
netlists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project: the
knowledge enhancement partners (KEP): Lead institution: Arizona State University
(Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering and School of Computing, Informatics and
Decision Systems Engineering); and Small Businesses: Cactus Semiconductor Inc.
and Everspin Inc. Other Partners--Large Businesses: Qualcomm and Texas
Instruments.