* 1237618
* Meeting: Hormone-mediated Male:Female Ratio Adjustment in Vertebrates, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, January 3rd-7th, 2013, San Francisco, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Kristen Navara, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 11/30/2013
* USD 19,168.00

The sex ratio of a population is a major determinant of the population's
survival and the reproductive success of individuals within the population. The
ability of an individual to adjust the sex ratios of the offspring they produce,
or to change their sex at the adult level such that the number of males and
females at the population level are influenced, is a powerful concept and one
that has been discussed in an evolutionary context for decades. Although for
some systems, such as reptiles and some fishes, the mechanisms by which sex can
be altered through environmental cues have been addressed in detail, in other
systems, such as birds and mammals, surprisingly little is known about the
mechanisms of sex ratio adjustment. This symposium will bring together
researchers studying hormonal mechanisms of sex adjustment in birds, reptiles,
fishes, humans, and non-human mammals in an effort to stimulate new research
avenues in the study of sex ratio adjustment. By demonstrating novel approaches
in their own vertebrate systems used to address similar questions about sex
ratio adjustment, we will encourage cross-fertilization of ideas among speakers
and introduce the SICB audience to potential research avenues to which their
current research in their respective systems could prove applicable. The
symposium will include presentations by nine speakers, including one assistant
professor, two associate professors, five professors, and one senior lecturer.
Three of the nine speakers are women and three are foreign nationals. Efforts
were made to include those with the highest level of expertise in the field of
hormone-mediated sex ratio adjustment, while stimulating (1) interactions
between foreign and US researchers, (2) interactions between young scientists
and established scientists, and (3) incorporation of underrepresented groups at
the nexus of hormone-mediated sex ratio adjustment in multiple vertebrate
systems.