* 1237083
* Conference: 2012 Protein Transport Across Cell Membranes GRC and GRS-March 10-16, 2012 in Galveston, Texas
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2013
* Kenneth Cline, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2013
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The fourth biennial Protein Transport Across Cell
Membranes Gordon Research Conference (GRC) will be held March 11-16 and will be
preceded by the first Gordon Research Seminar for this meeting on March 10-11.
Together these conferences will focus on mechanisms involved in translocating
proteins across or into biological membranes. Elucidation of protein transport
mechanisms remains a fundamental objective of modern cell biology as ~30% of all
proteins are either transported across or integrated into cellular membranes.
Moreover, defects in protein transport result in several human genetic diseases,
and infectious microbes use protein transport systems to deliver virulence
factors to plants and animals. Protein translocation machineries (translocases)
are highly sophisticated nanomachines, comprising multiple receptors, motors,
checkpoints, channels and complex regulatory circuits. As such, progress in this
field requires an integrated approach that combines diverse methodologies
including biochemistry, genetics, x-ray crystallography, cryo-EM, and
fluorescence single molecule imaging. This conference is the only regularly
scheduled meeting in the US devoted to an in-depth coverage of the protein
transport field. It assembles specialists in these varied methodologies to
report unpublished data, to evaluate&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses, and to generate new
theories and approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of 2012 Protein
Transport across Cell Membranes GRC is to stimulate the exchange and vigorous
discussion of the frontiers of knowledge and methodology in the protein
transport field. This will be accomplished in large part by the judicious
selection and recruitment of speakers and discussion leaders, and also by the
intense but informal GRC format of the conference. The 2012 conference will
begin with an overview session that will inform participants on the range of
experimental systems, approaches, and concepts of this field. Other sessions
will cover mechanistic aspects of major transport systems (15 to 20 in some
eukaryotes; up to 10 in prokaryotes), as well as novel transport systems. This
conference will advance knowledge into the workings of these essential and
varied protein transport nanomachines. Thirty-five invited speakers and
discussion leaders have already accepted, indicating a high level of enthusiasm
for this meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The mission
of these associated meetings is to provide a forum that both educates
experienced researchers and introduces new investigators into the field. The GRC
format, which encourages extensive and spirited discussions of unpublished data
and ideas, is perfect for these goals. The associated GRS is a rich training
environment that will provide postdocs and students the confidence to engage in
such discussions. First, GRS participants will receive basic background in the
concepts, principles, and mechanisms involved in protein translocation. Second,
they will receive feedback on their research, network with their peers and
senior investigators, and sharpen their skills in presentation and discussion in
a non-intimidating environment. Other mechanisms to integrate young
investigators will include selection for GRC short talks and partial support for
GRC registration. Female participants made up 38% of the participants at the
2010 conference. The 2012 GRC and GRS will obtain a gender- (and other
minority-) balanced program of speakers with preference for speakers and
discussion leaders that will include registration support. Together with an
international distribution of attendees, the GRC and GRS will provide a rich
educational experience that will mentor a diverse new generation of scientists
into this and related fields.