* 1237590
* EESE: A multidimensional and dynamic ethics education paradigm spanning the science career
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Rochelle Tractenberg, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,939.00

The dominant method for ensuring ethical conduct of research among scientists is
to teach students formal rules and require them to take a test. This method may
be insufficient to support ethics competency throughout an entire scientific
career. Using a new framework for career-spanning ethical development - the
Mastery Rubric (MR) for the responsible conduct of research (MR-RCR)- this
research project addresses that gap, encouraging Ph.D.scientists to gain skills
and mastery in ethical research practices throughout their career. In the MR-RCR
framework, individuals are taught, and given opportunities to practice and
demonstrate, ethical reasoning skills that underpin research integrity and RCR.
MR encourages individuals to monitor their own development, so that they know to
seek multiple opportunities to learn, practice, and demonstrate their mastery of
the specific components of the RCR training objectives. More specifically, to
establish and continually augment RCR training and knowledge, scientists create
portfolios that can result in certification of journeyman- and master-level
skill. The method also supports concrete evaluation and improvement of training
opportunities and their consistency with learning objectives, and includes
opportunities for mentorship that provide means of cementing communities of
ethically-trained scientists. Established standard-setting approaches are used
to create test evidence for validation by a team of content experts to estimate
reliability and drift in ratings of portfolio evidence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theoretical contribution of this project is
that it situates responsible conduct of research and ethical action in
collective and individual reflective teaching and learning. This framework has
the potential to transform ethics scholarship, as well as ethics training, by
emphasizing purposeful and reflective development throughout the career, and to
encourage self-regulation by making developmental objectives and performance
criteria explicit. The results are disseminated to sixty multi-institutional
research centers, including historically black colleges and universities, to
professional associations, via publications.