* 1237814
* PFI-BIC:  Innovation Transfer of the Portable Nuclear Moment Imaging Platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Bernard Whiting, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 598,644.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from University of Florida is focused
on developing the nuclear moment imager (NMI) which is a technology that
utilizes the directional nature of highly sensitive optical magnetometers to
collect an MRI-like image in only seconds without the use of large permanent
magnetic fields. It functions more like magnetic tomography than a conventional
MRI, in that the magnetic fields from the subject are imaged directly. It can be
made portable, and it will be relatively inexpensive compared to MRI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include applications
and research in areas as diverse as medical imaging for head trauma, industrial
product inspection, agricultural pest control, scientific study of biological
processes, ground penetrating imaging, and agricultural product inspection. The
nuclear moment imager has the potential to affect many areas of everyday life in
such widely varying areas as medicine, agriculture, science, industrial
inspection, and other areas yet to be envisioned. One particularly exciting
potential application is in third world countries, where the availability of a
relatively inexpensive MRI-like imager that could travel with mobile medical
teams could change the way "bush medicine" is practiced. The NMI platform and
Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI: BIC) research
will be housed as a part of the recently formed Center for Innovation
Translation. This center allows students to move real-world research projects
rapidly to the early prototype stage, thus educating them in early-stage high-
tech startup skills, contributing to the overall regional entrepreneurial
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project:
University of Florida with the Microfabritech/Center for Innovation Translation,
Materials Science and Engineering, Physics, Mathematics, Biomedical Engineering,
and Radiology departments participating; Small businesses: Anitraks
(Gainesville, FL),an imaging software development firm; Synogen (Gainesville,
FL), a medical device development firm; and Medical Tool &amp; Technology
(Hawthorne, FL), a medical device prototype manufacturer. All of three of these
businesses for profit companies that are fully engaged in the regional
entrepreneurial ecosystem. Symmetricom (San Jose, CA), a world leading
manufacturer of atomic clocks and atomic physics technology--has recently become
a partner on this project and will be working to optimize miniature
magnetometers for this application. In addition, the group has very active
partnerships with the UF Office of Technology Licensing ,which routinely
participates in nurturing entrepreneurial activities in the region,;the
Innovation Hub, a newly formed one-stop-shop incubator that specializes in
getting new technological business over the early startup difficulties; and the
Sid Martin Biotech Center which is a biotechnology focused incubator near
Gainesville that is working with more than 30 active small businesses.