* 1237207
* 2012 Solid State Chemistry Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Susan Kauzlarich, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2013
* USD 25,000.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Solid State
Chemistry funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program will be held
at Colby-Sawyer College July 22-27, 2012. The focus of this conference is the
design and properties of materials for energy and environment applications. This
conference highlights the challenges that we face in producing enough energy
while maintaining our environment. Sustainable development of alternatives to
fossil fuels is a challenging endeavor. To face this fundamental issue, the
design of new compounds, the optimization of existing materials and the
understanding of the relationship of structure and physical properties require a
multidisciplinary approach in which Solid State Chemistry is the bedrock. To
this end, the conference brings together a diverse array of scientists to
discuss the latest advances and challenges in Solid State Chemistry. Speakers
and poster presenters are explicitly encouraged to emphasize advances,
unpublished results, new and risky ideas on a variety of current topics. The
organizers strongly encourage active contribution to discussions and
participation in poster sessions, which offer an excellent opportunity for
presenting new and exciting research. Solid State Chemistry is a
multidisciplinary field whose importance continues to increase not only with the
discovery of new classes of materials, but also through a deeper understanding
of the diverse properties of solids made possible by modern techniques. The
importance and scope of the field has grown in response to the continuing
challenge to understand, control, and predict the structures and properties of
solids and the need to synthesize new materials with enhanced physical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting
will directly impact all of the attendees by providing an open atmosphere for
exchange of ideas on the cutting edge of Solid State Chemistry. GRC provides the
framework for fostering an open attendees at each of its meetings. There is time
for informal discussion and the manner with which the meals are provided ensures
that all participants can interact during the meeting. The speakers are expected
to convey unpublished and cutting edge information to their colleagues with the
objective that this disclosure will stimulate expansive discussion among all
attendees and progressively advance the field. The inclusive, collegial
atmosphere of the GRC, and the emphasis on sharing previously unpublished
information, enables the cultivation of innovative approaches to address the
most important challenges facing our world. This strategy is a hallmark of GRC
and has served the scientific community and facilitated the advancement of
science for over eight decades. There is special funding for underrepresented
groups. The intent of this meeting is to promote the exchange of ideas and the
building of partnerships between researchers from the academic world, industry
and government laboratories. Many younger scientists are included in the program
along with more senior and distinguished scientists, promising to make the
presentations and discussions representative of new directions in the field.