* 1237404
* The Mechanisms for the Maintenance of Nocturnal Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* David Parsons, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 599,951.00

Supported investigators will focus on improved detection and understanding of
mechanisms leading to formation and maintenance of nocturnal deep convection
(i.e., thunderstorms developing well after the cessation of maximum daytime
heating) under conditions that include a low-level jet, stable boundary-layer
stratification and elevated instability as signified by the largest Convectively
Available Potential Energy (CAPE) being located near the altitude of this low-
level jet wind maximum. This work is motivated by recent idealized studies that
point to the potential importance of undular bores and internal gravity waves in
maintaining nocturnal convection over the Great Plains region, as well as recent
case-studies of by these investigators showing that a positive feedback may
potentially exist between nocturnal convection, bores and the pre-convective
environment. This work will take advantage of the operational rawinsonde
network, composite radar data analyses, and advanced wind profiler data to
conduct an in-depth study of the impact of the nocturnal weather systems on
convective instability, and in so doing will seek to generalize prior
descriptions of mechanisms that may serve to trap the vertical propagation of
wave energy. Additional measurements will be obtained using an FM-CW (frequency
modulated continuous wave) radar, scanning Doppler lidar and serial soundings.
Lidar (light detection and ranging) data will allow identification of situations
in which bore-lifted air is serving to feed convective updrafts. Non-hydrostatic
numerical simulations will be conducted to advance understanding of
observational results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this
effort will derive from characterization of the complex interplay among
nocturnal convection, undular bores and gravity waves with emphasis on
assessment of cases where positive feedbacks among these features may be
responsible for convective maintenance. Broader Impacts will include graduate
student involvement in data collection and analysis, as well as anticipated
linkages to NSF-supported REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) programs
at National Weather Center and through integration of results into courses
offered at the School of Meteorology. Ultimately, desirable impacts are also
expected through improved ability to predict nocturnal thunderstorm development
over the Great Plains and anticipate associated impacts on surface hydrology,
energy production and agriculture, as well as related increases in public safety
in situations involving hazardous nocturnal weather. This effort is also well
paired with NOAA's stated goal to assess effectiveness of increasing dependence
of storm-scale short-term forecasts on numerical models, as in the "Warn-on-
Forecast" initiative. Findings may also be applicable in other continental
regions beyond the U.S. Great Plains that exhibit a nocturnal maximum in
thunderstorm occurrence.