* 1237809
* Student Travel Grants for SIGCOMM 2012 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Sharon Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2013
* USD 24,615.00

The ACM SIGCOMM Conference will be held from August 13 to August 17, 2012 in
Helsinki, Finland. ACM SIGCOMM is the flagship annual conference of the Special
Interest Group on Data Communications, a special interest group of the
Association for Computing Machinery. This proposal requests funding to assist
approximately 10 graduate students and 3 postdoctoral students from US
institutions to attend this conference. Participation in conferences such as
SIGCOMM is an extremely important part of the graduate school experience,
provides students with an opportunity to interact with more senior researchers
and exposes them to leading edge research in the field. The support requested in
this proposal will enable people in the above categories to attend the main
SIGCOMM 2012 conference, who would be otherwise unable to do so. The travel
grant chairs are committed to encouraging the participation of women and under-
represented minorities.

Intellectual Merit: This project proposes to provide travel support for US-based
graduate and postdoctoral students to attend the main SIGCOMM 2012 conference.
SIGCOMM is the flagship conference in the networking community and a highly
competitive venue (with acceptance rate around 10%). Its rich program exposes
participants to new ideas and cutting-edge research and allows for interaction
between researchers from all over the world.

Broader Impact: This project integrates research and education of students
through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks and
communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field. The proposed
student participation is expected to have a positive impact on the students'
research interests and quality. Second, the project will promote diversity by
encouraging and enabling women and other under-represented minorities to
participate. Furthermore, the truly international flavor of SIGCOMM as an annual
conference is well-known and reflected in the composition of the Technical
Program Committee as well as in the authors of the submitted and accepted
papers. As such, it cultivates international research interactions and presents
a tremendous opportunity to students to increase their breadth of ideas,
research approaches, and technical perspectives.