* 1237737
* Ethics among Physicists in Cross-National Perspective
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Elaine Howard Ecklund, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,732.00

This study seeks to find out how physicists in the United States, China, and the
United Kingdom approach the ethical issues surrounding research integrity and
their relationships with industry. The primary data collection will consist of
225 interviews with a sample of physicists at various stages of their careers
who work in research universities or research institutes in the three national
contexts. We will ask: How do physicists perceive the meaning of research
integrity and misconduct? Under what conditions is one obliged to act when
research misconduct has occurred? What are the potential conflicts of interest
(if any) of industry's role in research? Is the ideal of a borderless scientific
community consistent with the national character of research, and is this
relationship relevant to issues of research integrity among physicists? Do
physicists perceive the ethics training they receive (if they receive any) as
relevant to the ethical issues they face? The study begins to fill the lacunae
of data that exists on how scientists understand ethical issues in relation to
science, and how such views differ across local and national contexts.

Intellectual Merits: The research will specifically explore the relationships
among science, ethics, and society in a way that complements recent studies of
science in national and international contexts. Existing laboratory studies are
foundational to understanding how scientists view ethics, yet few broadly
examine scientists? own ethical views. The study is a cross-sectional interview-
based study rather than a case study, meaning it will complement existing
research while significantly expanding upon it. The research will provide a
snapshot of pan-communal attitudes, which can be integrated at the aggregate
with the wealth of existing microscale perspectives provided by social science
studies of the natural sciences. A large qualitative study like ours will
contribute to a better understanding of how physicists perceive and gain clarity
on what constitutes research integrity and the appropriate relationship between
research and industry. Other work highlights the constantly shifting ways
scientists overcome uncertainty. Sociologists once thought scientists deployed
well-articulated norms - i.e., a bureaucratic-rational approach - to overcome
uncertainties about proper scientific conduct. But closer examination reveals
that even at the forefront of modern research fields (and perhaps especially
here), we find extensive appeals to charismatic authority to foreclose, or at
least bracket, such uncertainties. In the natural sciences especially, where
research often involves extensive international collaboration, it is important
to understand how varying approaches to research integrity might contribute to
the success or failure of collaborations, yet there is scant research on this
topic. In addition to remedying this knowledge gap, the results of our research
will guide and advance specific changes in ethics education for physicists in
different national contexts.

Educational and Broader Impact: Study findings will be widely disseminated via
lectures based on our results, a website, and publications for both academics
(particularly those in the ethics community) and general audiences. This study
will also involve extensive mentoring of undergraduate research assistants, and
insights from the research findings will be used in courses for graduate-level
physics students and science policy students. In particular, the PI and co-PIs
will provide undergraduates and graduate students training related to science
ethics and the development of science policy, during which students will acquire
a better understanding of research methods and social science approaches to
studying ethics among scientists. Public policy briefs based on our findings
will be created (in both English and Chinese) and used to interact with the
scientific community and science policy makers in order to demonstrate how
varying approaches to science ethics (especially issues of research integrity)
might influence international scientific collaborations.