* 1237292
* Supporting Students Attending the User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization 2012 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Bamshad Mobasher, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,200.00

User interfaces that adapt themselves to available user information (such as
special needs or individual preferences) are becoming increasingly important, so
much so that adaptability has become a selling point for software products. A
system with the ability to construct and consult a user model (an explicit
representation of properties of a particular user or group of users) can adapt
diverse aspects of its performance and enhance its effectiveness, usability
and/or acceptance in a variety of situations (e.g., to reduce information
overload, to improve the quality of information retrieval, filtering and
annotation, and to generate useful information visualizations). Applications for
user modeling range from electronic commerce and intelligent learning
environments to health care and assistive technologies. Relevant platforms for
user modeling include mobile and wearable systems and smart environments, as
well as individual desktop systems, groupware, adaptive hypermedia, and other
web-based systems.

The annual International Conferences on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization (UMAP) provide the premier forum in which academic and
industrial researchers from all of these fields can exchange their complementary
insights on user modeling issues. UMAP is a merger of the long-running and
successful International Conferences on User Modeling (UM, 1986-2007), and the
more recent important series of Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based
Systems Conferences (AH, 2000-2008). This is funding to support travel by
approximately 10 graduate students to present their accepted papers and posters
and/or to present their research plans at the Doctoral Consortium associated
with the 20th event in the UMAP series, to be held July 16-20, 2012, in
Montreal, Canada. More information about the conference is available at
http://umap2012.polymtl.ca/en.

UMAP-12 will include a Doctoral Consortium session, thereby continuing a
tradition established at UMAP-09 and before that at both the UM and AH
conferences. Lively and useful discussions have enabled students to receive
suggestions about their ongoing research and allowed more experienced
participants to hear some fresh ideas and view some of the new trends in the
field. Students whose work has been selected for presentation at the Doctoral
Consortium will be invited to write a paper that will be published in the
UMAP-12 conference proceedings. They will have 15 minutes to present their work
(which may include a short demonstration if appropriate), to be followed by an
additional 15 minutes for questions and discussion. During both the
question/discussion period and in subsequent informal interactions, organizing
committee members and other participants will provide constructive comments on
each student's work and attempt to address aspects on which the student has
requested advice.

Broader Impacts: Attending and presenting their work at UMAP, the top conference
in its field, will have a significant impact on the careers of the future
generation of user modeling, adaptation, and personalization researchers.
Students who participate in the Doctoral Consortium will also benefit from that
experience in several ways. First, they will have the opportunity to present
their work to a knowledgeable audience and get useful comments at an early stage
of their research when it will be most useful. Just as importantly, they will
have an opportunity to meet established researchers and other graduate students
doing similar work, to exchange ideas, and to make contacts that will be
invaluable to them as they progress in their scientific careers. Interacting
with the young researchers is also useful to more experienced investigators, by
providing new perspectives and fresh ideas. Thus, the Doctoral Consortium is a
great confidence builder for the students involved, and highly stimulating to
the established researchers who participate. The organizers have reaffirmed the
long-standing and demonstrated UMAP commitment to diversity. To this end, they
will make special efforts to recruit women and members of under-represented
groups from among the candidates for receiving financial support, and they will
ensure institutional diversity by supporting no more than one student from any
single institution.