* 1237485
* WORKSHOP: Student Travel Support for the CHI Mentoring 2012 Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Ronald Metoyer, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2014
* USD 13,750.00

The topic of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is more important now than at any
other time in the history of computing. As computers become smaller, faster, and
more ubiquitous, our ability to use them effectively becomes critical. Not only
must we design usable systems, but we must do so in a rapidly changing landscape
of computing hardware that includes desktops, mobile phones, and embedded
systems. A unique aspect of HCI is that it requires the study of not just
computing, but of the combination of computing and people. Because people are
involved, HCI is a field where aspects such as culture, socio-economic
background, gender, etc., are considered in the systems that we build. This is a
clear argument for the development of a diverse field of researchers who bring
to bear a wide range of experiences in their problem solving
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is funding to provide partial support for the
Computer-Human Interaction Mentoring (CHIMe) 2012 workshop
http://chime.hci.cs.vt.edu, which will bring together approximately 67 students
and 10 distinguished speakers from academia and industry as part of the
Discipline-specific Mentoring Workshops sponsored in part by the BPC Alliance of
CRA-W http://www.cra-w.org and CDC (the Coalition to Diversify Computing
http://cdc-computing.org). This is the second offering of the CHIMe Workshop,
whose goal is to provide an opportunity for networking and mentoring among
students in the field of HCI who belong to one or more of the following
communities: women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities.
The workshop will be run as a series of presentations and panels; speakers will
include leading researchers in the field drawn, to the extent they were
available, from these same communities, who will address a broad range of issues
ranging from technical concerns (such as appropriate evaluation methods) to some
of today's hot topics. The speakers' diverse occupations in government labs,
academia and industry will provide attendees with different perspectives of the
field. The workshop will be collocated with and listed as an offering on the
website of the ACM 2012 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
2012), which will be held May 5-10 in Austin, Texas, and is sponsored by the
Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Human-Computer
Interaction (SIGCHI); this is the leading international forum for the
presentation and discussion of research and practice relating to human-computer
interaction, and is attended by approximately 2,500 HCI professionals from
around the world. NSF funds will cover the costs of approximately 25 student
participants; additional funds are being provided by CDC/CRA-W and Microsoft
Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PIs have made a serious
and successful effort to attract participants from HBCU (Historically Black
Colleges and Universities), HSI (Hispanic-Serving Institutions), ACU
(Appalachian Colleges and Universities), and TCU (Tribal Colleges and
Universities) institutions. CHIMe 2012 will harness the cumulative experience of
successful STEM professionals in the field to provide a unique forum in which to
showcase the technical achievements of diverse researchers in computing and to
encourage a new generation of researchers from underrepresented groups. With its
focus on graduate students in HCI, the workshop will be positioned to have a
direct impact on future faculty and researchers in this area of endeavor. It
will provide a highly technical and supportive environment for underrepresented
minority doctoral students in the field of HCI to discuss their research and to
receive constructive feedback from experts, along with ample opportunities for
networking and peer mentoring.