* 1237880
* Genes and Networks Regulating Shoot Maturation and Flower Production in Tomato and Related Nightshades
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Joyce Van Eck, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 10/31/2017
* USD 2,851,735.00

PI: Zachary B. Lippman (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory)

Co-PIs: Michael C. Schatz (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) and Joyce Van Eck
(Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research)

Key Collaborators: Molly Hammell and Jesse Gillis (Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory)

Plants show remarkable variation in the number of flowers they produce during
their lifetime. This widespread variation traces back to differences in how,
when, and where plants switch from making leaves to making flowers - the
flowering transition. Although vitally important to crop yields, the transition
to flowering and the subsequent effects on shoot growth and flower production
remain poorly understood in many types of plants. For example, it is still not
known why one plant will form just a single flower each time there is a
flowering transition, as in pepper, and yet another plant will grow dozens of
branches bearing hundreds of flowers, as in some types of tomato. To address
this fundamental question in plant biology, this project is uniting a unique set
of genetic, genomic, and natural variation tools in tomato and related
Solanaceae plants, such as pepper, potato, and petunia, to reveal the genes and
networks controlling how, when, and where plants undergo flowering transitions
throughout development to continuously generate new branches and flowers. By
analyzing a wide range of tomato mutants and wild Solanaceae species reflecting
a wide range of flower production, this research will identify and characterize
the differences in gene expression and DNA sequences that underlie variation in
flowering transitions and flower production. This multi-dimensional project will
provide the most detailed information yet on the key genetic regulators that
drive the initiation and production of flowers in both agricultural and wild
plants, which will enable the application of novel strategies to improve crop
yields. The Solanaceae comprise the most valuable family for vegetable crop
production, and we will deliver to both the public and scientific community
broad genetic and genomic data in tomato, pepper, and edible wild Solanaceae
species that have the potential to become agriculturally important crops.

This project will train high school and college students in interdisciplinary
plant research, and a unique outreach program has been developed with an
elementary school in Queens, New York to excite young students about plant
biology and to explain the importance of integrating multiple research
disciplines to create the knowledge and tools that will ensure food security.
Students will meet scientists, experience plant genetic research in their own
school, experiment in a "Virtual Greenhouse" with kid-friendly genetics games,
and practice science writing. Each year, several students will be awarded a
daylong visit to CSHL to experience firsthand, modern plant biology research.
All data from this project, including gene expression, genetic mapping, network
analyses, and computational tools for analyzing DNA sequences will be made
publically available immediately after passing quality control. All DNA sequence
data will be deposited in Genbank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/), the
SOL Genomics Network (SGN) website (http://www.sgn.cornell.edu/), and a project
web site that will be developed.