* 1237832
* SCDB Meeting:Innovations in Development  University of California SC August 08-11, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Amander Clark, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,915.00

Scientific conferences serve a vital role in the exchange of new ideas and
results among scientists funded by the NSF and by other national and
international sources. Because the success of scientific research builds
increasingly on very recent technical advances and findings, such exchanges
serve to accelerate important research, increasing the return on research
funding. This proposal will fund a national conference for developmental
biologists, the 2012 Santa Cruz Developmental Biology Meeting, centered this
year on the theme of Innovations in Developmental Biology. This biennial
conference is one of the two major conferences in the field of developmental
biology. The 2012 conference, organized by Bob Goldstein, Amander Clark and John
Tamkun, will be held August 8-11 on the University of California, Santa Cruz
campus. There will be approximately 160 participants, including 28 invited
speakers and keynote lectures on recent advances from a Nobel Laureate and two
other scientists at the forefront of the field. Each speaker will present
results from his/her laboratory's recent research, and workshops will be held on
career development issues. Broader impacts from the conference will include the
education and training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows who will
become the educators, academic scientists and industry scientists of the future.
Invited speakers were selected by the organizers based primarily on their
contributions to the field and hence the likelihood that they would contribute
significantly to exchanges that will advance the field, and secondarily
balancing career stage, geography, gender, age, race, and experimental
approaches, to help ensure broad exposure to a variety of novel contributions as
well as valuable role models for the career development of young scientists. At
the conclusion of the conference, results presented will be disseminated widely
through publication in scientific journals.