* 1237034
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES Pacific Section-Shipboard Al, Mn and Fe
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Peter Sedwick, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 172,982.00

The 2013 GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific Zonal transect cruise will transit from the
highly productive coastal upwelling region off Peru to the stratified
oligotrophic waters of the South Pacific subtropical gyre on its way to Tahiti.
A range of subsurface oxygen depleted water and sedimentary inputs from the Peru
margin will be encountered, as well as hydrothermal vents at 15Â°S on the East
Pacific Rise (EPR). Scientists from the University of Washington and Old
Dominion University plan to analyze seawater samples for dissolved and total-
dissolvable aluminum (Al), manganese (Mn), and iron (Fe) in water column
samples. The dissolved Al, Mn, and Fe in samples from the upper water column
(&lt;1000 m depth) will be analyzed onboard to ensure samples being collected
are uncontaminated, as well as samples from west of the EPR at hydrothermal
plume depths. The shipboard analyses will be augmented by shore-based analyses
of water column samples from all depths, as well as analyses of total-
dissolvable Al, Mn, and Fe, which will complement the direct analyses of
particulate metals undertaken by other GEOTRACES investigators. Results will be
used to test the following hypotheses concerning the sources and cycling of Al,
Mn and Fe in the ocean: (1) when Aeolian inputs are relatively constant,
dissolved Al concentrations in surface waters vary as a function of biological
production; (2) concentration maxima of dissolved Al, Mn, and Fe in subsurface
waters of the Eastern Pacific oxygen minimum zone are the result of lateral
transport from the continental margin by means of resuspension and
remobilization; and (3) values about ambient levels with conservative behavior
will be encountered in the neutrally buoyant plume about the East Pacific Rise
ridge crest for dissolved Fe and Al. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader
impacts, results from the study would be disseminated to the public via
lectures, the internet, and press releases. One graduate and one undergraduate
student from the University of Washington would be supported and trained as part
of this project.