* 1237423
* Crossroads in Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Zoltan Szabo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2013
* USD 30,000.00

"Panorama of Topology" is a conference which will be held May 8-11, 2012 at
Princeton University. This conference is aimed at a wide audience of
topologists, presenting many of the current great developments in this broad
subject. Several themes will hold the conference together: Recent breakthroughs
in hyperbolic geometry, three-manifold topology and geometric group theory
leading to proofs of the virtual Haken and Ehrenpreis conjectures; major
developments in Floer homology and categorification; and recent breakthroughs in
homotopy theory, including the Kervaire invariant one conjecture. Conference
speakers include A. Adem, I. Agol, A. Bahri, W. Browder, F. Cohen, J. Kahn, P.
B. Kronheimer, R. Lipshitz, D. McDuff, J. Morgan, J. Rasmussen, D. Ravenel, N.
Reshetikhin, W. Thurston, V. Voevodsky, K. Vogtmann, and D.
Wise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past few decades, the subject of
topology has experienced fundamental and transformative developments. Some of
these developments come from its interactions with other fields of mathematics,
including ideas from algebraic geometry, ergodic theory, geometric group theory,
constructions inspired by mathematical physics, and links with representation
theory. The aim of this conference is to bring together a broad spectrum of
topologists to help foster communication between the various specializations,
and to inspire a new generation of young researchers in this exciting and
quickly-developing branch of mathematics. Architects of these developments will
give research talks on their areas of expertise. The schedule will consist of
roughly five hour-long talks per day, and some time for the researchers to
interact with one another. The budget will help support the speakers, and it
will provide partial support to graduate students and other young researchers to
come participate in this event. Registration for the conference is available at
the conference website,
https://cgi.math.princeton.edu/conference/browder2012/registration.html