* 1237857
* PFI-AIR:  Transitioning Novel Polymeric Membranes for Natural Gas, Air, and Hydrogen Separations: an NSF-PFI Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) Project
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 06/30/2014
* USD 955,000.00

This NSF Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) project will translate and
further develop a new generation of crosslinked aromatic polymer membranes for
removing carbon dioxide from natural gas, separating oxygen (O2) and (N2) from
air, and for hydrogen (H2) purification. The technology is based on the
discovery that select examples of these membranes have unprecedented
combinations of permeation, gas selectivity and resistance to performance
degradation, particularly during separations of condensable gases such as carbon
dioxide. Existing membranes are largely amorphous, glassy engineering
thermoplastics that lack durability to organic contaminants in the gas streams.
The AIR innovation provides a means to fabricate membranes into hollow fiber
platforms in solution, but also the membranes can be post-modified to develop
both the needed durability as well as very good transport and mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The economical separation of air into O2 and N2
will enable inert N2 atmospheres to transport food globally and also will be
applied to aircraft fuel tanks to minimize fires/explosions. Economical
generation of purified H2 will play a critical role in developing a hydrogen
economy for fuel cell systems for transportation, stationary (home) power, and
portable electronics.