* 1237577
* Efficient Determination of Intermediate Temperature Phase Diagrams Using Dual-Anneal Diffusion Multiples
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Ji-Cheng Zhao, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

There is a significant worldwide shortage of experimental phase diagram data at
intermediate temperatures (around 600ºC to 900ºC for Fe-based and Ni-based
alloys) where most alloys are used in service. This shortage results in large
uncertainty of thermodynamic data and thus inability to accurately predict phase
stability and driving force for phase transformations during materials
processing and usage at this temperature range. The proposed study will develop
a novel dual-anneal diffusion-multiple approach for high-efficiency
determination of intermediate temperature phase diagrams and will apply the
methodology to the Fe-Co-Cr-Mo-Ni system. A high-temperature (e.g. 1200 ºC)
anneal of diffusion multiples will first create wide composition regions of
solid solutions and intermediate compounds, which is equivalent to making many
alloy compositions simultaneously. A subsequent intermediate temperature (e.g.
600 ºC) anneal will induce precipitation and formation of equilibrium phases,
which is equivalent to the heat treatment of many individual alloys at a
temperature of interest for phase diagram determination. The effective
methodology to be developed here will have an impact on the design and long-term
stability prediction of materials. Wide application of this method will lead to
large amounts of phase equilibrium data for accurate assessment of the Gibbs
energy functions to enable high-fidelity thermodynamic predictions at
intermediate temperatures. High-fidelity prediction can reduce or eliminate the
long-term thermal exposure experiments that are required now to test an alloy's
propensity to detrimental phase formation or to promote stable precipitate
phases to strengthen alloys, thus reducing the alloy design iterations and
increasing the speed of new alloy design. The proposed study will also provide
intermediate temperature isothermal sections of several ternary systems that are
very important for the development of precipitation-strengthened stainless
steels and Ni-based superalloys.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

There is a significant worldwide shortage of phase diagrams at intermediate
temperatures (around 600ºC to 900ºC for steels and Ni-based alloys). This
shortage of phase diagrams (which are maps for materials scientists to design
alloys) leads to inability to accurately predict alloy behaviors at this
critical temperature range where most alloys are used in service. The proposed
study will develop a novel dual-anneal diffusion-multiple approach for high-
efficiency determination of intermediate temperature phase diagrams. The
effective methodology will have an impact on the design and long-term stability
prediction of alloys. Wide application of this method will lead to large amounts
of phase diagrams to enable high-fidelity prediction which can be used to
eliminate the long-term thermal exposure experiments that are required now to
test alloys' propensity to detrimental phase formation, thus increasing the
speed of new alloy design. The timely design and insertion of high-performance
alloys are critical to the global competitiveness of U.S. industries. This NSF
program will also educate next-generation materials scientists with the advanced
experimental tools so they can better serve the industry.