* 1237376
* EAGER:  High Speed Tomographic Imaging Facility for Studies of Auroral Fine Structure
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joshua Semeter, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 261,258.00

The investigators will develop a high frame-rate tomographic imaging facility,
and a physics-based inversion methodology, in order to quantify three-
dimensional motions of the aurora at its finest scales. Although several
theories have been suggested to account for structuring at these scales,
determining which model is correct and under which circumstance requires
knowledge of two parameters not directly observed by a single imaging system: 1)
the transverse motion or spreading) of auroral forms with respect to the
convecting frame of reference, and 2) the change in average energy of the
primary particle spectrum, manifested in the apparent vertical deformation of
auroral forms. The former addresses the dispersion of energy across magnetic
lines of force, while the latter addresses changes in coupling between
electromagnetic and kinetic energy. The new approach uses a physical model of
particle penetration in order to regularize the poorly observed field-aligned
dimension. In addition to regularizing the problem, this approach provides
access to the physical quantity of interest: the space-time variability in the
primary electron spectrum. The research leverages technologies recently
developed in the commercial and defense sectors (e.g., Electron Multiplying CCD
cameras, solid state drives, millisecond GPS synchronization). If successful,
the research will provide new observational evidence needed to address a
fundamental unresolved question space physics. The results will contribute to
the understanding of universal plasma processes occurring throughout the cosmos.
The project supports an early career space scientist, a graduate student in
engineering, and several undergraduate research assistants.