* 1237816
* PFI-BIC:  Silicon Carbide Integrated Circuits for Ultra-high Efficiency Power Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Bradley Reese, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 658,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from the University of Arkansas (UA)
will focus on the exploration and definition of an integrated circuit research
platform based on silicon carbide (SiC) technology to develop gate driver and
digital control circuitry for integration into advanced power electronic modules
with the aim of achieving higher performing integrated power electronics in
terms of size, weight, efficiency, and robustness. It is these modules that
serve as the basic building blocks of a vast array of equipment including
electrified transportation; heating, ventilation, and air conditioning; energy
exploration; renewable energy and storage interfaces; and grid-connected power
electronics. With approximately 30% of all power produced in the U.S. passing
through a power electronic converter or motor drive before it reaches its end
use, it is crucial that power electronic systems operate as reliably and
efficiently as possible. The U.S. DoE estimates that this percentage will
increase to 80% over the next 15 years. Wide bandgap-based power electronics,
particularly those made with SiC, have been shown to vastly reduce losses (>
50%); while simultaneously increasing power density, resiliency, and
reliability. Even though part cost is higher for SiC devices versus silicon, in
many cases, overall system costs are reduced through simpler thermal management
due to the higher temperature performance offered by SiC.

The broader impacts of this research include developing leading-edge mixed-
signal circuitry for use in power electronic modules that will influence a vast
array of products used by millions in the U.S. In addition, there are the
economic impacts of stimulating the creation of numerous jobs, differentiation
in the marketplace for the core partners, and fostering a customer-supplier
relationship through the three partners as the technologies mature. With the
anticipated growth described above, the market potential for these technologies
is clearly in the billions of dollars. Another impact is on an emerging
workforce. This project will educate graduate and undergraduate students in
building innovation capacity to be followed by accelerating innovations. It will
also help to attract K-12 students to the electronics field as a relatively
mature research platform undergoes a transformation.

Partners at the inception of the project include the Department of Electrical
Engineering and the Department of Computer Science & Computer Engineering at the
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville; two small businesses in Fayetteville:
Ozark Integrated Circuits and Arkansas Power Electronics International; and
Raytheon, a large U.S. company.