* 1237595
* CCEP-I: The Great Lakes Climate Change Science and Education Systemic Network (GLCCSESN)
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Sandra Rutherford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 839,269.00

An award has been made to University of Wisconsin to establish a Phase I Climate
Change Education Partnership (CCEP) in collaboration with the College of
Exploration, Michigan State University, the NOAA Great Lakes Environmental
Research Laboratory, Ashland University (Ohio), RISA and the Graham
Sustainability Institute, the Knight Center for Environmental Journalism, the
Great Lakes Sea Grant Network, and the Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum. The overall
goal of the CCEP Phase I project is to establish a coordinated national network
of regionally- or thematically-based partnerships devoted to increasing the
adoption of effective, high quality educational programs and resources related
to the science of climate change and its impacts. This project is focusing on
climate change education in the Great Lakes region. The formal and informal
education activities associated with the project are targeting an audience
including STEM educators, pre-service teachers, public and business
stakeholders, as well as the general public. The project is implementing an
inventory of regional climate change research/education resources and creating
an associated network map of existing interrelationships and partnerships. It is
designing and implementing a virtual Great Lakes community platform that is
linking project partners and collaborators. The project is convening a series of
community focus groups that are producing white papers outlining the breadth and
scope of climate research in the region and identifying the pathways of movement
of emerging science and learning science knowledge from the scientists and
laboratories in the region to the formal and informal education providers. The
PIs are developing a comprehensive planning document that is providing the
partnership with realistic goals and objectives for future climate change
education efforts in the region. The systemic network being developed by the
project is 1) enabling explicit partnering of educators, climate scientists and
learning scientists; 2) broadening the participation of underrepresented groups
by enhancing opportunities for populations within the Great Lakes region, many
of whom have been significantly affected by both recent and long-standing
economic downturns, both economically and in terms of educational opportunities;
3) enhancing the regional infrastructure for research and education; 4)
disseminating Great Lakes climate science through partnerships with formal and
informal education institutions; and 5) benefiting society by building
partnerships among academic, non-profit, and governmental entities that together
are working to improve climate change education in the Great Lakes region. For
additional information please contact: Dr. Sandra Rutherford
(srutherf@emich.edu) or visit the project website at: www.greatlakesclimate.org.