* 1237491
* LTER V:   New Science, Synthesis, Scholarship, and Strategic Vision for Society
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2019
* USD 5,940,356.00

The Harvard Forest LTER program is a two decade-strong, integrated research and
educational program investigating forest responses to human and environmental
change across the New England region. HFR engages more than 30 researchers, 200
graduate and undergraduate students, and dozens of institutions in research that
incorporates social, biological, and physical sciences. Scientists conduct this
work across multiple time scales: investigating the present, looking back
thousands of years, and using that knowledge to calculate future change. Over
the next six years, research will integrate the site's site-to-regional-scale
strengths in research, education, and outreach to understand the interactive
effects of climate change, biological processes, and human land-use on ecosystem
dynamics, processes, and the services they provide to humans and wildlife.
Researchers will pursue this question by applying long-term data from new and
ongoing experiments to integrated scenarios analyses, which are a framework for
scientists and decision-makers to work together to determine what factors
influence present and future landscape change. These factors will then be
incorporated into models to link a range of potential future scenarios, such as
a future with limited oil resources, with a range of potential consequences for
forest dynamics and ecosystem processes, such as an increase in forest cutting
to produce heat and energy formerly produced by oil.

To broaden the impacts of its research programs, the Harvard Forest project is
committed to strong education and outreach programs that engage K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as land managers, elected
decision-makers, and the news media, to produce and to understand societally-
relevant ecological data. This research is part of a national-scale effort led
by the Harvard Forest to incorporate regional land-use scenarios at all LTER
sites. The inclusion of decision-makers in the production of the results, and
public outreach of those results, fills critical knowledge gaps for scientists
and the public, and helps decision-makers better use science to address
societally-relevant questions.