* 1237733
* LTER:  Drivers, dynamics and consequences of non-linear change in coastal barrier systems
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2019
* John Porter, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2019
* USD 5,929,993.00

The Virginia Coast Reserve (VCR) Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program
examines the response of coastal barrier ecosystems to climate change, sea-level
rise and intensified human use. Studies of watersheds, marshes, tidal flats,
bays, and barrier islands show that there are surprising and dramatic changes in
ecological dynamics, so-called 'tipping points' or thresholds, where one
ecosystem rapidly shifts to another. When these changes occur, many key
ecosystem services - storm buffering, commercial fisheries support, carbon
sequestration and wildlife habitat - are lost and may be difficult to restore.
The VCR LTER uses long-term observations, experiments, and modeling to
characterize how, where, and when these tipping points occur, the environmental
drivers and biological feed-backs that move ecosystems toward or away from
critical thresholds, and the resilience of ecosystems to resist change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding non-linear responses to global change is
critical to managing coastal ecosystems where over half the global population
lives, and where humans are altering systems at unprecedented rates. VCR
research findings will be broadly disseminated through the program's website,
publications and presentations, and partnerships with regional stakeholders to
inform policy decisions. The site's Schoolyard Program will provide important
training and infrastructure to primary and secondary schools in the local
counties, which are some of the poorest in Virginia, and where over half the
students are women and minorities. Training of future environmental scientists
through the graduate programs at the Virginia Coastal Reserve is one of the
priorities of the proposed research.