* 1237412
* Equidistribution in Symmetric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Dubi Kelmer, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2015
* USD 78,947.00

This proposal is composed of problems on equidistribution in locally symmetric
spaces. Specifically, the P.I. outlines questions regarding the distribution of
closed geodesics, the question of arithmetic quantum unique ergodicity, and the
the strong spectral gap property on locally symmetric spaces. The question of
quantum unique ergodicity originates in the theory of quantum chaos, which
studies the behavior of high energy states of quantum systems with underlying
chaotic dynamics. Arithmetic surfaces, along with other arithmetic models, have
proven a very fertile ground for testing predictions made in this theory.
Recently there has been a great advancement in this field; application of new
techniques from ergodic and analytic number theory resolved the (arithmetic)
quantum unique ergodicity conjecture for arithmetic surfaces. However, for
higher dimensional systems our knowledge is still very limited; for example, it
is not even clear what the correct conjecture should be in this
setting.&lt;br/&gt;The P.I. proposes to address this problem for certain higher
dimensional symmetric spaces. On the other side of the spectrum, the notion of a
strong spectral gap is related to the lowest energy state. This notion is
crucial in many applications and in particular to the distribution of closed
geodesics on these spaces. Following advancements in various mathematical
disciplines, the existence and magnitude of the strong spectral gap is well
understood in almost all cases. However, there are still a few cases missing in
order to fully complete the picture, and it is the P.I.'s intention to work on
closing this gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems the P.I. proposes to
investigate have a long history and are still matters of active research.
Although the models considered in this program are very specific and arithmetic
in nature, the P.I. believes that the study of these models will lead to a
better understanding of related phenomena in more general settings. In
particular, results on the question of quantum unique ergodicity for arithmetic
models will provide valuable insights into the behavior of other physical
systems. Also, progress on the spectral gap question may lead to construction of
new expanders which have uses in cryptography. Moreover, the attempts to answer
these questions could lead to the development of new tools that will facilitate
studying fundamental questions in number theory.