* 1237622
* PFI:BIC  Development of Hybrid Cathodes and Separators for High-energy and High-power Lithium-Sulfur Secondary Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Lynden Archer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from Cornell University will create
carbon-based nanocomposite materials suitable for advanced batteries, super
capacitors, and magnetic storage media. The approach relies on co-polymerization
of inorganic and organic polymer precursors to create composite materials in
which inorganic nanoparticles are uniformly embedded in an electrically
conductive carbon host. This platform technology will be applied to the
development of new high-energy battery cathodes and anodes based on
metal/carbon, metal sulfide/carbon, and metal oxide/carbon nanocomposites.
Batteries based on the new composite electrodes offer energy storage capacities
four to five times higher than the most advanced units in use today and are
expected to find applications in portable electronic devices and electric
vehicles. By incorporating highly conductive graphene structures into the
composite materials, the project further aims to develop supercapacitors with
high power and high energy storage capacities for the power utility grid
storage. In addition, the project utilizes mixed metal precursors to create
composites based on metal alloys and inter-metallic nanoparticles that
facilitate independent control of the magnetic permeability and electrical
conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
ultimately will include acceleration of commercialization of several unique
battery systems with potential market-changing impacts. The global market for
secondary batteries alone was estimated to be $11-$13 billion in 2010 and is
expected to quadruple by 2020. By bringing together researchers from Cornell
University, known world-wide for their innovative contributions in the
rechargeable batteries field, with two Up-State New York technology concerns
possessing complementary expertise on materials synthesis, formulation, and
manufacturing, the project creates a path toward commercial deployment of
lithium battery systems that offer multiple unique features. These features
include best-in-class energy storage capacity and best-in-class power density.
The project will also develop materials and manufacturing processes for battery
electrodes, supercapacitors, and magnetic materials that are familiar from other
sectors of technology. By doing so, costs associated with deployment of battery
manufacturing processes will be contained--a required first-step for improving
competitiveness of the new lithium battery systems in the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Cornell University as the lead academic institution and&lt;br/&gt;Small Business
partners Graphene Devices Ltd., Rochester, New York; and NOHMs Technologies,
Ithaca New York.