* 1237881
* Collaborative Research:  Genomics &amp; Society - Exploring ethics, impacts and consequences of technological advances
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Penny Riggs, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2016
* USD 291,046.00

Scientists and engineers who develop genomics technology must address key
ethical questions about the process of genomics research, the role of society in
genomics research, and carefully reflect about the intended and unintended
implications of new technology for different social groups, economic sectors,
communities, animals and the environment. This project develops a graduate
ethics education program that uses advances in genomics and genomics technology
as a central theme in a team-taught, case-based, modular course to facilitate
students' ability to understand and think carefully and critically about social
and ethical questions raised by these advances. This course considers more than
the downstream consequences of accepted technologies by placing importance on
discussion of the formation of technologies, as well as on the in-principle
decisions about whether to use them at all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach
is innovative in considering a broad spectrum of ethical and societal issues
related to genomics and genomics technologies that goes far beyond health or
specific disciplinary topics to bring interdisciplinarity, critical thinking and
values awareness together with genomics science to explore a range of
interconnected social and ethical issues spanning human health and privacy,
justice, agriculture, animals, and the environment. In particular the course
raises critical questions at the human/animal/environment boundary, concerning
the relationships between human, animal and environmental health, and the
permissibility of various practices on different kinds of living beings
including, but not restricted to humans. These questions inevitably expose
students to diverse perspectives and competing ideas; and the discussions and
assessment tasks are geared to help them make balanced, thoughtful, and informed
judgments about these questions. The course is being developed at Texas A&amp;M
University (TAMU), and presented on campus in College Station for students from
a variety of disciplines. During year 2, the course is also being presented via
e-learning and textual resources at Texas A&amp;M University Corpus Christi
(TAMUCC) and Boise State University.