* 1237800
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Large Mammal Extinction and Human Colonization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Kayla Wopschall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 24,394.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Donald K. Grayson, Ms. Kayla Wopschall will analyze
the remains of the extinct pygmy hippopotamus (Phanourios minutus) from the
archaeological site Akrotiri Aetokremnos. Aetokremnos is located in the
southernmost portion of the eastern Mediterranean island of Cyprus. Dating to
ca. 10,500 years ago, it is the oldest known archaeological site on the island
and provides evidence of some of the earliest seafaring by people in the
Mediterranean. Furthermore, this site also contains the most recent known
specimens of the Cypriot pygmy hippo. The connection between the earliest human
colonization of the island and the disappearance of this large mammal has led
many to believe that human hunting was the cause of the pygmy hippo's ultimate
demise. Ms. Wopschall will focus on the bones, teeth and ancient DNA of this
species to determine if humans did make an impact by hunting and/or introducing
other animals that may have become competitors for resources. She will also
document any prehistoric climatic change that may have occurred during this time
and the potential impact such a change may have had on the disappearance of the
pygmy hippo.

Archaeologists and paleontologists often find that initial human colonization of
island environments leads to the disappearance of vertebrates. Human hunting of
na√Øve fauna coupled with indirect anthropogenic affects (e.g. large scale
burning and/or the introduction of invasive species) has had devastating
consequences for island species. However, as more work has been done, scientists
have discovered multiple cases where humans have coexisted for long periods of
time with island vertebrates before those vertebrates became extinct, if
extinction occurred at all, as well as situations in which island vertebrates
have gone extinct in the absence of human occupation. As a result, the
assumption that human colonization of islands leads to the extinction of island
fauna needs to be rigorously tested for each individual species. In addition,
most prior studies have focused on the Holocene (the last 10,000 years), deal
with birds, not mammals, and/or have poor chronological control. There are very
few cases where it has been shown that large mammals may have become extinct in
such settings. The pygmy hippopotamus of Cyprus presents a unique opportunity to
study a large mammal from the Pleistocene at a location with excellent
chronological control. This study will provide valuable insight to the dynamics
of large mammals on islands and their response to such different stressors as
human hunting, the introduction of new species, and/or significant climate
change.

In addition to addressing these research issues, the project will provide
educational material and outreach activities on the island of Cyprus as a whole,
the British Royal Air Force base where Aetokremnos is located, and in the United
States. Public education and outreach activities will be focused on children and
young adults and will be center on the public understanding of archaeology and,
more broadly, science. The results of this project will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed publications and the raw data made available to the public through an
archival database at the University of Washington. The findings will be
incorporated in future courses taught by Ms. Wopschall at the university level.