* 1237602
* RCN: Coordination of the NSF-Census Research Network
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Alan Karr, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2015
* USD 748,577.00

The NSF-Census Research Network (NCRN) consists of eight nodes, each comprised
of researchers conducting innovative, high-impact, cross-disciplinary
investigations of theory, methodology and computational tools of interest and
significance to the Census Bureau, the federal statistical system and the
broader research community. These nodes are located at Carnegie Mellon
University, the University of Colorado at Boulder/University of Tennessee,
Cornell University, Duke University/National Institute of Statistical Sciences
(NISS), the University of Michigan, the University of Missouri, the University
of Nebraska and Northwestern University. The NSF/Census Research Network
Coordination Office (NCRN-CO), operated jointly by NISS and Cornell University,
catalyzes and fosters communication and collaboration among the nodes of the
NCRN, as well as focuses the network's relationships with multiple external
stakeholder communities. These communities include federal statistical agencies,
researchers in academia and the private sector, professional associations,
international bodies, and the press and public. Among NCRN-CO activities are
organizing semi-annual meetings of NCRN researchers; facilitating information
sharing within the NCRN, using advanced communication and collaboration tools;
supporting NCRN engagement with staff from the Census Bureau; assisting and
coordinating educational activities at NCRN nodes; conducting workshops and
seminars that disseminate the research products of the NCRN and engender
feedback and engagement of non-NCRN researchers; and maintaining a website that
provides access to research findings and their implications for a broad and
diverse set of communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NCRN-CO is a value-added
activity, helping the NCRN nodes to leverage each other's research achievements
and leading to scientific and societal impact that exceeds the sum of the
individual impacts. The NCRN-CO is the public face of the NCRN, through paths
such as the website www.ncrn.info, quarterly newsletters and an NCRN-wide annual
report, research briefs, news releases, special sessions at professional society
meetings, and special issues of leading journals. The NCRN-CO aids the nodes in
advancing the careers of postdoctorals and graduate students, as an investment
in the future of official statistics in the United States.