* 1237830
* Making Ethics Explicit: Relocating Ethics to the Core of Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Joonhong Ahn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2016
* USD 314,999.00

MAKING ETHICS EXPLICIT:&lt;br/&gt;RELOCATING ETHICS TO THE CORE OF ENGINEERING
EDUCATION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Ethics Education in Science and Engineering
award supports an interdisciplinary effort to transform engineering ethics
education by developing pedagogical approaches that engage students in
innovative ways. Engineers and social scientists will work collaboratively to
study problem-based learning as a strategy to incorporate cutting edge research
into ethics curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project incorporates two
interrelated research and education components: 1) develop&lt;br/&gt;innovative
pedagogical approaches to engage with students? emotions and existing
value&lt;br/&gt;systems; and 2) explore how student-directed, problem-based
learning can place ethics at the&lt;br/&gt;core of the curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team includes the four PIs at University of
California Berkeley and collaborators from the University of California, Los
Angeles and from the 3TU Centre for Ethics and Technology at the three technical
universities in the Netherlands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates a
diversity of research experiences for advanced undergraduate and graduate
students, including opportunities to: 1) become involved in curriculum
evaluation and development, 2) create new curriculum materials and resources, 3)
participate in an advanced, intensive ethics summer program, 4) incorporate
ethics components into their dissertations, and 5) contribute to the ethics
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include an active
program of dissemination via peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations, as well as substantial curriculum development, such as course
modules, an advanced undergraduate course, an intensive summer graduate program,
and a concise textbook-style resource. All course materials will be made
available to other institutions through the NSF-funded online resource center,
The National Professional and Research Ethics Portal
(http://nationalethicsresourcecenter.net) as well as the Online Ethics Center
for Engineering and Research (http://onlineethics.org). By involving students in
research and curriculum development, our project enables new scholars to
incorporate ethics into their research programs and teaching activities.