* 1237565
* CAREER: A Search for the Optimal Material for Spintronic Device Applications: From University to Primary School Classrooms
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Juana Moreno, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2014
* USD 246,734.00

This CAREER award combines theoretical and computational methods with the
ultimate goal of guiding experimental efforts in the search for optimal
materials for spintronic device applications. Controlling the properties of
magnetic semiconductor nanostructures involves many parameters that are
difficult to address experimentally. Often it is faster and cheaper to test new
ideas with computer simulations prior to addressing them in the laboratory. This
work will focus on developing a&lt;br/&gt;reliable theory of magnetic
semiconducting heterostructures and quantum dots. It will use the Dynamical Mean
Field Approximation (DMFA) and its cluster generalization to study the magnetic
and transport properties of three systems: dilute magnetic semiconductors, such
as Ga1-x Mnx As, quantum dots of dilute magnetic semiconductors and thin films
of magnetic organic semiconductors, in particular metalloporphyrins. Our theory
will incorporate the different competing interactions present in these systems
within a unified self-consistent approach. These three systems become prototypes
where we test the validity of our approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will be combined with an educational/outreach program in nanoscience. At the
university level a new undergraduate course, Introduction to Nanoscience, will
focus on nanoscience and nanotechnology. In order to bring the nano-world to our
children I am planning to develop an inquiry, activity-based program on
nanoscience and a workshop for the professional development of teachers in
grades 6-12. I will develop and test modules on nanoscience and nanotechnology
in the style of Physics by Inquiry by Lillian C. McDermot and the Physics
Education Group at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A reliable theory of
magnetic semiconductors is crucial for progress towards spintronic device
applications. Several families of materials are currently under active scrutiny
due to their promising characteristics. Although these materials are very
different from one another, they display common characteristics, such as the
presence of several competing interactions and short-range correlations,
significant excitonic and polaronic effects and strong confinement effects. Our
theory will properly account for these effects, and be able to make predictions
that are material specific. This research will broaden our fundamental
understanding and the potential applications of magnetic semiconductors in
spintronic devices, quantum computation and quantum
information&lt;br/&gt;systems. New methods and algorithms will be developed;
they will be relevant in the modeling of other strongly correlated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: One of the grand challenges for
nanotechnology is education. In 10 to 15 years, we may have the necessary
research results for new technology without having the skilled workers to take
advantage of them. The main objective of our outreach efforts will be to
increase student interest and achievement in science, and encourage high school
students to consider careers in nanoscience. Children in our region have few
avenues available to grasp the world of opportunities provided by the
nanotechnology revolution. Our efforts will help bring nanoscience to the
general public though workshops for elementary and high school teachers. In
addition, the training of undergraduate and graduate students in high-
performance computing is crucial to foster the technology-based economic
development within the Red River Valley Research&lt;br/&gt;Corridor. This
research fits perfectly within the University and State focused research areas;
high performance computing is a priority of the strategic plan of the University
of North Dakota, and spintronics research is one of the four Statewide Research
Initiatives of North Dakota EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education/outreach in the
area of nanoscience. In particular, advanced computational and theoretical
methods will be applied to increase our understanding of materials made of
semiconductors that also have magnetic properties. These materials hold great
promise to revolutionize conventional electronics by utilizing the magnetism of
the atoms that make up the materials. Materials that use this magnetism, or
spin, are called spintronic materials. The research will study various types of
materials that could be good candidates for spintronic applications. The award
will also support the development of a new college course on nanoscience and an
outreach program for teaches in middle and high schools. Thus, the award
supports a nice balance of cutting edge research and education for the next
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;