* 1237938
* Research Initiation Award Grant:  Investigating the combinatorial structure of special classes of matrices and graphs
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Ulrica Wilson, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,567.00

The Research Initiation Award entitled - Investigating the combinatorial
structure of special classes of matrices and graphs - has the goal to find a
test that will determine the eventual nonnegativity of reducible matrices and
determine eventual properties of other classes of matrices. In dynamical
systems, one is frequently interested in qualitative information regarding state
evolution. Due to physical and modeling constraints arising in applications, it
is of interest to impose or consider conditions for nonnegativity of the states.
Such applications are directly linked to the problem of understanding the
behavior of A^k as k increases. The objectives in this project will transform
how we answer open questions about the nonnegativity and reducibility of large
powers of matrices.

An eventual property of a matrix M is a property that holds for all powers M^k,
k >= k0, for some positive integer k0, the power index. Eventually positive
matrices and eventually nonnegative matrices have applications to control theory
and have been studied since their introduction in 1978. For a fixed n, the power
index of an eventually positive or eventually nonnegative n x n matrix may be
arbitrarily large, so it is not possible to show a matrix is not eventually
positive or not eventually nonnegative by computing powers. Perron-Frobenius
theory shows several ways to test for eventual positivity and in 2010 Hogben
found a test for eventual nonnegativity for matrices that are not eventually
reducible. The objective of this research is to investigate the remaining class
of eventually nonnegative matrices that are not well understood.