* 1237992
* STEM Achievement in Baltimore Elementary Schools (SABES)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Michael Falk, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 7,414,585.00

STEM Achievement in Baltimore Elementary Schools (SABES), a Partnership between
core partners Johns Hopkins University (JHU) and Baltimore City Public Schools
(BCPS), works within neighborhoods to build a Community Enterprise for STEM
Learning. Supporting Partners include the Greater Homewood Community
Corporation, Park Heights Renaissance, Southeast Community Development
Corporation, Greektown Community Development Corporation, Education Based Latino
Outreach, Child First Authority, Baltimore National Aquarium, and the Maryland
Science Center. SABES is a unique approach to STEM education that builds
expertise and excitement for STEM learning within target communities by engaging
BCPS teachers and students in grades 3-5, caregivers, community-based
organizations, afterschool program providers, faculty and students from JHU,
members of Baltimore's high-tech businesses, and local museums. SABES not only
directly engages approximately forty STEM teachers and more than 1,620 grade 3-5
students at nine elementary schools in three high-minority, low-income,
Baltimore neighborhoods, but it extends far into the wider community, drawing on
the expertise of higher education faculty at JHU, museums and STEM business
leaders. In the process, SABES prepares afterschool STEM project facilitators in
each neighborhood, creating a community-wide culture of STEM learning relevant
to the lives of its participants in ways that engage caregivers to sustain
student curiosity outside of the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
premise that undergirds SABES' work is that the integration of science into the
learner's world, as opposed to bringing students into the world of scientists,
has great potential to enable deep learning, self-efficacy and student agency.
Grounded in this perspective, SABES establishes Mutually Beneficial Partnerships
(MBPs) in three low-income, majority-minority communities and employs three main
strategies to obtain its goals of broad participation in science, increased
student achievement in STEM, and increased teacher proficiency. These strategies
are: (1) sustained/collaborative professional development including professional
learning communities, (2) scaffolds that bridge school learning with
applications of STEM in the community including biannual community STEM
Recognition Events featuring students' STEM projects, and (3) STEM visiting
experts from JHU and high-tech industries as well as field trips linked to
careers in action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SABES research agenda pursues the
following questions: 1. If the impact evaluation shows that some intended
outcomes are affected in desired directions by SABES, but others not, what
theory-building or holistic understandings of educational improvement efforts
and mechanisms can emerge from these findings? 2. What aspects of the proposed
intervention are most effective for creating a sustainable STEM community where
previously there exists little expertise or organized activity outside the
school? 3. How does effectiveness vary between neighborhoods or schools that
differ in student composition (e.g., race/ethnicity, and English language
proficiency), neighborhood resources and infrastructure, and other aspects of
school organization (e.g., other high-priority initiatives in a school that
might compete with SABES for staff attention, stability of principal or teacher
incumbency)? The research design employs the application of a multi-level,
ecological perspective which will result in important findings related to
developing science literacy in a community, engagement of formal and informal
settings and structures as assets for developing teaching and learning in
science, and examining the impacts on achievement, particularly related to
closing the achievement gap among students of different ethnicities, language
proficiencies and income levels.