* 1237353
* Workshop: Formulating a Successful Engineering Ambassador Program
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Michael Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The mission of the Engineering Ambassador Program, which originated in the
College of Engineering at Pennsylvania State University, is to increase the
diversity of those seeking engineering degrees and to strengthen the
communication and leadership skills of those currently seeking engineering
degrees. To increase the diversity, the Program emphasizes placing the right
messenger (college engineering students with advanced communication skills) with
the right message (engineering contributes to the health, happiness, and safety
of our everyday lives) in front of middle and high school classes. In addition,
the Program has empowered these messengers with advanced presentation strategies
to communicate the message effectively. Numerous faculty and department heads
from across the United States are expressing interest in emulating the
Ambassadors program at their own institutions. This project entails the
organization of a workshop to disseminate the successful Engineering Ambassador
Program to 20 more universities.

Intellectual Merit: Despite the many efforts to inform the public about the
career opportunities in engineering, there is still a dramatic lack of
understanding by many high school students, teachers, and guidance counselors
about what engineering is. Another problem, which at first might seem unrelated,
is that few opportunities are given to most engineering students for public
speaking that takes place outside of the classroom. This lack of public speaking
experience by students and lack of grounding of presentation principles taught
in the classroom has led to continued comments from industry indicating the need
for students to have strong public speaking skills. The intellectual merit of
this program lies in addressing both of these problems with one program. First,
the program seeks to educate not only the high school students, but also their
teachers and guidance counselors, on the opportunities that exist with an
engineering degree. In addition, the program provides a unique opportunity for
our engineering students to be better educated in advanced communication skills
by giving them an out-of-the-classroom public speaking opportunity that will
help to provide confidence.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the proposed workshop will be to (1)
strengthen the communication skills of those students participating in the
Engineering Ambassador Program leading to a more informed public, and (2)
recruit a diverse population of students to study engineering by using the
messages promoted by the National Academy of Engineering. This workshop also
provides an opportunity to establish a national community of Engineering
Ambassadors.