* 1237723
* PFI-BIC:  A Large Scale Acoustophoretic Multi-component Separation Technology Platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Seyed Cheraghi, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 481,080.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from Western New England University
focuses on an ultrasonic acoustophoretic separation technology platform that
will accomplish efficient separation technologies for multi-component liquid
streams that eliminate waste, reduce required energy, and promote a sustainable
environment. This platform provides an innovative solution that consists of a
large volume flow rate acoustophoretic phase separator based on ultrasonic
standing waves. Acoustophoresis is a low-power, no-pressure-drop, no-clog,
solid-state approach to particle removal from fluid suspensions and is used to
achieve separations typically performed with porous filters, but with none of
the disadvantages of porous filters. The acoustic resonator is designed to
create a high intensity three-dimensional ultrasonic standing wave resulting in
an acoustic radiation force larger than the combined effects of fluid drag and
buoyancy and is therefore able to trap and hold stationary, the suspended phase.
The novelty is in the ability to create ultrasonic standing wave fields that can
trap particles in flow fields with linear velocities in excess of 1 cm. High
frequency (MHz), high-power, and high-efficiency ultrasonic drivers based on
solid state switching mode amplifiers will be designed and developed. An
embedded control solution using a Digital Signal Processor and microcontroller
will be implemented to maintain resonance operation and control power delivery
and acoustic trapping force.

The broader impacts of this research are improved, green, and sustainable
separation technology with applications such as environmental oil clean-up, bio-
fuels production, and biomedical applications such as blood-lipid separation.
The partners on project team are eager to develop this technology and create
green jobs to provide a nascent manufacturing base in Western Massachusetts, a
region devastated by a significant decline in its manufacturing base. The
project brings together a unique team with proven innovators from several small
companies, engineering faculty from across several disciplines, three graduate
students, and eleven undergraduate engineering students. Efforts are being
undertaken to include underrepresented minorities in the REU and MS programs.
Partners at the inception of the project are Western New England College, as the
lead institution, with collaborators from the Mechanical and Electrical
Engineering Departments in the College of Engineering, and three knowledge-
enhancing small business partners: FloDesign Sonics Inc. (Wilbraham,
Massachusetts), UTX Inc. (Holmes, New York), and FloDesign Inc. (Wilbraham,
Massachusetts). An additional partner is the University of Southern Maine.