* 1237384
* EAGER: Prokaryotic Adaptive Immunity and the CRISPR Associated Complex for Antiviral Defense (CASCADE)
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Martin Lawrence, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Susannah Gal
* 12/31/2013
* USD 120,235.00

Adaptive immune systems in mammals and other eukaryotes have been known for many
years, but the fact that single celled bacteria and archaea also have adaptive
immune systems has only recently been established. The molecular machinery that
underlies this prokaryotic adaptive immune system, known as CRISPR/Cas, is
fundamentally different than that employed by eukaryotes. This project seeks to
investigate the functions of the genes and protein machinery that constitute the
CRISPR/Cas system, by studying how these proteins recognize invading viruses and
terminate the viral infection. The approach includes a structural technique
known as X-ray crystallography, in which the CRISPR/Cas proteins are analyzed to
determine their three dimensional structure. These structures are then studied
for clues about how these proteins impart immunity to viruses that might
otherwise infect and kill the bacteria and archaea that have the CRISPR/Cas
system. Sulfolobus solfataricus has been chosen as the model organism for these
studies for several reasons. First, this organism is a thermophilic archaeal
organism that lives at temperatures near 200 degrees Fahrenheit in places like
the hot springs of Yellowstone National Park. Its ability to survive in a high
temperature environment is due to its very stable proteins that are not
deactivated at these extreme temperatures. Such thermostable proteins can be
easier to study, and it has already been shown that this system has significant
similarities to that of bacteria like E. coli. Thus, while studying a heat
stable CRISPR/Cas system, it is possible to learn about CRISPR/Cas in other
organisms as well. Second, S. solfataricus is also of interest because it is a
host for hyperthermophilic viruses, and studying these viruses will help answer
fundamental questions in virology. These include questions such as: What is a
virus? How long have they been around; billions of years? Where did they come
from? How have viruses evolved over time? How have viruses contributed to the
evolution of their hosts, including higher organisms? Understanding CRISPR/Cas
is directly relevant to understanding these hyperthermophilic
viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed work will make
seminal contributions to our understanding of viruses and virus-host
interactions in single celled organisms, a research area that is expected to
give rise to a number of industrial and biotechnology applications. In addition,
the Lawrence laboratory is a member of the Montana State University Thermal
Biology Institute (TBI). As such, the results of our ongoing work is
communicated to the general public by TBI outreach programs. These outreach
efforts to K-12, tribal colleges, other undergraduate institutions, and the
general public will continue. In addition, TBI also partners with the National
Park Service /Yellowstone National Park in outreach to the general public, with
activities that include preparation and review of materials for public
presentation within the Park. The Park System is increasingly aware, as is the
general public, of the unique microbial organisms inhabiting these world famous
thermal features, and has worked to increase the educational signage within the
park that describes these organisms. There is also strong integration of the
proposed research with educational goals. Students and teachers at the high
school, undergraduate, doctoral and post-doctoral levels will receive
significant training in biochemistry, structural biology and thermal biology.
The involvement of under represented groups, particularly women and Native
Americans, is actively encouraged.