* 1237627
* The Politics of Presidential Decree: Presidential Proclamations, the Unilateral Presidency and the Separation of Power
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Brandon Rottinghaus, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2013
* USD 47,783.00

This project investigates the use of presidential proclamations to explore an
underlying tension in executive power. Specifically, when presidents use
unilateral powers, do they work with Congress or do they truly act alone?
&lt;br/&gt;To address this question, the PIs create a new coding of
proclamations, articulate a theory that unilateral power is shared between the
branches, and examine how a president justifies unilateral action in terms of
the source of legal authority invoked in each order and any delegated of
authority from Congress that corresponds to the president?s order. The PI?s
theory and new data speak to the evolution of executive power as well as to the
ongoing controversy over the role of legal rules in guiding or enhancing
presidential power. &lt;br/&gt;Each proclamation will be coded for the authority
presidents used to justify the action taken and the amount of discretion
provided in each statute cited by the president in each order. There are
approximately 4,000 proclamations that need to be coded to complete the
analysis. These data will also be made available to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new theory and data will show that, contrary to the
current literature, presidents are both strategic actors who engage in
independent executive action and participants in politically integrated
activities with Congress for the purposes of enacting and implementing policy.
Presidential unilateral orders are not uniformly used for one selective purpose
or the other ¯ presidents vary their strategy depending on the amount of
authority they have and nature of the political environment they face.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute information to the public
conversation concerning executive power. By making the data publicly available,
the project will allow other scholars and citizens to evaluate presidential
proclamations. In addition, this project will train students in social
scientific research methods.