* 1237059
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES - 210Po and 210Pb distribution at Eastern Pacific Interface Regimes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mark Baskaran, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2016
* USD 189,844.00

In 2013, a multi-institutional team of U.S. marine chemists and geochemists will
launch a major expedition to the Pacific Ocean to map and study the distribution
of trace elements and isotopes as part of the International GEOTRACES Program.
Because of their proven value as natural tracers of both sedimentation dynamics
and hydrodynamics in the sea, radioactive daughter isotopes in the natural U-Th
radionuclide series will be of immense value to all GEOTRACES researchers. In
particular the naturally-occurring Pb210/Po210 radioisotope pair would be useful
for quantifying rates of particulate scavenging of other trace elements and
isotopes of interest in the U.S.GEOTRACES Pacific campaign. This is because
these two isotopes are themselves particle-reactive and radioactive, thus
providing a natural clock for tracking the vertical transport of other particle-
reactive substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at Wayne
State University and CUNY Queens College will sample and analyze several hundred
dissolved and particulate (large and small) samples for 210Po and 210Pb along
the U.S.GEOTRACES Eastern South Pacific section. About two thirds of the samples
will be focused at six so-called "super stations" (sites chosen for intensive
study), half above the main thermocline and the other half down across the
benthic nepheloid layer (the zone of suspended material extending several meters
above the seafloor). The depths will be chosen according to regional atmospheric
input, ecosystems, and coordinated with sampling by other researchers onboard.
The other third will be taken within the hydrothermal plume in the vicinity of
the East Pacific Rise. The data will be synthesized according to interface
scavenging models by particle types (e.g. fine/colloidal, lithogenic and
biogenic). As such, the proposed work will be closely coordinated with that of
other U.S.GEOTRACES PIs funded to study other particle-reactive or dissolved
trace elements and radionuclide isotopes during the
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impacts are closely
linked to those of the GEOTRACES Program as a whole: to enhance (1) research
infrastructure by providing a broad array of 210Po and 210Pb data useful for
biogeochemical scavenging models, (2) education by mentoring graduate and
undergraduate students, teaching by example from proposed research, (3)
participation of under-represented students interested in careers in the
geosciences, (4) research training of graduates in marine radiochemistry, and 5)
public dissemination of results through publications, presentations, and on a
dedicated public website at Wayne State University.