* 1237301
* Research Starter Grant:  Functional analysis of the Arabidopsis heterotrimer G-protein beta subunit, AGB1 and putative AGB1-interacting proteins in mediating stress responses
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Tyrell Carr, Chowan University
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Functional analysis of the Arabidopsis heterotrimer G-protein beta subunit, AGB1
and putative AGB1-interacting proteins in mediating stress
responses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to environmental stress, plant
growth, development and/or yield can be adversely affected. Recently, the
Arabidopsis thaliana heterotrimer G-protein beta subunit (AGB1) has been linked
to Arabidopsis seed production in response to water availability and an
AGB1-interacting protein has been linked to Arabidopsis susceptibility to a
bacterial pathogen. With the release of the Arabidopsis G-protein interactome,
it is greatly anticipated that the role of AGB1 in abiotic stress and biotic
stress responses will be determined, since it is largely unknown. The funded
project will examine the role of putative AGB1-interacting proteins toward plant
fitness in response to drought conditions and in response to bacterial and viral
infections. Using various Arabidopsis genetic backgrounds, a functional genetics
approach coupled with biochemical and molecular approaches will be used to
detect altered hormonal and signaling pathways in response to stress stimuli.
The intellectual merit of this proposal consists of the following: (1)
deciphering the Arabidopsis AGB1 signaling pathway in response to
drought/abiotic stress and pathogen/biotic stress and (2) identifying the
functional roles of putative Arabidopsis AGB1-interacting proteins in mediating
these responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader scope of this research
includes furthering plant science initiatives to increase the yield of essential
plant products for energy applications, agriculture, forestry and other
beneficial needs. The funded project will provide numerous research
opportunities to increase the number of students including minorities and women
from Chowan University and surrounding communities that enter science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) careers including the plant
sciences. In addition, the funded project will help strengthen the STEM
curriculum at Chowan University and further undergraduate student and local
middle school/high school student advancement in interdisciplinary learning.
Chowan University is a small primarily undergraduate institution with a growing
minority enrollment located in a rural and underdeveloped section of
northeastern North Carolina.