* 1237889
* Meeting: When Predators Attack: Sensing and Motion in Predator-Prey Interactions; January 3-7, 2013, San Francisco, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Matthew McHenry, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,529.00

Predation is a fundamental interaction between animals. It plays an essential
role in shaping ecological communities and has direct consequences for the
survival, growth and reproduction of species. Despite a vast body of research on
the ecology of predation, it is not clear how the sensory and locomotor systems
of animals determine the outcome of a predatory attack. Through the use of
cutting-edge techniques, investigators have only recently made this a tractable
area of research. The goal of this symposium is to highlight recent findings
that are advancing our understanding of how sensory-motor dynamics affect
predator-prey interactions. The symposium will bring together presentations on a
diversity of animals (e.g. bats, insects, fishes, crustaceans), locomotory modes
(e.g. swimming, flying, jumping) and sensory systems (e.g. mechanoreception,
vision, chemoreception, echolocation), to provide insight into the unifying
themes of this emerging field. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The structure of the
symposium is designed to facilitate exchange between biologists from different
fields, geographical areas and career levels. The talks will be open to
attendees of the Annual Meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology (SICB) in San Francisco, CA on January 3-7, 2013. Invited participants
include three women, three assistant professors, three student speakers, two
researchers from non-academic institutions and four international participants.
In addition, students and postdoctoral researchers will have the opportunity to
contribute presentations in a complementary session. The meeting agenda is
available online (sicb.org/meetings/2013/symposia/predator.php) and participants
will contribute to a published volume of the journal Integrative and Comparative
Biology (icb.oxfordjournals.org) in 2013. Due to its excellent history of
supporting and encouraging student participation, SICB is an ideal venue for
engaging young investigators in this topic and encouraging the types of
integrative research approaches needed to answer outstanding questions about the
sensory-motor dynamics that mediate predator-prey interactions.