* 1237216
* I-Corps:  Assessment of Nanostructured Palladium on Carbon Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Martin Bakker, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This Innovation Corps project proposed a novel palladium-supported on porous
carbon catalysts (PCC). PCCs account for approximately 1/3rd of the catalysts
used in the $4.7 billion/year petrochemicals market. An innovative new PCC has
been developed under a previous NSF award. Better utilization of expensive
palladium coupled to improvements in the carbon support provide the foundation
for decreases in the cost and enhancements in the performance of these key
catalysts. The proposed program will evaluate the industry relevant properties
of the catalysts. Preliminary market analysis and cost estimates of potential
industry targets indicate that the cheaper cost and improved properties of this
catalyst, coupled to low startup costs, excellent scalability, and potential for
further catalyst upgrades, provide the basis for founding a competitive start up
catalysis company. This hypothesis will be tested by the team to enable a Go/No
Go decision to be made and to identify and develop the appropriate business
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have (4) major broader impacts: (1)
lower costs and improved energy and materials efficiency in a significant
fraction of the petrochemical and fine chemical industries. (2) the materials
and methods developed will provide the foundation for significant improvements
in automobile catalytic converters, decreasing cost and improving air quality,
and in energy storage and utilization (3) develop skills in the graduate student
and faculty member participating in transitioning pure and applied research from
the laboratory into the market place (4) result in sharing of the curriculum
content with other potential entrepreneurs within the institution.