* 1237440
* Promoting Student Education &amp; Outreach at the 16th Annual Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering Conference (June 18-21, 2012 / Washington, DC)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Robert Peoples, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2013
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Green chemistry and engineering offer fundamental and
sustainable solutions to the global challenges facing the planet. Green
chemistry is the design of chemical products and processes that reduce or
eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances. Green engineering is
the development and commercialization of industrial processes that are
economically feasible and reduce the risk to human health and the environment.
Green chemistry and engineering are absolutely essential to the development of
solutions to global challenges. Impact of green chemistry and engineering
approaches on sustainable development are significant, since these design
philosophies unite the pursuit of economic prosperity with environmental and
public health protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual Green Chemistry and
Engineering Conference is organized each year by the American Chemical Society
(ACS), Green Chemistry Institute (ACS GCI) with the active involvement of an
organizing committee comprised of scientists from other nonprofit organizations,
US government agencies, academic institutions and industry. Dr. David Wiley
serves as the PI for the ACS Green Chemistry Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
16th Annual GC &amp; E Conference in 2012 will for the first time host a
renewable energy session as part of the United Nations 2012 initiative
"Sustainable Energy For All". The students participating in the GC&amp;E
Workshop and Conference will have a unique opportunity to engage in topics not
commonly encountered in traditional university courses. The 16th GC &amp;E
Conference is scheduled for June 18-20, 2012 and will be held in Washington, DC.
It will host a ceremony presenting the 17th Annual Presidential Green Chemistry
Challenge Award winners. The GC&amp;E 2012 Conference theme is "Innovation,
Jobs, Sustainability - The Role of Green Chemistry". Educating the innovators of
tomorrow is a crucial part in securing the well-being of the future. This highly
successful interdisciplinary conference and workshop provides a proven
opportunity for students to learn to present research, learn the latest
developments in green chemistry and engineering, and expose themselves to the
broader economic, social and political context in which these developments
occur.