* 1237276
* The Distribution and Source of Plasma Blobs in Low-middle Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Larry Paxton, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 364,869.00

This is a study to identify the source of plasma blobs (local increases in
plasma density) at low and middle latitudes. Specifically, the researchers will
address the following science questions: (1) What are the underlying geophysical
conditions for the creation of blobs? (2) Are plasma bubbles a prerequisite for
the creation of plasma blobs? (3) Are plasma blobs associated with traveling
ionospheric disturbances (TIDs)? (4) What is the relationship between blobs and
middlelatitude electron density irregularities? Conventional wisdom is that
blobs are byproducts of bubbles, but this hypothesis is challenged by the recent
observation of blobs in the absence of bubbles in the equatorial region. This
project searches for alternative sources of blobs as well as clarifying the
causal relationship between bubbles and blobs. Our focused investigation by
analyzing various observation data will provide a comprehensive understanding of
the characteristics, distribution, and source of blobs that have not yet been
fully explored. Recent Communication/Navigation Outage Forecasting System
(C/NOFS) satellite observations have provided an unprecedented opportunity to
investigate the blob phenomenon with use of ample blob events for several years.
In addition, radar, all-sky imager, and other satellite observations are
available simultaneously with the C/NOFS observations. The results of this study
will advance understanding of the source of the electron density irregularities
that are problematic in satellite communication and navigation systems. Case
studies will be carried out by using all-sky image data at Arecibo in Puerto
Rico, Kototabang in Indonesia, and Bohyun in South Korea to verify the
association of blobs with TIDs. The relationship between blobs and middle-
latitude irregularities will be determined by examining Korea radar data.
Electron density irregularities cause problems in modern technology and are a
significant space weather feature that requires global observations to
understand their characteristics and predict their occurrence. This project will
promote the international collaboration in two aspects: (1) participation of the
graduate students in South Korea and Malaysia to the project and (2) utilization
of international observation data. Space science is a growing field in those
countries, but those countries lack experts in that field. The training and
mentoring through this project will support their growth.