* 1237975
* Network-Guided Predictions and Characterization of Genes Governing Pattern Recognition Receptor-Mediated Immunity in Cereals
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Pamela Ronald, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 02/28/2018
* USD 2,668,339.00

PI: Pamela Ronald (University of California - Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI:
Edward Marcotte (University of Texas at
Austin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Roger Wise (USDA-ARS) and Jorge
Dubcovsky (University of California - Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants and
animals sense conserved microbial signatures through receptors localized to the
plasma membrane and cytoplasm. These receptors, often called pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs), typically carry or associate with non-arginine-aspartate (non-
RD) kinases that initiate complex signaling networks cumulating in broad-
spectrum resistance. While it is now widely appreciated that PRRs play a key
role in the immune response of plants and animals, little is known about the
signaling pathways governing these responses. This is especially true in
monocotyledonous species, which are estimated to contain a ten-fold larger
number of PRRs as compared to dicots. This project exploits RiceNet, a
previously experimentally validated genome-scale functional gene network of rice
genes, to explore PRR-mediated immune responses in cereals on a genome-wide
scale. Taking advantage of the observation that genetic modifiers of the same
gene often cluster in gene networks, novel regulators of PRR-mediated immune
responses can be effectively identified and prioritized based on local
connectivity in such networks. The project will identify and validate
subnetworks (i.e. sets of genes) governing rice, barley and wheat PRR-mediated
immune responses, generate a new dataset for rice based on an innovative
proteomics approach, and establish a genome-scale functional network for wheat.
Results from these studies will lead to major advances in understanding the PRR-
mediated immune response of cereal crops. Because pathways controlling PRR-
mediated responses in rice are similar to those in other plants and animals, the
expected results will be relevant to other species that will serve as a starting
point to develop new strategies for engineering resistance in cereal crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at all levels, from undergraduate student
interns through postdoctoral scientists, will receive essential training in
genomics, proteomics, pathology, and systems biology. The project will organize
and hold a Networks in Immunity (NetI) workshop that will facilitate
collaborations between increasing numbers of researchers in this important
discipline. Results will be made broadly available, allowing for generation of
novel hypotheses and biotechnological applications, and serve as a basis for
comparative genomics studies. All validated interactions will be deposited into
central protein-protein interaction databases such as IntAct, MINT, DIP, or
bioGRID. All raw mass spectrometry data will be deposited into the Open
Proteomics Database (http://bioinformatics.icmb.utexas.edu/OPD/) and raw
proteomics datasets will be submitted to the public repositories PeptideAtlas
(http://www.peptideatlas.org) or Tranche (https://proteomecommons.org/tranche/).
Finally, gene expression datasets will be deposited in the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) public database at the NCBI.