* 1237529
* 2012 Crystal Engineering GRC/GRS
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Robin Rogers, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 Crystal Engineering Gordon Research Conference
(GRC), partly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program,
follows the highly successful first ever GRC on Crystal Engineering (2010) which
had over 160 international participants. The 2012 Crystal Engineering GRC will
also include a new and exciting Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) in which only
students and postdocs may present or lead discussions. Crystal engineering is
the design and synthesis of functional solid-state structures (e.g., new organic
molecular crystals and metal-organic co-ordination polymers and framework solids
(MOFs)), based on a bottom-up approach from smaller building blocks such as
neutral organic molecules, and organic or inorganic ions. Typical design
strategies use hydrogen bonds and coordination bonds, which define sub-
structural units that are called respectively, supramolecular synthons and
secondary building units. This subject cuts across the traditional divisions of
organic, inorganic, and physical chemistry, making for a very eclectic blend of
ideas, techniques, and strategies. The field has developed to a stage that
cross-fertilization between topics is expected to promote significant
advancements in a general quest to afford functional materials. The topics cover
both fundamentals and applications of Crystal Engineering that have relevance to
important areas such as organic synthesis, pharmaceutics, and energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;Crystal Engineering is one
of the more contemporary areas of chemical research today and is central to many
fundamental problems that are currently facing society. It is expected that
developments in this rapidly developing field will meet societal demands that
are not currently being addressed by more conventional approaches to synthetic
chemistry and materials science. Examples of areas where Crystal Engineering can
address current societal challenges include the rational design and construction
of hydrogen storage materials and efforts to control drug polymorphism.
Moreover, knowing how to deliberately place both the organic and metal
components into positions that optimize gas uptake can be realized by
participants of our conference that do not normally work in the gas storage
area. This GRC will seek to aggressively recruit graduate students, postdocs,
and junior level professionals to attend the GRC and enable them to not only
learn from the talks and discussions, but allow them to make important contacts
for their future development; NSF funding assists in this endeavor. The GRC
Chair and Vice-Chair will actively recruit underrepresented groups, at least one
small step toward the goal of diversity in the Crystal Engineering community
reflective of the general population.