* 1237958
* WORKSHOP: Access to Civil Justice: Re-envisioning and Reinvigorating Research, Chicago, IL, Fall 2012.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Rebecca Sandefur, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 42,895.00

In the contemporary United States, civil justice problems are widespread. Just
how widespread cannot be known, as the most recent comprehensive national survey
of public experience with civil justice problems and institutions is thirty-five
years old. In the U.S., these common problems affect as many as 150 million
people each year, and have potentially wide-ranging and powerful impacts on core
areas of life such as livelihood, shelter, the care and custody of minor
children and dependent adults, neighborhood safety, and environmental
conditions. Despite the fact that most of these problems never reach the formal
justice system, courts are often overwhelmed by the numbers of civil litigants.
Local, state, and federal governments, generous individuals, and private
foundations contribute more than 1 billion dollars each year to fund civil legal
assistance for low- and moderate-income people, but because we lack research on
this topic, we know little about how this activity is organized, what services
this funding supports, how existing programs do their work, and whether outreach
efforts adequately understand and address the most common barriers to access to
these services. Little high quality, publicly available data exist to stimulate
theory, engage scholarship, and guide policy on issues of access to justice.
This project is a workshop convening scholars and practitioners to develop and
begin work on a new research agenda for access to civil justice. Invitees
include staff from institutions of civil justice, such as judges, leaders from
the organized bar, and legal services practitioners as well as scholars from
law, statistics and the social and behavioral sciences. The convening seeks to
synthesize and coordinate existing research activity and to generate new
research activity, including research that can inform policy.