* 1237463
* Shaping an Infrastructure for the Partnership of Informal Science Education and Higher Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2016
* William David Burns, HARRISBURG UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 01/31/2016
* USD 1,112,110.00

Expanding on the encouraging outcomes of an NSF-funded conference, this three-
year project led by the National Center for Science and Civic Engagement at
Harrisburg University of Science and Technology, in collaboration with the
Koshland Science Museum of the National Academy of Sciences, will explore and
evaluate ways to support new collaborations between professionals in
institutions of higher education and informal STEM education around areas of
common interest. The primary goal is to develop the educational infrastructure
to grow and efficiently sustain multiple cross-organizational partnership
activities at the intersection of learning about science, society and civic
engagement around such possible topics as energy, environment, genetics, earth
resources, computers and ethics, nanotechnology, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
initiative is: 1) creating a joint organizing "secretariat" to provide
communications and support through low-cost shared services for at least six
partnerships around the country; 2) providing partnership support and technical
assistance to seed the six national partnerships, and 3) sharing evaluation and
analysis services across all the partnerships. The outcomes of the work pertain
to improvements in professional knowledge and practice in higher education and
informal science education, as well as the improvement of learning by
undergraduates and by the general public.