* 1237787
* PFI-BIC:  Superelastomers: New Thermoplastic Elastomers based on Multigraft Copolymers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Joy Fisher, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,999.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project proposes to develop multigraft
copolymer-based thermoplastic elastomers by use of randomly spaced side chains,
representing a more cost effective technique than the present technique which
depends on difficult to produce evenly spaced side chains. Thermoplastic
elastomers combine the desirable properties of crosslinked elastomers (like car
tires) with low processing costs and recyclability of thermoplastics. This newly
developed class of multigraft copolymer-based thermoplastic elastomers is called
"superelastomers" and holds promise for improved processability and
recyclability of rubbery materials used in many different products such as
gloves, earbuds, condoms, nipples for baby bottles, etc. The superelastomers
also have the potential to open up new applications for elastomer materials.
These designer elastomers constitute a new concept where macromolecular
architecture (the shape of the molecule) is used to create the desired property
profile. Through partnerships and collaborations fostered by this project, the
research team will progress from knowledge generated by fundamental research
toward new products that will enhance U.S. competitiveness, and the partner
companies will have access to new designer elastomer technology.

The broader impacts of this research are the creation of new jobs to stimulate
the economy, and the reduction of the worldwide carbon footprint by developing a
new class of highly tunable thermoplastic elastomers that have the potential to
both be recyclable and reduce energy consumption during manufacturing.

Partners at the inception of this project are the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville (Department of Chemistry, School of Business Administration, and
Research Foundation), BBB Elastomers (small business, Knoxville, TN), Asius
Technologies (small business, Longmont, CO), InaMei Skin Care (small business,
Hadley, MA), MAPA GmbH (large business, Zeven, Germany), Fuji Film (large
business, Dayton, TN), Technology 20/20 (non-profit, Oak Ridge, TN), and Venture
Incite (regional venture capital firm, Oak Ridge, TN).