* 1237579
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for CICI Expansion to Add a Site at the University of North Dakota
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Wayne Seames, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,140.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;Planning Grant: CICI I/UCRC
Expansion to Add a Site at the University of North Dakota (UND)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1237579 University of North Dakota; Wayne Seames
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of North Dakota (UND) seeks to join the
existing Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI). The
Center is currently comprised of West Virginia University (lead institution),
Rutgers University, the University of Miami (FL), and North Carolina State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current mission of the Center is to
accelerate the adoption of polymer composites into infrastructure and
transportation applications through a collaborative research partnership of
academia, government and industry. Research is focused on fundamental scientific
topics concerning composites such as strength/service life predictions, smart
structure development, fire/blast protection, fatigue response, aging
phenomenon, and nondestructive testing. The Center works to develop new and
unique products that can be made through a wide variety of processes for which
numerous market opportunities exist. By adding UND to the CICI, the research
scope will be expanded to include: 1) renewable polymers and composites for use
in CICI relevant applications, 2) natural and renewable filler materials for
composites, and 3) characterization of emissions generated during fires from
composite infrastructure materials. The UND site will be administered through
the SUNRISE BioProducts State Funded Center of Excellenece.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center's activities seek to enhance the international
competitiveness of American industry in the area of composites including modular
construction and rapid deployment techniques using natural and biomaterials;
thus reducing carbon emissions into the atmosphere. The proposed expansion
furthers this goal by expanding the scope of the CICI to include the entire
value chain for renewable source feed stocks that can be incorporated into
composite materials. The experience of the investigators at UND provides a nice
complement to the existing Center competencies. Strong potential for cooperative
research exists through the use of biopolymers developed at UND coupled with the
natural fabric research conducted at WVU or NCSU. In addition to the publishing
of journal articles and conference presentations to promote scientific research
and knowledge dissemination, the proposed site and the Center will utilize
separate funding mechanisms to educate practicing engineers and end users who
are not familiar with composites. The above mentioned broader impact will be
assured through collective multi-university team work involving various
disciplines and a wide spectrum of industries and agencies. The UND site will
add diversity through a SUNRISE REU site, a SUNRISE Native American program, and
a bridge program with a Hispanic serving institution.