* 1237267
* EAGER:   Shared Principles of Adaptive Learning - anticipatory behavior in Halobactetrium salinarum
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Nitin Baliga, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual merit. Biological systems use memory of previous experiences to
anticipate future environmental changes. In the literature this is called
"anticipatory behavior". These experiments will be performed in Halobacterium
salinarum, a tractable model organism that has adapted to a complex and
dynamically changing natural environment. Individual environmental factors such
as oxygen, temperature, pH do not occur in isolation but rather, in a temporally
coupled and non-random manner. This project seeks to understand the rate at
which microorganisms evolve novel anticipatory behavior as they encounter a new
environment. This understanding will have significant implications on wide-
ranging issues including predicting the consequences of climate change on
microbial communities in the oceans, as well as strategies to prevent pathogens
from evading the immune system.

Broader impacts. The objective is to significantly expand the already highly
successful "Networks in Biology" high school educational module by incorporating
statistical modeling and model inference lessons. It will be reinforced that
models are as good as the data they are based upon, and model predictions must
be assessed with rigorous statistics in order to avoid misinterpretation. These
educational activities will be designed and implemented through collaborations
between senior scientists, postdoctoral fellows, high school student interns
from disadvantaged backgrounds, and educators, such as high school teachers and
curriculum developers.