* 1237555
* PFI-BIC: Partnership for Interoperable Components for Parallel Engineering Simulations
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mark Shephard, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,958.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
will advance the development and delivery of scalable simulation tools to
support companies in the effective application of massively parallel computing
in the design and manufacture of future products. The project will address the
technology gaps that are currently preventing industry from taking advantage of
the advances in cost effective massively parallel computing and the growing
number of individual analysis components that execute at scale on these
machines. The key technical advancement will be addressed through the
development of interoperable interfaces that can effectively couple individual
simulation components together to support the execution of complete massively
parallel simulations as needed to reliably answer the performance questions of
interest to engineers and scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this project will lead to new products and services of benefit to society, as
well as to associated economic benefits. It will be a powerful tool for building
innovation capacity. The broader impacts will follow from the new technologies
that support innovation over a broad spectrum of applications ranging from the
engineering of new generations of products, to the development of medical
treatments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Knowledge-Enhancement Partners: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's Scientific
Computation Research Center, Troy, NY; Kitware, Inc., Clifton Park, NY; Pliant
Energy Systems, Brooklyn, NY; and Simmetrix, Inc., Clifton Park, NY. Other
Partners: Private Sector Organization: Altair Engineering, Inc., Mountain View,
CA and Clifton Park, NY;and IBM, Armonk, NY; Public Sector Organization:
Division of Science, Technology and Innovation, Empire State Development,
Albany, NY.