* 1237829
* PFI-BIC: Market-Guided Ionic Liquid Discovery and Design
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Peter Kilpatrick, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 540,537.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from the University of Notre Dame will
discover, design, and translate ionic liquids (ILs) into new products and
processes that are innovative and might eventually be ready to be marketed.
Three target markets will be pursued: 1) development of processes to efficiently
turn 'waste' heat into useful electricity; 2) finding new environmentally benign
ways to deposit hard metal coatings on metal surfaces; and 3) developing
improved 'ultracapacitors' (devices that store electrical energy and can be
charged and discharged rapidly over millions of times). Each application will
utilize an IL, defined as a pure salt that is liquid around room temperature.
ILs are relatively newly discovered compounds that have many unique properties
not found in conventional liquids, such as virtually no vapor pressure, inherent
electrical conductivity, high thermal stability, and large electrochemical
windows. These properties will be exploited in this project to develop new
products and processes that address large market needs.

The broader impacts of this research are that it will address issues across
multiple cross-sections of society that are of critical importance to the U.S.
and world economy. It will provide hands-on technology design and implementation
opportunities in the area of ionic liquids. In the long term, there will be
opportunities to optimize candidate ionic liquids for several production-scale
applications while at the same time reducing volume manufacturing costs. The
project will allow two small, Innovation Park Notre Dame-based businesses to
help South Bend, Indiana, a traditional Midwestern manufacturing city, re-invent
itself.

Partners at the inception of this project are the University of Notre Dame (lead
institution, Notre Dame, IN). Small businesses: Echogen Power Systems Inc.
(Akron, OH); Ionic Research Technologies LLC (South Bend, IN); Neo Industries
LLC (Portage, IN). Large businesses: Maxwell Technologies, Inc. (San Diego, CA);
and United Technologies Research Center (East Hartford, CT). Additional partner
organizations that are not part of the KEP groups are the Notre Dame ESTEEM
professional science and engineering master's program, Innovation Park Notre
Dame, Michiana TechConnection, and the Notre Dame Master of Science in Patent
Law program.