* 1237969
* Unraveling the Heterozygosity, Allelic Composition, and Copy Number Variation of Potato
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Carol Buell, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 09/30/2017
* USD 5,774,862.00

PI: C. Robin Buell (Michigan State University) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs:
Yuehua Cui and David Douches (Michigan State University), Jiming Jiang
(University of Wisconsin-Madison), and Richard Veilleux (Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potato is the third most
important food crop in the world following rice and wheat and is cultivated for
its tuber, a below-ground storage organ. Potato is distinct from many other
major crops in that it is asexually propagated, has four sets of chromosomes
(tetraploid), and all cultivars are highly heterozygous. As a consequence,
potato has a greater probability of retaining deleterious gene mutations than
sexually propagated diploids such as rice, maize, and soybean. These three
characteristics make genetic improvement of potato slow and unpredictable due to
a lack of understanding of the interaction of genetic elements in a complex
background. Furthermore, there is limited knowledge regarding the molecular
nature of heterozygosity and allelic composition in the potato genome and how
these correlate with phenotype. The objectives of this project are to understand
the contribution of genes/alleles, transcripts, copy number variation and
epigenomic features to a complex of phenotypic traits associated with fitness in
potato. Data to be generated from this project will include characterization of
the genome, transcriptome and epigenome from multiple potato populations with
differential degrees of chromosome number and heterozygosity and statistical
analyses to identify genes and alleles associated with a set of phenotypes
associated with vigor. These data will also facilitate modeling genomic features
into phenotype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the genetic and genomic questions
associated with potato cannot be readily addressed by using diploid model
plants. Project efforts to probe the genetic complexities of potato will serve
as a model genomics system for other vegetatively propagated, highly
heterozygous crops with similarly intractable breeding systems, including
alfalfa, banana, cassava, grape, strawberry, sugarcane, sweet potato, yam and
scores of minor horticultural crops, thereby improving the understanding of the
genetic machinery underlying phenotypic diversity. Through outreach activities
in this project, the public will gain knowledge of plant biology, specifically
in the uses of potato and its unique biology, through a suite of activities with
the Michigan State University Children's and Horticulture Garden involving all
age groups. Through engagement of high school and under-represented groups, this
project will provide opportunities for students to see science as a viable
career opportunity and increase the representation of women in computer-related
science/technology disciplines. The techniques and approaches used in this
project will provide a rich training environment for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in relevant and emerging disciplines of bioinformatics,
genomics, and epigenomics. The data to be generated in this project through
publication and deposition in public databases will provide the first high-
resolution map of genome variation and its association with gene expression,
epigenetic modifications, and phenotypic traits in potato. Sequence data will be
made public through the project website (to be accessible via http://buell-
lab.plantbiology.msu.edu/), the SOL Genomics Network (http://solgenomics.net/)
and through the NCBI Sequence Read Archive and the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
for permanent archiving. Germplasm developed and/or used in this project will be
available on request and long-term through the NRSP-6 U.S. Potato Genebank
(http://www.ars-grin.gov/nr6/).