* 1237734
* PFI-AIR:  Advanced SiNWs: Partnerships for Innovative Research in Energy (ASPIRE)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Pradeep Haldar, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 06/30/2014
* USD 800,000.00

This NSF Accelerating Innovation Research (AIR) project will build on an
existing novel and emerging nanotechnology platform that integrates patent
pending branched-SiNWs, obliquely aligned nanorods and lithographically
patterned nanostructures into high energy density batteries, solar cells with
improved absorption and wire grid polarizers for smart windows, respectively;
all with lower cost and improved performance. Additionally, the project will
leverage its broader incubation and commercialization efforts that connects
university-based research and development activities with private enterprise,
funding and expertise; thereby helping to increase the rate and scale of clean
energy technology market deployment.

The world needs short-, medium-, and long-term solutions to the global energy
challenge, and innovative programs such as this AIR project that develops an
energy ecosystem is one such answer to that challenge. By introducing a new
paradigm of open, circular communication amongst partners, the AIR project will
routinely make existing nanostructured-materials platforms accessible to its
partners, allowing them to expand on and remix the core product in surprising
new ways such as clean energy applications. The most important innovation that
will be built within this ecosystem is a network of companies, working
collaboratively together, to maximize technological research advances and to
identify new opportunities.