* 1237754
* PFI-BIC:  Silica-based Bioremediation Technology Platform with Applications for a Growing Shale Gas/Oil Industry
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alptekin Aksan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,001.00

This Partnership for Innovation project from the University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities will take a successful bioremediation technology previously used for
pesticide removal from water and re-engineer it for use in microbiologically-
enhanced coal-bed natural gas recovery from depleted gas wells and in
bioremediation of the percentage of water returned via the well from waters
generated during the hydraulic fracturing (fracking) method of drilling for
shale oil, oil sands, and gas. The technology is based on encapsulating
microorganisms in an inexpensive, safe, extended life-time, silica-based hybrid
gel. The microbes are stabilized within the gel and continue to biodegrade
pesticides for more than four months. In re-engineering the platform technology
for enhanced recovery, communities of microorganisms that transform coal to
natural gas will be stabilized by silica encapsulation for ease of transport,
enhanced stability, and improvement of function. In re-engineering of the
platform technology for bioremediation, microbes will be stabilized and rendered
highly active to biodegrade organic contaminants within the percentage of water
returned via the well from waters generated during the hydraulic fracturing
(fracking) method of drilling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are on possible future applications to an efficient and safe oil and
gas industry. There is a strong link between a robust domestic energy sector and
the creation of new jobs. The U.S. has recently become a net exporter of energy,
credited largely to advances in shale oil and gas extraction that use hydraulic
fracturing. This proposal develops technologies to enhance gas and oil recovery
and a platform that can minimize the environmental impacts from a percentage of
the water that is returned via the well and then kept in settling ponds. Two of
the knowledge enhancement partners (KEPs) will take away technology to develop
and scale-up production of silica-encapsulated, biodegrading bacteria that can
be used for treating fracking water in settling ponds. Biostabilization imparted
by the silica materials is also important for preserving microbial communities
that transform coal to natural gas. One of the KEPs will take away this
technology to enhance the ability to deliver microorganisms that increase
natural gas production throughout the U.S. and potentially in foreign markets.
This application is important because the U.S. has enormous coal reserves and
enhancing coal to methane conversion will contribute to a clean energy future
for our country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project:
the lead instituion, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities (Department of
Biochemistry; Bioresource Center, Biotechnology Institute; Sponsored Projects
Administration; Office of Technology Commercialization; Venture Center; and
Office of the General Counsel; KEP core small businesses: 1) Luca Technologies
(Boulder, CO) 3F LLC (St. Paul, MN) and 3) Tundra Companies (White Bear Lake,
MN).