* 1237865
* Collaborative Research:  Deliberation and Communication--Building Practical Skills in the Next Generation of Environmental Scientists
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Jeffrey Downard, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,982.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop a curricular design and
educational resources to enable graduate students in the natural sciences to
develop the fundamental skills needed to navigate difficult ethical issues found
at the intersection of public policy and environmental science. Towards this
goal, this project is developing four tools: (1) a model for effective practical
deliberation; (2) reading guides and screen casts for texts in environmental
ethics; (3) a curricular design that gives students an opportunity to build
skills in deliberation and communication in public venues; and (4) and short-
case study and documentary videos. The crux of this deliberative model approach
is to focus on the practical dilemmas that arise. This approach enables students
to isolate and clarify the various sources of conflict about environmental
issues. Students will learn to identify three sources of conflict: those that
stem from disagreements over moral principles and ideals; those that stem from
differences in political commitments, economic interests and legal
interpretation; and those that stem from differences in scientific understanding
of environmental issues including different assessments of risk and uncertainty.
The educational resources are designed to help students draw more effectively on
the literature in environmental ethics, including some of the seminal classic
texts by Leopold, Muir, and Thoreau, as well as more contemporary texts in
applied ethics as they sort through environmental debates of social concern.
With a richer understanding of the ethical issues, and an ability to communicate
effectively in a public setting, we believe that students will be in a better
position to work through and understand the underlying disagreements in a more
thoughtful and intelligent manner. In order to practice what they have learned,
the curricular design provides students with opportunities to participate in and
lead discussions about climate change and other environmental issues of regional
importance in a range of public settings including native communities within the
region. Implementing these opportunities will also strengthen students'
deliberative and communicative skills as they engage in dialogues with a broad
cross-section of the public. &lt;br/&gt;The impact of this work is expected to
be very broad. The development and implementation of the community engagement
activities build off existing outreach connections between NAU and the
surrounding community and will engage Native American communities in the
proposed discourse activities. Educational resources will be shared with the
broader community, including the Museum of Northern Arizona, who will work with
the project team to integrate these resources into the activities and displays
of the museum. All of the educational resources and scaled versions of the
curricular materials will be made publicly available through a variety of online
channels, including YouTube.