* 1237813
* An Assessment of Options for Post-CMOS Emerging Research Devices and Related Materials: Four Workshops to be Held in 2012 in the Netherlands, Canada, France and San Francisco.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Victor Zhirnov, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2013
* USD 40,000.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to conduct an international
series of four face-to-face workshops&lt;br/&gt;to assess quantitatively the
potential and status of four topics related to research on
nanoelectronics&lt;br/&gt;devices and materials. The topics are: Emerging
Research Memory Devices, Emerging Research&lt;br/&gt;Logic Devices, Emerging
Research Architectures, and Emerging Research Materials critical
for&lt;br/&gt;the realization of specific nanoelectronics devices. Participants
and contributors to these&lt;br/&gt;workshops will include academic and
industrial domain experts. The outputs of these workshops&lt;br/&gt;will guide
and input preparation of the 2013 International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors&lt;br/&gt;chapters on Emerging Research Devices and Emerging
Research Materials. This grant will&lt;br/&gt;be used to pay partial travel
expenses for some presenters, particularly academics,
requesting&lt;br/&gt;travel assistance.&lt;br/&gt;The workshops series will
focus on the relationship between the Semiconductor Industry as&lt;br/&gt;it
endeavors to continue to advance semiconductor technology and the work of the
National&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) research community. One
purpose of these meetings is to evaluate&lt;br/&gt;the potential and status of
each specific nanotechnology entry identified by the ITRS
ERD/ERM&lt;br/&gt;Working Groups as having potential to enable a new paradigm
for information processing. Another&lt;br/&gt;purpose is to identify research
opportunities that, if addressed, will benefit the
Semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;Industry and fall within the scope of the NNI research
agenda. Presenters will be provided&lt;br/&gt;with a list of questions that are
intended to stimulate discussions during the workshops.&lt;br/&gt;Each workshop
will be documented by a report described
below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;In bringing together
leading academic and industrial scientists to discuss, debate and
reach&lt;br/&gt;consensus on the potential performance and key scientific
challenges related to several emerging&lt;br/&gt;research memory and logic
device technologies, these workshops will provide an excellent
forum&lt;br/&gt;for intellectual pursuit and discernment of important/limiting
scientific issues related to&lt;br/&gt;approaches to information processing. The
intellectual merit of these workshops is illustrated&lt;br/&gt;by way of
example.&lt;br/&gt;In the first example, the physics of operation and extreme
scaling projections are not well&lt;br/&gt;understood for ?select devices?
required for use in nanoscale memory arrays. These select&lt;br/&gt;devices are
needed to employ a new class of non-volatile memory cells, called resistive
random&lt;br/&gt;access memory (ReRAM),that may replace NAND flash for
technology generations beyond the 16nm&lt;br/&gt;technology node. Generally
speaking, a memory cell in an array can be viewed as being composed&lt;br/&gt;of
two fundamental components: a ?storage node?, which is usually characterized by
the physics&lt;br/&gt;of operation of the particular memory device used, and a
?selector?. The selector is a device&lt;br/&gt;which allows a given memory cell
in an array to be singularly addressed for read or write&lt;br/&gt;operation
without addressing its nearest neighbor cells. It is a non-linear element,
which&lt;br/&gt;can operate as a switch, such as a diode-type, or as a
resistive-switch-type structure. The&lt;br/&gt;latter category includes novel
concepts such as Mott switches, threshold switches, and mixed&lt;br/&gt;ionic
electronic conduction switches. Understanding the dominant physics related to
their&lt;br/&gt;non-linear I-V characteristics is essential to employing these
select devices in a highly&lt;br/&gt;dense non-volatile ReRAM crossbar
architecture. It should be noted that for several advanced&lt;br/&gt;concepts of
ReRAM, the storage node in principle can be scaled down below 10 nm, and the
memory&lt;br/&gt;density will be limited by a somewhat larger conventional
three-terminal select device. Thus&lt;br/&gt;the select device represents a
serious bottleneck for scaling a ReRAM memory cell to 16 nm&lt;br/&gt;and
beyond. Application of these new non-volatile memory devices to a crossbar
memory structure&lt;br/&gt;will enable a paradigm shift to a new storage class
memory (SCM) off-chip memory architecture&lt;br/&gt;discussed
below.&lt;br/&gt;Another example, related to logic, is a family of new
nanoelectronic low subthreshold-swing&lt;br/&gt;devices: e.g., negative Cg
devices. These devices offer the attractive possibility of
performing&lt;br/&gt;high speed logic while dissipating much lower power
compared to a conventional MOSFET. The&lt;br/&gt;circuit design and the academic
research communities have a expressed a strong interest for&lt;br/&gt;the ERD
Technical Working Group to explore the physics of operation of these devices and
the&lt;br/&gt;circuit design space in which they can operate in order to better
understand their potential&lt;br/&gt;performance. This information will provide
important input to these communities regarding&lt;br/&gt;their accelerating
development of low-power electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;By carefully assessing the potential performance and
scientific/technological challenges for&lt;br/&gt;each new memory select device
and of new low-power logic devices, as well as emerging
architectures,&lt;br/&gt;these workshops will provide important documented
inputs to the research community as they&lt;br/&gt;pursue their exploration of
many emerging research devices.&lt;br/&gt;One venue being initiated to obtain
broad dissemination of this information is the editing&lt;br/&gt;and publication
of a comprehensive book on nanoelectronics entitled ?Emerging
Nanoelectronic&lt;br/&gt;Devices?. A proposal is under review by a major
publisher who has expressed considerable interest.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the
educational value and planning impact of these workshops on the
international&lt;br/&gt;research community are quite substantial. Several
universities (e.g., Stanford, U. Minnesota,&lt;br/&gt;U. Tokyo,?) use the ITRS
chapters on Emerging Research Devices and Emerging Research
Materials&lt;br/&gt;resulting from these workshops as texts in their
Nanoelectronics courses. Also several international&lt;br/&gt;research funding
agencies (e.g., SRC, NSF, and NIST Nanoelectronics Research Initiative,
the&lt;br/&gt;EU Framework Program 8, ?) use the material in these chapters as
inputs to their decisions&lt;br/&gt;on research directions in their
Nanoelectronics research programs.