* 1237878
* PFI-BIC:  Emulating Biological Actuation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Laura Huenneke, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 631,804.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from Northern Arizona University (NAU)
uses a commercially available, state-of-the-art, powered foot-ankle prosthesis
(the iWalk BioM) as a research platform to develop and test a new theory (the
'winding filament' theory) of how muscles work, with the goal of emulating
biological actuation in man-made devices. The project integrates biological
inspiration and engineering expertise within a business and economic development
context. To achieve these goals, engineers at iWalk will modify a prosthesis
prototype so that the winding filament model can be integrated into the existing
control software. At NAU, engineers will code the winding filament model to fit
the required architecture. The modified prosthesis will be provided to engineers
at NAU and Electric Torque Machines, a business that will install the algorithms
in the prosthesis. Once the new algorithms are installed, three participants
with amputation will wear the prosthesis in a series of experiments designed to
compare the kinematics, kinetics, energetics and adaptability of walking with
the conventional vs. the modified prosthesis. The competitive landscape in
powered prosthetic devices will be analyzed and a commercialization strategy
will be developed. If the project is successful, the winding filament model will
become a market-accepted innovation for controlling a wide range of powered
devices, including prostheses, exoskeletons, and robots. The project will also
further the understanding of control principles involved in muscle-like
actuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research will
enhance the innovation and economic competitiveness of the knowledge enhancement
partner (KEP) companies by developing new control algorithms for controlling
prosthetic and other devices, including exoskeletons and robots. The innovations
have the potential to improve the quality of life for millions of disabled
Americans. The long-term goal is to design robotic muscles that, like human
muscles, will adapt instantaneously and automatically to changes in the loading
environment during operation. This academe/business collaboration will stimulate
the technology-based business environment that is growing around NAU's academic
community. The project will provide interdisciplinary training in biology,
engineering, and business for undergraduate and graduate students and
educational advancement for professional engineers. The project has the
potential transform the understanding of muscle function and human motor
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are NAU
(Departments of Mechanical Engineering and of Biological Sciences and Office of
the VP for Research), iWalk, Inc. (Bedford, MA), Electric Torque Machines (ETM),
Inc. (Flagstaff, AZ), and NAU Ventures (Flagstaff, AZ). Each of the partners
brings significant expertise and experience to the collaborative effort. The
iWalk BioM prosthesis represents the state-of-the-art in prosthesis design to
emulate the function of the human foot-ankle, with several patents for
innovative technology. ETM has a proven track record of commercializing novel
motors and controllers featuring unique but practical architectures and designs,
with significant improvements in efficiency and high continuous torque. NAU has
patented a linear actuator inspired by basic research on how muscles work.