* 1237613
* The Effect of Model Uncertainty and Error on the Forecast Uncertainty
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Joseph Tribbia, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2016
* USD 363,677.00

This project examines the impact of uncertainty and error in model formulation
on errors in weather forecasts produced by ensemble prediction systems (EPSs).
In an EPS, forecasts are produced by running an ensemble of forecast models in
which each model starts out with a slightly different initial condition (models
can also differ in their formulation), and the resulting ensemble of forecasts
is analyzed statistically to produce an optimal forecast, and estimate of the
error in the forecast, and (in combination with real-world observations), a set
of initial conditions for the next forecast cycle. The work is based on the
hypothesis that errors in model formulation (principally errors in
parameterization and truncation) introduce errors into the model integrations at
the scale of the parameterized processes, presumably at or near the truncation
limit of the model, and these errors are propagated upscale by resolved model
dynamics until they produce forecast uncertainty at synoptic scales. Because
upscale propagation determines the forecast impacts at substantial lead times
(day three, for instance), forecast errors due to model errors do not have any
particular characteristics that would distinguish them from forecast errors due
to initialization errors (which would likely undergo the same upscale
propagation before affecting the forecast). Based on the above results, the PIs
conjecture that the effect of model errors could be accounted for, at least
approximately, by modulating the magnitude of the different error patterns in
the low-dimensional vector space which contains most of the forecast uncertainty
from all sources. The research has a three part agenda, in which the first part
will test the hypothesis in forecasts archived in the THORPEX Interactive Ground
Global Ensemble (TIGGE) data set. The TIGGE archive contains forecasts produced
by a variety of ensemble prediction systems using a variety of techniques to
account for errors in model formulation and intial conditions, thus allowing
numerous tests of the hypothesis. The second part consists of a suite of
"perfect model" experiments, in which the "true" state of the atmosphere will be
taken from the same model used in the ensemble forecast system. The perfect
model configuration enables experiments in which there is no model error, as the
"true" system can have exactly the same physics and truncation as the forecast
model. Such experiments are useful for considering other sources of forecast
errors. The third part consists of forecast experiments using a state-of-the-art
data assimilation system to assimilate real-world observations, and the PIs will
attempt to specific challenging forecast cases, such as prediction of
cyclogenesis produced from a warm-core tropical cyclone.

In addition to its scientiifc merit, the work will have societal benefit by
developing a strategy to improve the quality of weather forecasts issued to the
general public. The work also seeks to improve understanding of the uncertainty
inherent in weather forecasts, so that information regarding the likely accuracy
of forecasts can be included in forecast guidance. The work may also have
applicability to climate and earth system models used to produce climate
projections and long-range forecasts, and to understanding and predicting the
behavior of other complex systems. In addition, the project provides support and
training to a graduate student, thereby developing the workforce in this
research area.