* 1237140
* LTER:  Georgia Coastal Ecosystems-III
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2019
* Steven Pennings, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2019
* USD 6,243,180.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Georgia Coastal Ecosystems (GCE)
LTER is located along three adjacent sounds on the Atlantic coast and includes
both intertidal marshes and estuaries. Long-term drivers of climate change, sea
level rise and human alterations of the landscape will cause transitions in
dominant habitat types (state changes) within the GCE domain by changing the
amounts and patterns of water delivery across the landscape. These changes in
water delivery can be conceptualized as presses and pulses in river inflow,
local runoff, groundwater input, and tidal inundation, which will in turn
manifest themselves as changes in salinity and inundation patterns in the
domain. The research at GCE-III is designed to address how variations in
salinity and inundation, driven by climate change and anthropogenic factors,
affect biotic and ecosystem responses at different spatial and temporal scales,
and to predict the consequences of these changes for habitat provisioning and
carbon (C) sequestration across the coastal landscape. The goals for this next
funding cycle are to: 1) Track long-term changes in climate and human actions in
the watershed and adjacent uplands, and evaluate the effects of these drivers on
domain boundary conditions (riverine input, runoff and infiltration from
adjacent uplands, sea surface height). This will be accomplished through long-
term measurements of climate, water chemistry, oceanic exchange, and human
activities on the landscape. 2) Describe temporal and spatial variability in
physical (e.g. stratification, estuarine salt intrusion, residence time),
chemical (e.g. salinity, nutrients, organic matter liability), geological (e.g.
accretion) and biological (e.g. organism abundance and productivity) properties
in the domain, and to evaluate how they are affected by variations in river
inflow and other boundary conditions. LTER researchers will accomplish this by
tracking both water and marsh conditions at our core monitoring sites, remote
sensing, and hydrodynamic modeling. 3) Characterize the responses of three
dominant habitats in the domain (Spartina marsh, fresh/brackish marsh, high
marsh) to pulses and presses in salinity and inundation. Investigators will
accomplish this through monitoring, large-scale field manipulations, and
modeling designed to evaluate system responses to changes in inundation in the
Spartina marsh, increased salinity in the fresh/brackish marsh, and changes in
hydrologic connectivity in the high marsh. LTER personnel are particularly
interested in determining thresholds that cause habitat transitions (state
changes), and in identifying signals of these changes. 4) Describe patterns of
habitat provisioning and C sequestration and export in the GCE domain, and to
evaluate how these might be affected by changes in salinity and inundation. This
will be accomplished by using modeling and field observations to evaluate
habitat provision and C flow under different scenarios of sea level rise,
freshwater inflow, and coastal development that describe both the pre-colonial
past conditions of the system and its likely future over the next 100 years.
These efforts will be synthesized into a synoptic understanding of both biotic
and ecosystem responses to variations in salinity and inundation driven by
climate change and human activities, which will be used to assess thresholds
between habitats and the potential for state changes in the
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
GCE outreach is to enhance scientific understanding of coastal ecosystems by
teachers and students, coastal managers, and the general public. The GCE
Schoolyard program, run in partnership with the UGA Marine Extension Service, is
built around long-term contact and mentoring of educators. The Schoolyard
program is developing activities and distribution plans for the forthcoming GCE
children's book, As the Tide Comes In. A partnership with the GCE Peach LSAMP
program will provide research opportunities for minority undergraduates, and a
cross-site interdisciplinary course will provide interdisciplinary training for
graduate students. GCE postdoctoral opportunities will advance the early careers
of several scientists. The LTER partners with the Georgia Coastal Research
Council to promote science-based management of coastal resources. GCE scientists
routinely participate in a variety of public outreach forums. GCE information is
also broadly accessed via our website, which uses a state-of-the art information
system to manage and display information about study sites, research, taxonomy,
data sets, publications, and project administration.