* 1237868
* SIRA Modules for Effectively Engaging Engineers in Ethical Reasoning About Emerging Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Carla Zoltowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This Ethics Education in Science and Engineering award addresses growing calls
for ethics as a core competency in engineering education. The fundamental
questions addressed by this research are:

(1) What is the impact of a scaffolded, integrated, and reflexive analysis
(SIRA) approach to ethical analysis of cases concerning emerging technology on
the development of students' ethical reasoning and satisfaction and engagement
with ethics education? (2)What characteristics of this SIRA approach most
contribute to change in moral reasoning ability and to student satisfaction and
engagement with engineering ethics education? This will be studied by examining
the relationship between graduate and senior-level undergraduate students'
participation in and experience of the online learning module and their
development of ethical reasoning and satisfaction and engagement with ethics
education. The result will be several SIRA modules that will have been piloted
in the online format with increasingly larger groups of engineering seniors and
graduate students. Their effect will be assessed through analysis of reasoning,
interactivity, discourse, and reflectivity.

Broader Impacts: The results of this project will be communicated in engineering
education and ethics communities by presentation at professional engineering
education, national engineering, and ethics conferences. This will include
publishing findings in peer reviewed publications with potential to reach
collegiate educators. In addition, the interactive case-based modules will be
made available through the NSF-sponsored website for online ethics, Ethics CORE
at http://nationalethicscenter.org, and the NAE Online Ethics Center at
http://www.onlineethics.org. SIRA learning modules with established assessment
instruments that have proven to be effective in developing ethical reasoning
abilities for engineers will be an attractive option for embedding into a wide
variety of engineering courses and curricula across disciplines and within a
variety of engineering programs at both undergraduate and graduate levels.