* 1237761
* PFI-BIC: Partnerships for Innovation In Printed Devices and Materials
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Harvey Palmer, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,389.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project from Rochester Institute of Technology
entitled, "Partnerships for Innovation in Printed Devices and Materials",
focuses on the use of direct-write material printing technologies and the
applications made possible by their unique capabilities. Traditional
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) processing techniques are very well suited
for a variety of applications. However, they are generally limited to a small
set of standard materials, they are used with planar substrates, and they
require clean-room environments. This project seeks to grow the universe of what
is possible through the use of direct-write print technologies and a
complementary photonic curing process. Direct-write deposition eliminates many
of the material restrictions associated with MEMS techniques. Nano inks
consisting of polymers, metals, ceramics, or composites can all be printed. The
photonic curing process then enables one to cure, or fuse, high temperature
printed nanomaterials without damaging surrounding low temperature materials
such as polymers. The marriage of multi-material, multi-layer nano ink printing
with low temperature curing opens the door to new applications using devices
consisting of combinations of material types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research will be economic benefits for the knowledge enhancement
partners as well as end users of their technologies. Nano ink formulations
optimized for Aerosol Jet printing and photonic curing will be developed.
Aerosol Jet process enhancements aimed at multi-material deposition will enhance
the ability to produce novel MEMS-scale devices. An archive of multidisciplinary
webinars as well as lab activities that are incorporated into undergraduate
courses and K-12 summer camps will be maintained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners
at the inception of the project are the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT)
and its small business partners, Optomec (Albuquerque, NM), NovaCentrix (Austin,
TX), and Intrinsiq Materials (Rochester, NY). These four entities form the
project's primary knowledge enhancement partners. Other large businesses
supporting the knowledge-enhancement partners include Hewlett Packard, Kodak,
Tyco Electronics, and Xerox.