* 1237798
* PFI-BIC:  Thermal Modification Research for Engineered Wood Materials
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Brian Brashaw, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 719,220.00

This Partnerships for Innovation project focuses on thermal-modification
technology to enhance the utility of engineered wood products in order to
improve dimensional stability and resistance to biodegradation and weathering.
Service life will also be extended, while at the same time reducing
environmental impacts. This project will advance thermal-modification technology
toward the development of advanced, high-performing engineered wood products.
Thermally-modified wood is currently used in a limited set of applications,
including solid wood flooring, external cladding, and decking products. This
project will advance the platform so that it can be the basis of new, high-
volume, and in-demand engineered wood products for markets that are poised to
grow quickly in the near future when the demand for engineered wood products
increases with the rebound in U.S. residential and commercial construction. The
completion and validation of research will also facilitate interactions and
information exchange between stakeholders within the forest products industry to
enhance opportunities for sustained forest products production and use; and it
will contribut to improvement in the knowledge, skills, and capacity of the
forest products industry workforce and management.

The broader impacts of this project will be job creation, national export
earnings, and better homes and buildings from engineered wood products. This
project will advance the scientific understanding of the thermal-modification
platform and propel it toward potential applications for new, ultra-high-
performing thermally-modified engineered wood products that excel in severe
environmental conditions. Ultimately, such products will bolster the critical
U.S. forest products industry by increasing U.S. economic competitiveness,
increasing the number of jobs (many of them in rural and lesser-populated areas
where the need is particularly great), increasing revenues for manufacturers,
and accelerating the export of new products.

Partners at the inception of the project are the Knowledge-Enhancement Partners:
University of Minnesota Duluth Natural Resources Research Institute (Duluth,
MN); Small businesses: Aspen Research Corporation (Maple Grove, MN); C.S.
Industries LLC (Suwanee, GA); Marshall W. Nelson & Associates, Inc. (Eagan, MN);
WI Business Innovation Corporation (Spooner, WI); and Large business: Louisiana-
Pacific Corporation (Nashville, TN); Other Partners: Public: Aitkin County
Economic Development and Forestry (Aitkin, MN); College of Menominee Nation
(Keshena, WI); MN Department of Natural Resources (St. Paul, MN); USDA Forest
Service Forest Products Laboratory (Madison, WI); WI Department of Agriculture;
Trade and Consumer Protection (Madison, WI); and WI Department of Natural
Resources (Madison, WI); Private Non-Profit: APA-The Engineered Wood Association
(Tacoma, WA); National Association of Home Builders Research Center (Upper
Marlboro, MD); Private For-Profit: Arclin Limited (Mississauga, Ontario, CA);
and Stora Enso Wood Products Oy Ltd.(Helsinki, Finland).