* 1237487
* Research Starter Grant: Understanding savanna vegetation dynamics in East Africa under different off-take methods and precipitation regimes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Bilal Butt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2015
* USD 49,974.00

Understanding savanna vegetation dynamics in East Africa under different off-
take methods and precipitation regimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Savanna vegetation
comprises a large percentage of the total land surface area in East Africa and
savannas are important for the sustainability of millions of livestock keeping
pastoralists and wildlife. The ecological processes underlying the dynamics of
savanna vegetation are the result of interactions between moisture, nutrients,
fire and herbivory. The objective of this research is to rely on experimental
field studies, which incorporate more real-world conditions, in order to better
understand vegetation dynamics of savannas, specifically, how the method of
vegetative off-take matters for regrowth. The investigation will utilize
experimental treatments through enclosures across a precipitation gradient
within the Serengeti-Mara Ecosystem of East Africa. This project will contribute
new knowledge on how savannas might be impacted in future generations and
addresses the implications of these changes for the sustainability of people,
landscapes and wildlife. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a direct
bearing on conservation and development policies, contributing to new knowledge
and the development of policies which more fully consider the real world
conditions affecting savannas. The project will enhance the participation of
underrepresented groups by training local Maasai peoples in ecological
monitoring and evaluation. The project will also benefit undergraduate students
from the University of Michigan and the University of Nairobi who will be part
of a yearly study abroad effort to understand the ecological dimensions of
conservation and development strategies in East African savannas.