* 1237524
* Project/Proposal Title:  EAGER:  Creating a New Paradigm for Computer Architecture and Implementation:  The 10 X 10 Idea
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Andrew Chien, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 08/31/2013
* USD 254,925.00

Microprocessors are facing an energy wall in scaling performance which requires
a major deviation from the scaling technologies of the past 25 years
(microarchitecture innovation and caches). In the Exascale computing time window
(2018+), even with parallelism, advanced circuit techniques such as near-
threshold voltage, and simplified microarchitectures, energy will be the key
constraint, implying that architectures (and software) which make most efficient
use of each transistor switching to complete application work are needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many researchers have published techniques which exploit
heterogeneity or customization which have the potential to reduce energy and
increase performance, often by 10x or more. However, few of these techniques
have made it into large-scale deployment because of the 90/10 optimization
model, which discriminates against innovations which benefit only a portion of
the average workload. To date there has been no systematic framework for
thinking about how to introduce such heterogeneity and no disciplined method for
analyzing and optimizing for workloads which shared like properties. We propose
exploratory development of 10x10, a transformative model which enables both
broad exploitation of customization for higher energy efficiency and
performance, by looking at 10 clusters of application computational structure,
enabling specialization for each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these needs, we
will develop a 10x10 model, a disciplined framework for analyzing workloads,
dividing them in separate clusters for energy and performance optimization ? and
disciplined introduction of heterogeneity/customization ? which yields
understandable and predictable benefits. We introduce the notion of 10x10
architecture, which exploits the 10x10 framework to drive the design of energy
efficient and higher performance microprocessors in a technology scaling regime
which yields plentiful transistors, but modest energy
scaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because these 10x10 architectures may make better
use of their transistors than regular replication of traditional cores for
parallelism, they can be expected to outperform them in low parallelism phases
(?sequential?). In addition, because of their greater energy efficiency, they
should also parallel outperform parallel systems based on the replication of
traditional cores in phases with high parallelism. In short, if 10x10 research
is successful, it will transform how we think about application workload
analysis, computer architecture and implementation, and software compiler tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these efforts will transform the thinking
of the computing research community and the industry. The potential is to break
out of a ?local minima? proscribed by the power wall and the end of Moore?s Law
to enable scientific breakthroughs facilitated by exascale simulation of
physical and mathematical processes. This work will tie into the education and
experience of new computer scientists, dealing as it does with a novel and
potentially transformative architecture idea. Improvements in energy efficiency
on heterogeneous systems will be disseminated to new NSF systems such as the
Track 2D experimental system at Oak Ridge.