* 1237022
* SHB: Type II (INT): Collaborative Research: Algorithmic Approaches to Personalized Health Care
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* William Adams, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,100,000.00

The US health care system spends major resources on the treatment of acute
conditions in a hospital setting rather than focusing on prevention and keeping
patients out of the hospital. While there is no broad agreement on the potential
solutions, structural reform is on the horizon. The meaningful use of Electronic
Health Records (EHRs) is seen as a key to improving efficiency. Technology
solutions including miniaturized implantable medical devices, networked home
monitoring devices, and the ubiquitous use of smart phones are starting to
enable continuous real-time monitoring of patients as they go about their daily
lives. Rich data from these devices form an electronic Personal Health Record
(PHR) that captures patient health in a much finer time-scale than the EHR. The
health care system, however, is not well equipped to benefit from the impending
deluge of personalized health-related data in order to improve health outcomes
and reduce costs. This proposal puts forth a comprehensive and systematic
approach to intelligently process such data aiming at preventing
hospitalization, empowering patients to actively participate in managing their
health, assessing quality of care, and facilitating cost-effective epidemiology
in the emerging data-rich environment. In the proposed framework, early risk
assessment starts with algorithms for mining EHR and PHR data to classify
patients in terms of the risk they have for developing an acute condition that
would require hospitalization and/or incur large costs. Risk stratification
produced by our approach triggers a set of actions, including tests, additional
and more intensive monitoring, and physician involvement. As part of this
dynamic health management process, patients can have access to tools that enable
their active participation in the daily management of chronic conditions, such
as diabetes. Our plans include the development of algorithms that leverage
experts? opinions to assess quality of care and the development of a distributed
epidemiology approach suitable for the emerging landscape where lots of data
about each patient are distributed among many different locations.

The proposed work has the potential to achieve revolutionary improvements in the
quality of health care. Risk assessment combined with intelligent management of
chronic conditions can prevent acute health episodes and dramatically improve
health outcomes. Having rigorous and scalable ways of assessing the quality of
care has the potential to reduce medical errors and improve coordination among
health care providers. On the educational front, plans include new courses,
training a diverse set of graduate students, involving undergraduate students,
actively collaborating with medical doctors, and reaching out to high school
students through existing programs embraced by the PIs. Dissemination plans
include capitalizing on the BU Sensor Network Consortium and organizing a major
medical informatics workshop.