* 1237498
* RCN: Social Observatories Coordinating Network (SOCN)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Emilio Moran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2017
* USD 299,999.00

This award supports the operations of the Social Observatories Coordinating
Network (SOCN), a research coordination network that will work with a broad
cross-section of scholars in the social, behavioral, and economic (SBE)
scientific communities in the development and planning of a set of observatories
that will transform SBE science. The major objectives of the network are to
continue exploration of ideas regarding the potential form and functioning of a
network of social observatories and to actively engage individuals and groups
across the SBE research community in this process. SOCN will work with
disciplinary and interdisciplinary groups to ensure that they contribute to the
design of these proposed observatories and that the scientific questions the
observatories might pursue will have value for basic research and for a broad
range of practical uses. SOCN will widely dissemination reports and other
findings, and it will facilitate interactions among scholars, particularly at
national professional meetings and other scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network will facilitate the consideration
and development of what is expected to be a transformative set of observatories
that would provide a new platform for data collection, data archiving, and data
distribution; advanced cyberinfrastructure for a truly interdisciplinary SBE
scientific enterprise; new approaches to training of students; and a focal point
for synthesis and faculty collaboration around questions of national importance.
A coordinated suite of social observatories is expected to add new capabilities
for SBE sciences by moving to fine-grained and place-based studies that address
local, regional, and national concerns. The observatories will advance
understanding of individual decision making via experiments, ethnography,
spatially explicit data, administrative, and social media data that, when
combined over all sites, will be nationally representative. Through its efforts
to facilitate consideration of social observatories, SOCN will advance the
discussion of critical new ideas and advance interdisciplinary communication and
collaboration across the SBE sciences.