* 1237410
* University of the Virgin Islands:  Living on Earth III: Social-Ecological Systems Workshop 2012, October 24-28, 2012
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* LaVerne Ragster, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2013
* USD 172,275.00

The Living on Earth III (LOE III) workshop, October 24-28, 2012, University of
the Virgin Islands,addresses the need for effective integration of processes
linking scientific knowledge and analytical approaches in social-ecological
systems research. This workshop continues the important work of the two previous
workshops (LOE I and II) organized and hosted by Alaska EPSCoR, between
2009-2011, including among others, building science and research capacity in
sustainability science and coupled human-natural/socio-ecological systems (SES)
science across EPSCoR jurisdictions and facilitating the formalization and
functionality of a LOE-SES scientific network promotes cutting-edge and
transformative science ideas. LOE III focuses on conceptualizing SES science in
the context of small, yet critical ecosystems with challenging human dimensions.
Specifically,the workshop emphasizes three focal themes, namely, promoting
science to inform our knowledge and understanding of critical coupled human-
natural system transformations; the role of social emergence in addressing
vulnerability while promoting ecosystem stewardship across multiple social-
ecological transformations, and; deepening scientific integration at nested
multiple scales promoting sustainable and resilient outcomes. In addition to
these three core themes, the LOE III workshop provides participants and
participant EPSCoR jurisdictions the skills and capability to build and develop
social-ecological system's activities at their home institutions, by offering a
"Bringing it Home" activity development session. In this session the workshop
participants create a meaningful social-ecological systems exercise for their
local community, university, and/or institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation
of the workshop will be conducted in multiple levels: continuously throughout
the workshop by incorporating participant evaluations following the scientific
discourse and interactive dialogue; online through a survey tool for each
session and for the overall experience of the workshop, and post-workshop by
EPSCoR jurisdictions where each team will be tasked to report on specific
outcomes promoted or planned after the LOE III
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific outcomes from the workshop are to:
(a)formalize and structure a new LOE-SES EPSCoR scientific network building upon
previous informal network approaches from LOE I and II; (b) generate thematic
sub-network groups with specific aims and goals (such as NSF proposal
submissions incorporating cross-EPSCoR collaborations, special-issue or book
proposal submissions, sections or panel proposals for conferences and scientific
meetings, etc., and; (c) develop a LOE-SES network toolkit for building within-
EPSCoR jurisdictional capacity especially for integrating biophysical with
social/behavioral scientists for SES science.