* 1238030
* MCA-PGR:   Genetic and Genomic Approaches to Understand and Improve Maize Responses to Ozone
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Lauren McIntyre, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2019
* USD 5,733,824.00

PI: Elizabeth Ainsworth (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign/USDA-ARS)

CoPIs: Andrew Leakey and Patrick Brown (University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign) and Lauren McIntyre (University of Florida)

Key Collaborator: Thomas Brutnell (Donald Danforth Plant Science Center)

Tropospheric ozone is the most damaging air pollutant to crops. Today, oxidative
stress arising from ozone exposure is reducing potential maize yields by up to
10%, which in 2011 would have been valued at $7646 million. This project couples
the unique capabilities of Free Air Concentration Enrichment (FACE) technology,
which provides controlled elevation of ozone in open-air at field scale, with
the power of the vast genetic resources in maize and transcriptome profiling. It
will provide a foundation for crop improvement by quantifying genetic variation
in response to elevated ozone among 200 inbred and 100 hybrid maize lines in the
field. The project will use high-throughput phenotyping of ozone impacts on
maize growth, senescence, leaf metabolism and reproductive processes to identify
traits that correlate with yield loss. It will identify the genes and gene
networks underpinning the ozone response in the most extreme tolerant and
susceptible lines, and their hybrids, by integrating transcriptome analysis and
detailed physiological analysis in inbred and hybrid maize. The project will
develop or select existing biparental populations derived from tolerant and
sensitive parents to identify QTL and eQTL for ozone tolerance. Finally, the
project will assess crosstalk between ozone and biotic stress response gene
networks in maize.

This work will address key mechanistic hypotheses about how oxidative stress
leads to transcriptional reprogramming of antioxidant and carbon metabolism, as
well as hormone, senescence and defense pathways. This multifaceted approach is
essential because multiple physiological drivers of yield are sensitive to
oxidative stress from ozone exposure. Consequently, oxidative stress tolerance
is undoubtedly a complex, polygenic trait. The broad application of quantitative
genetic tools coupled to gene expression profiling and biochemical and
physiological analyses of diverse germplasm makes the challenge of discovering
the foundation for ozone tolerance tractable for the first time. With regard to
outreach and training, this Mid-Career Investigator Award in Plant Genome
Research (MCA-PGR) will help re-tool two mid-career plant physiologists who
study plant physiological and agronomic responses to environmental change with
training in genomics and quantitative genetics. This new expertise will allow
them and their post-docs and graduate students to address major challenges in
agriculture and ecology by leveraging the full power of genomics through
bioinformatics, quantitative genetics and expression profiling using next-
generation sequencing technologies. In addition, the project will provide
outreach through an after-school program on plant biology at a local middle
school and a summer science camp for high school girls. Pollen images and pollen
viability data, sequencing and proteomics datasets developed in this project
will be publicly available at public repositories such as the iPlant
Collaborative, NCBI GEO (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), and EMBL-EBI PRIDE
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/). Germplasm developed in this project will be
available through the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center
(http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu/).