* 1238619
* Enhancing Mathematics Education with Educational Games: Can Erroneous Examples Help?
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Bruce McLaren, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 03/31/2015
* USD 526,518.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Carnegie Mellon University tests
an educational game aimed at addressing problems students face learning
mathematics. The PI plans to design, develop, iteratively test, and
scientifically evaluate a potentially transformative gaming technology. This
approach combines an educational game environment, erroneous mathematics
examples, state-of-the-art interaction design, and adaptive tutoring technology
to help engage and motivate students to learn mathematics. The project develops
a blueprint for educational games that can be used with middle school students
in both formal and informal settings. Two research questions guide the research:
Can erroneous examples increase learning and add motivation to an educational
game? Will making erroneous examples adaptive to individual students increase
learning and motivation beyond the non-adaptive version of the educational game?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project randomly assigns 6th, 7th, and 8th grade
students to an intervention that brings together design thinking and design
activity in co-designing sessions involving students and their teachers. This
approach allows students and teachers to create prototypes of specific
interfaces for mathematical games using results from the co-designing sessions.
The prototypes involves developing personas, scenarios, wire-framing, rapid
prototyping, and speed dating. It also includes rapid concept evaluation
sessions created iteratively with students and their teachers to inform the
final game design. An online software instrument logs student data from pre-
questionnaire, pretest, game playing, posttest, delayed post-test, and post-
questionnaire. The software also logs correct and incorrect attempts at solving
problems, evaluations of these attempts by the tutor, the number of hints
requested, and the amount of time spent on task. These data provide immediate
feedback to teachers and researchers about student understanding of specific
concepts in mathematics. The project assembles a multi-disciplinary team of
experts from learning domains using erroneous examples, educational technology,
intelligent tutoring systems, human-computer interaction and interaction design,
prolific experimental educational psychologist, and a cognitive scientist with a
long history and knowledge of mathematics education. The expectation is that
these partners will increase the effectiveness of the design outcome as proven
in other co-design studies.