* 1238984
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Architectural and Algorithmic Solutions for Large Scale PEV Integration into Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Ufuk Topcu, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This project designs algorithms for the integration of plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles (PEVs) into the power grid. Specifically, the project will formulate
and solve optimization problems critical to various entities in the PEV
ecosystem -- PEV owners, commercial charging station owners, aggregators, and
distribution companies -- at the distribution / retail level. Charging at both
commercial charging stations and at residences will be considered, for both the
case when PEVs only function as loads, and the case when they can also function
as sources, equipped with vehicle-to-home (V2H) or vehicle-to-grid (V2G) energy
reinjection capability. The focus of the project is on distributed decision
making by various individual players to achieve analytical system-level
performance guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrification of the
transportation market offers revenue growth for utility companies and automobile
manufacturers, lower operational costs for consumers, and benefits to the
environment. By addressing problems that will arise as PEVs impose extra load on
the grid, and by solving challenges that currently impede the use of PEVs as
distributed storage resources, this research will directly impact the society.
The design principles gained will also be applicable to other cyber-physical
infrastructural systems. A close collaboration with industrial partners will
ground the research in real problems and ensure quick dissemination of results
to the marketplace. A strong educational component will integrate the proposed
research into the classroom to allow better training of both undergraduate and
graduate students. The details of the project will be provided at
http://ee.nd.edu/faculty/vgupta/research/funding/cps_pev.html