* 1238292
* NSF/FDA SIR: Reporter compounds for quantitative imaging of biomolecular interactions using coherent x-ray scattering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Maricel Kann, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 128,106.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1238292&lt;br/&gt;Kann, Maricel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
propose to demonstrate proof-of-concept feasibility for a biomolecular
interaction characterization technology that utilizes Biomolecular Interactions
using Coherent X-ray Scattering (BICXS). The BICXS technology is based on small-
angle coherent x-ray scattering (SAXS) signatures of reporter agents to
determine the occurrence of interactions between two targeted proteins or small
molecules. A strong multidisciplinary team has been assembled and includes
expertise in bioinformatics, cellular biology, Gold NanoParticles, physics, and
computational studies. The team includes three faculty members from University
of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC)as well as team members from the Division of
Imaging and Applied Mathematics (DIAM), OSEL/CDRH/FDA. The team members are
experts in their fields and uniquely qualified. Three graduate students will
participate and perform research at the FDA site for one year. The proposed
imaging technology may provide improved spatial resolution with high specificity
that could enable deep tissue characterization of biomolecular interaction
processes providing unique opportunities to evaluate the differences between
normal vs. abnormal cells at the molecular level for various disease states.