* 1238441
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Ultrasensitive Plasmonic Nanoprobes for Monitoring of Intracellular Labile Iron Pools
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Fei Yan, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This study will develop a minimally invasive new sensing approach that addresses
outstanding challenges of understanding the chemical nature, distribution and
cooperativeness of the intracellular labile iron pool (LIP), at the single-cell
level. In recent years, attempts have been made to measure the LIP in cells;
however, the precise determination of the LIP remains elusive. The development
of ultrasensitive and potentially organelle-specific plasmonic nanoprobes for
LIP monitoring will improve the understanding of intracellular iron dynamics and
distribution, and will thus have an impact on the optimization of existing
chelation and supplementation therapies for iron disorders. The study will also
provide research training opportunities for African American undergraduate and
graduate students at the forefront of nanotechnology research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a unique approach using plasmonic
nanostructure-based surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) for selective
sensing of the LIP, with nanomolar sensitivity. The work involves biotemplate-
assisted nanopatterning of two-dimensional superlattices constructed from silver
nanocrystals, and the physicochemical properties of these nanostructures will be
characterized using a variety of analytical tools such as TEM, SEM, UV-Vis
spectrometry, FT-IR, and Raman spectroscopy. The sensitivity and selectivity for
the plasmonic detection of the LIP will be optimized and evaluated using lysates
from millions of cells, and the eventual goal of the project is to integrate the
optimal plasmonic nanostructures onto the facet of an optical fiber, so it can
be inserted to individual cellular compartments, and used as an ultrasensitive
nanoprobe for real-time monitoring of the LIP in vitro. It is expected that
considerable progress in the elucidation of intracellular iron trafficking and
dynamics will be achieved by the development of ultrasensitive LIP-specific
plasmonic nanoprobes.