* 1238187
* A Field-based High Throughput Phenotyping Platform for Plant Genetics
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Kevin Price, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lyons
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,639,615.00

PI: Jesse Poland (Kansas State University/USDA-ARS)

Co-PIs: Kevin Price (Kansas State University)

Collaborators: Michael Gore, Andrew French, Kelly Thorp, Jeff White (USDA-ARS);
Pedro Andrade-Sanchez (University of Arizona); Allan Fritz, Randy Price, William
Schapaugh, Stephen Welch, Naiqian Zhang (Kansas State University)

The essence of plant biology is to understand the link between genetic variation
and observed phenotypes. While genotyping can now be accomplished with low-cost,
next-generation sequencing technologies, phenotyping is labor intensive and has
become the limiting factor in plant biology studies and crop improvement
programs. This project will develop transformational capacity for field-based
high throughput phenotyping (HTP) by creating platforms for rapid assessment of
multiple quantitative plant traits. Proximal sensing tools and GPS referencing
will be integrated to develop mobile platforms that are low-cost, flexible,
robust, and amenable for a range of species. A central premise of this work is
that integrating streams of data from multiple types of sensors will increase
both the accuracy and number of traits that can be quantified for field grown
plants. Thus, a second objective is to develop novel algorithms for analyzing
HTP data to quantitatively estimate phenotypes expressed in field environments.
The newly developed sensor systems, indexes, and algorithms will be applied in
test cases that examine multiple quantitative traits in wheat, soybean and
cotton.

The development of HTP platforms will complement the explosion of genomic
information currently being collected and will enable field level experimental
biology on a scale that has not been previously possible. Because the focus of
this project is on field-based assessment of economically important crop species
that represent different plant types and production systems, the platform and
analytic methods developed in this project are expected to have broad
application to a range of target environments and species and allow scalability
for larger studies. The tools and methods developed will be transferred to the
scientific community through hands-on training workshops. Training materials,
equipment designs and software will be publicly available through a project
website. This project will provide training for graduate and postgraduate
scholars while hosting multiple internships for undergraduate engineering and
plant science students in the field of HTP.