* 1238313
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for AREA Wheat Genetics: Wheat Genetics Resource Center: a public-private consortium to mobilize genetic diversity and meet food security needs
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Bikram Gill, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,940.00

Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Area Wheat Genetics: Wheat Genetics Resource Center

1238313 Kansas State University; Bikram Gill

Kansas State University (KSU), as the lead institution, will partner with
Oklahoma State University to establish an I/UCRC for Wheat Genetics that will
feature integrated application of genomics, bioinformatics, high- throughput
genotyping, mapping, phenotyping, and cytogenetics to accelerate alien gene
introgressions for crop improvement. The proposed I/UCRC will build upon the
already existing Wheat Genetics Resource Center (WGRC) at Kansas State
University.

Managing bread wheat genetic diversity within domesticated varieties and wild
wheat species, as well as workforce training, are critical success factors for
the wheat research enterprise. Both will be major functions of the proposed
I/UCRC. Adding value to wheat genetic resources will also be a major function of
the proposed center. Another focus of the center will be mobilization of genetic
diversity to improve crop performance. Finally, a key focus of the center will
be the development of new methods for the rapid deployment of useful genetic
diversity. Technical innovations will allow rapid transfer of useful traits to
elite germplasm through genotyping by sequencing, marker assisted breeding and
doubled haploid and other innovations by center scientists.

The primary research impact of the proposed activity could be, potentially, the
characterization (genotypic and phenotypic) of thousands of wild wheat relatives
and alien introgression lines, a resource of immense value to the broader wheat
improvement community (public and private). The value of this work will be even
greater with the proposed I/UCRC investing effort in reducing the segments of
alien introgressions carrying genes of interest to wheat improvement programs.
WGRC's impressive track record of training and mentorship will be expanded upon
in the new I/UCRC by providing additional training and educational activities
including industry mentorship and internships, undergraduate research and
potential dual degree programs in the plant sciences and various K-State
departments.