* 1238795
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Development and Enhancement of the Physics Laboratories at Winston-Salem State University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Jafar Gharavi-Naeini, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,936.00

The Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Development and Enhancement of the
Physics Laboratories at Winston-Salem State University - seeks to develop and
enhance the Introductory Physics, Biophysics, Renewable Energy, Optics, Modern
Physics, and Computational Physics laboratories, which ultimately will impact
about 300 students majoring or minoring in science,technology,engineering and
mathematics (STEM) programs, and in particular those enrolled in the Physics
minor program. The project integrates education and research because the
instrumentations and computational labs will be also used to conduct
interdisciplinary research in nonlinear optics, computational physics, and solar
energy. The research efforts involve undergraduate students in a meaningful way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance the infrastructure for physics
education and research at Winston Salem State University and prepare
undergraduate students for graduate studies or the STEM workforce. The proposed
activities are centered in a department that currently enrolls six physics
minors, all of them African American. The plan is that the physics minor will
lead to a Physics major program within five years. This is significant at a time
when Historically Black Colleges and Universities are losing their physics
programs. The results of the project activities will be disseminated to the
broader Physics community through presentations at meetings of professional
Physics educators.