* 1238246
* A Miniaturized Automated Sensor for Phenotyping Bud Break in Natural Plant Populations
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Anton Kruger, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 02/28/2017
* USD 431,306.00

PI: Heather E. Lintz (Oregon State University)

Co-PI: Anton Kruger (University of Iowa)

One major scientific challenge is to understand the genomic basis of plant
adaptation in the context of climate change. Climate change threatens the
sustainability of forestry and agriculture, which support human life globally.
An understanding of the genomic basis of adaptation would allow better modeling
and prediction of the fate of plant species and improve forest and crop
management in a rapidly changing environment. While the capability to collect
genomic data is advancing at a rapid pace, high-throughput phenotyping in
natural populations remains a challenge even in model plant species. Given that
natural selection operates in environments more complex than growth chambers,
phenotypes in natural populations are needed to fully understand and verify
adaptive genomic signatures. Phenotype-genotype studies conducted in growth
chambers and common gardens assume that loci and genetic pathways identified as
'adaptive' are actually adaptive in nature. This assumption may not hold due to
the genomic complexity and environmental dependency and complexity behind many
quantitative traits. One objective of this project is to provide a new tool for
the standardized measurement of an adaptive biological phenotype in natural
plant populations. This project will enhance and test a small automated sensor
of plant bud break. The sensor will be designed to precisely detect vegetative
and reproductive bud break at the scale of a plant bud while measuring key
environmental drivers such as temperature. Another objective is to test a
predictive model of vegetative bud break for three tree species in the field
using data collected with the sensor.

The automated bud break sensor will facilitate high-throughput phenotyping of
natural populations and will be useful in other species and other traits such as
flowering. This project will provide an interdisciplinary research experience
for undergraduate and graduate students in electrical engineering and ecological
genomics. Data collected from the sensors will be made public through databases
such as Phytozome, PopGenIE, and the National Phenology Network. Training in the
use of the sensor will be provided to the research community through workshops
at major research conferences. The sensors produced by this project will become
part of an upper division class at Oregon State University as part of an
integrated science curriculum.