* 1238802
* Research Initiation Award Grant: A Monte Carlo and SQUID Magnetometer Study of Molecular Spintronics Devices
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Pawan Tyagi, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,992.00

Molecular spin devices (MSDs) are promising candidates for revolutionizing
computer logic and memory. MSDs aim to harness the controllable transport and
magnetic properties of molecular device elements which can be synthetically mass
produced. However, there have been insignificant efforts to predict or measure
the effect of molecular coupling on the performance of a MSD.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to produce insights about the role of molecular
device elements on the magnetic properties of the MSDs, the Research Initiation
Award project entitled - A Monte Carlo and SQUID Magnetometer Study of Molecular
Spintronics Devices - has two goals: a) To perform Monte Carlo Simulations (MCS)
to theoretically investigate the interplay between the magnetic molecules and
ferromagnetic electrodes responsible for bringing about the desired
characteristics within MSDs. The project will study the effects of Heisenberg
exchange coupling between magnetic molecules and ferromagnetic electrodes of a
MSD; study the effect of dimensionality, geometry on the molecule induced
magnetic coupling, and improvise algorithms for Monte Carlo Simulations near
phase change points in a MSD. b) To experimentally study the effect of molecular
device elements on the magnetic properties of the MSDs. The research will focus
on magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) based MSDs, by conducting a SQUID magnetometer
based magnetization study before and after transforming a variety of MTJ test
beds into MSDs by utilizing molecular device elements.