* 1238318
* I/UCRC:   On Compact, High-Performance Cooling Technologies Research
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Suresh Garimella, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 220,610.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION

IIP 1238318 Purdue University Garimella

This proposal seeks funding for a third five-year term (Phase III) of the NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center at Purdue University, the
Cooling Technologies Research Center, which started operations in 2002. The
Center addresses research and development needs of industries in the area of
high-performance heat removal from compact spaces.

The uniqueness of the proposed Center draws from its strong focus on heat
transfer technologies and related thermal management issues. The research
approach relies heavily on experimental investigations, backed by theoretical
and numerical analysis. The Center draws participants from the Schools of
Mechanical Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Materials Science
and Engineering, Physics and Chemistry at Purdue University, who contribute
complimentary competencies in heat transfer, micrrofluidics, microfabrication,
nanotechnology, refrigeration, computational techniques, mechantronics,
controls, acoustics, and diagnostics and measurements. The Center continues to
pursue a research agenda that is of immediate relevance to its industry members,
while focusing on the fundamental challenges in each technology. The Center has
come to be recognized globally for its leadership in this area, and was awarded
the 2011 Alexander Schwarzkopf Award for Technological Innovation.

Based on the outcomes the center has realized during its first 10 years of
operation, Phase III renewal of the CTRC will continue to produce research
outcomes that support the needs of industry sectors designing and using high
performance electronics. The Center's strong multi-disciplinary culture promotes
broad impacts on education and diversity. Exposure to the Center ecosystem
ensures that tomorrows research leaders understand the team-based, problem
solving skills needed for successful cross-disciplinary research. The Center is
committed to continually and proactively recruiting, nurturing and mentoring
women and under-represented groups, at the graduate and undergraduate levels,
during their pursuit of academic excellence. The Center benefits from, and adds
to, the multiple, strong diversity and outreach programs housed at Purdue
University.