* 1238757
* Broadening Participation Research Grant: Reducing Stereotype Threat by enhancing emotional regulation: A role for Mindful Awareness Practice for STEM majors
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* John Fife, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 417,097.00

The Virginia State University HBCU-UP Broadening Participation Research in STEM
education project is entitled Reducing Stereotype Threat by Enhancing Emotional
Regulation: A Role for Mindful Awareness Practice for STEM Majors. The proposed
study is designed to test the efficacy of a meditative intervention, a meta-
cognitive intervention, and a media based intervention on test anxiety based on
prior research showing a positive correlation with academic improvement. The
goal is to study mechanisms to reduce stereotype threat in mathematics courses
using meditative or meta-cognitive practices. The study aims to: 1) Implement
and assess the degree to which a meditative intervention (Autogenic Training)
attenuates math anxiety and other STEM related test anxiety by reducing
stereotype threat; &lt;br/&gt;2) Implement and assess the degree to which a
meta-cognitive task (self-reflective journaling) attenuates math anxiety and
other STEM related test anxiety by reducing stereotype threat; 3) Implement and
assess the degree to which a media based intervention decreases math anxiety and
other STEM related test anxiety by increasing test preparedness; and 4) Add to a
theoretical model by understanding the mediating and moderating factors of each
intervention on the ethnic identity, outcome expectation and academic self-
efficacy of STEM students and how these relate math anxiety and other STEM-
related test anxiety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching idea is innovative.
The study includes meta-cognition, journal writing, digital media and reflection
as elements in the research construct. Because these are familiar in the science
education literature, it makes the work easily transferrable and informative to
other scholars. There is a solid research base that supports the work, a focus
on more than one STEM discipline, a relation to contemporary technology in the
implementation and design of the research, and an understanding of the nature
and culture of science. The results can potentially benefit all institutions in
their effort to increase student retention in STEM discipliens through faculty
developmetn and more effective student support systems.