* 1238139
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Novel High Voltage Transmission Materials and Structures
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Maciej Kumosa, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,499.00

Program Director' Recommendation Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Novel High Voltage
Transmission Materials

1238139 University of Denver; Maciej Kumosa 1238275 Michigan Technological
University; Gregory Odegard 1238331 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
Iwona Jasiuk

The proposed Center, comprised of the University of Denver (UD as the lead
institution), Michigan Technological University (MTU) and the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), will focus on improving the design of the
next generation High Voltage transmission (HV/T) conductors.

The current designs of high voltage conductors based on steel (for strength) and
aluminum (for conduction) strands used in regional grids exhibit several
limitations. Primarily, they are limited by their propensity to sag at elevated
temperatures. Through extensive collaborations amongst the sites of the proposed
Center and with several leading US industries and national laboratories,
entirely new classes of HV/T materials systems and structures will be designed
for a variety of high energy applications. The interdisciplinary fundamental and
applied research performed in the Center will make a major impact on the
understanding of the combined effects of mechanical, electrical and
environmental high energy fields on traditional metallic materials, novel
polymer, metallic and ceramic matrix composites, highly advanced next generation
nanocomposites, coatings, and others. The PIs intend to explore new
manufacturing technologies in order to improve the aging resistance of
traditional low cost materials for HV/T long term applications. Finally,new
monitoring, self-repair and self-healing techniques for HV/T structures will be
designed as a result of the proposed research activities of the Center.

The proposed research will increase the fundamental knowledge of the effects of
HV/T fields on the materials leading to major advances in (1) HV transmission
engineering, (2) high energy generation and distribution systems, and (3) many
other fields of engineering requiring the application of HV/T material systems.
It will also create a diverse and interdisciplinary educational, research and
business environment for (1) numerous undergraduate and graduate students,
including those from underrepresented groups, funded by the research projects of
the Center, (2) faculty members from a variety of disciplines, including junior
faculty starting their academic careers, (3) utility, aerospace and national lab
engineers and designers developing various types of HV/T materials and
structures, (4) utility managers supervising HV transmission lines across the
country, and many others. The Center will enhance the reputation of the American
HV/T manufacturing around the world and, in particular, will improve the level
of confidence among the potential users of novel HV/T structures in this country
and around the world.