* 1238552
* Identifying and Measuring the Implementation and Impact of STEM School Models
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Elizabeth Noble, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,858,366.00

The goal of this Transforming STEM Learning project is to comprehensively
describe models of 20 inclusive STEM high schools in five states (California,
New Mexico, New York, Ohio, and Texas), measure the factors that affect their
implementation; and examine the relationships between these, the model
components, and a range of student outcomes. The project is grounded in
theoretical frameworks and research related to learning conditions and fidelity
of implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study employs a longitudinal, mixed-
methods research design over four years. Research questions are: (1) What are
the intended components of each inclusive STEM school model?; (2) What is the
status of the intended components of each STEM school model?; (3) What are the
contexts and conditions that contribute to and inhibit the implementation of
components that comprise the STEM schools' models?; and (4) What components are
most closely related to desired student outcomes in STEM schools? Data gathering
strategies include: (a) analyses of school components (e.g., structures,
interactions, practices); (b) measures of the actual implementation of
components through teacher, school principals, and student questionnaires,
observation protocols, teacher focus groups, and interviews; (c) identification
of contextual conditions that contribute to or inhibit implementation using a
framework inclusive of characteristics of the innovation, individual users,
leadership, organization, and school environment using questionnaires and
interviews; and (d) measuring student outcomes using four cohorts of 9-12
students, including standardized test assessment systems, grades, student
questionnaires (e.g., students' perceptions of schools and teachers, self-
efficacy), and postsecondary questionnaires. Quantitative data analysis
strategies include: (a) assessment of validity and reliability of items
measuring the implementation status of participating schools; (b) exploratory
factor analysis to examine underlying dimensions of implementation and learning
conditions; and (c) development of school profiles, and 2- and 3-level
Hierarchical Linear Modeling to analyze relationships between implementation and
type of school model. Qualitative data analysis strategies include:(a)
descriptions of intra- and inter-school implementation and factor themes, (b)
coding, and (c) narrative analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes are:
(a) research-informed chracterizations of the range of inclusive STEM high
school models emerging across the country; (b) identification of components of
STEM high school models important for accomplishing a range of desired student
achievement; (c) descriptions of contexts and conditions that promote or inhibit
the implementation of innovative STEM teaching and learning; (d) instruments for
measuring enactment of model components and the learning environments that
affect them; and (e) methodological approaches for examining relationships
between model components and student achievement.