* 1238437
* EAGER: Forced Assembly of Nanocomposite Structures using Polymer Crystallization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Meisha Shofner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 124,895.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides funding
to evaluate the feasibility of assembling nanoparticles in semi-crystalline
polymer matrices using polymer crystallization and crystal morphology as the
driving force and template for assembly, respectively. Specifically, the
experimental activities will focus on three key issues related to this assembly
process using a series of gold nanoparticle/polyethylene oxide nanocomposites.
First, structural and morphological characterization activities will be used to
identify where nanoparticles locate in the polymer crystal structure. The
specific locations preferred by the nanoparticles in this hierarchical structure
will have impacts on the material's potential applications. Second, the
materials used in the model nanocomposite system will allow the effects of
component interactions on the assembly process to be robustly examined which
will govern material design guidelines. And third, calorimetric studies using a
wide range of rates will be used to determine if the structures resulting from
this assembly method are kinetically-trapped or are in a quasi-equilibrium
state. Understanding the structure's thermodynamic nature will have implications
on determining processing strategies that favor nanoparticle assembly.

If successful, the envisioned morphologies resulting from this research have
functional and structural applications with direct application to bulk
heterojunction organic photovoltaics (OPVs) since the performance of OPV devices
is often tied to the degree of crystallinity and length scale of phase
segregation achieved. Ultimately, advances in the areas of OPV efficiency and
stability will lead to wide-spread replacement of the more expensive silicon-
based photovoltaic devices, making solar energy a more affordable energy source
and reducing dependence on fossil fuels. Beyond OPVs, hierarchical nanocomposite
morphologies have applications as biomedical implants with improved mechanical
stability during degradation as well as structural materials with cellular
morphologies. Finally, the research results will provide valuable, new insight
to understanding the fundamental crystallization behavior of semi-crystalline
nanocomposites which is clearly needed to disruptively advance this area.