* 1238285
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Geothermal Energy Resources
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* William Glassley, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,311.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Geothermal Energy Resources

1238285 University of California-Davis; Peter Schiffman 1238347 University of
Nevada Reno; Wendy Calvin

The proposed Center for Geothermal Energy Resources aims to focus research
efforts on topics with a high potential for successfully addressing industry-
identified major challenges, as well as to provide educational opportunities for
students to develop interest and expertise in geothermal studies. The research
efforts will be anchored by the University of California-Davis (UCD) as the lead
institution, partnered with the University of Nevada Reno (UNR).

Despite its potential, the development of geothermal energy has been slow
relative to other renewable energy technologies. The critical challenge in
expanding geothermal energy applications has been identified as the inability to
target the sub-surface resource(s). Over the past decade, however, high
performance computing, three-dimensional visualization, and geo-physical and
geo-chemical analyses have been identified as possible solutions to address this
challenge. These and other techniques are rapidly maturing and could provide
powerful tools in advancing research in the broad topics of (1) geothermal
resource exploration, (2) the production and management of known geothermal
reservoirs, and (3) the frontiers of geothermal energy research. Faculty and
student researchers at UCD and UNR, in partnership with industry, have the
ability to advance the utilization of geothermal resources through this proposed
I/UCRC in geothermal energy resources.

An I/UCRC in geothermal energy resources would promote development of new
exploration and reservoir management techniques to increase the certainty in
drilling productive boreholes, thus reducing the financial risk of exploration.
An I/UCRC in geothermal energy resources would provide an energetic venue within
which interaction could be fostered amongst industry, academic researchers,
graduate students and undergraduate students. The goal of the proposed Center
would be to focus research efforts on topics with a high potential for
successfully addressing industry-identified major challenges, as well as to
provide educational opportunities for students to develop interest and expertise
in geothermal studies. The proposed Center would also hope to engage the
international geothermal community, e.g., through existing research
collaborations in Iceland and elsewhere.