* 1238859
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Smart Grid Simulator Development for Multidisciplinary Teaching and Research
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Warsame Ali, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The project at Prairie View A&M University is developing a smart grid simulator.
The project aims to achieve the following objectives: (a) revamp
multidisciplinary lectures and corresponding labs in the context of smart grids;
(b) improve student learning in power and energy areas; (c) promote
multidisciplinary research collaborations on smart grids; (d) develop faculty
expertise through research and teaching initiatives; and (e) disseminate results
and findings for the academic community and the general public. The project will
directly impact 390 undergraduate students, most of whom are from
underrepresented groups, in the departments of electrical and computer
engineering and engineering technology.

The smart grid simulator will integrate simulation software, power electronic
devices, motors, embedded microprocessors, and cybernetics to construct a
simulated environment with hardware-in-the-loop. A collaborative consortium
allows for the most qualified research expertise to tackle the grand challenges
in smart grid education and research. Centered on the power grid simulator,
segmented resources in several teaching laboratories are infused, and
traditional power engineering education is enriched with complementary courses
to strengthen student knowledge and skills in communication and information
technologies.