* 1238014
* Biology of Rare Alleles in Maize and Its Wild Relatives
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* John Doebley, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2019
* USD 13,289,140.00

PI: Edward Buckler (USDA-ARS/Cornell University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Peter Bradbury (USDA-ARS), John Doebley (University of Wisconsin), Sherry Flint-
Garcia (USDA-ARS/University of Missouri), Theresa Fulton, Sharon Mitchell and Qi
Sun (Cornell University), James Holland (USDA-ARS/North Carolina State
University), Jeffrey Ross-Ibarra (University of California-Davis) and Doreen
Ware (USDA-ARS/Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Personnel: Jeff Glaubitz (Cornell University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key
Collaborator: Jose de Jesus Sanchez Gonzalez (Universidad de Guadalajara,
Mexico) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic architecture is the constellation of gene
effects and interactions that underlie variation in a quantitative trait, and
can be thought of as the map that links phenotype and genotype. Understanding
variation in genetic architecture is critical to understanding evolution,
manipulating species for sustainable agriculture, and preserving variation as
species adapt. This project has been very effective over the last several years
at understanding the basic genetic architecture of traits, determining key
genes, and identifying common variants. While these common variants play a
central role in maize's adaptation to numerous large-scale environments, there
is also a nearly infinite number of rare alleles that may play a significant
role in phenomena such as inbreeding depression, genetic load, heterosis,
hitchhiking, local adaptation, parallel evolution, gene flow, and the genetic
architecture of quantitative traits such as yield. The ability to predict the
combined effects of thousands of rare alleles is one of the important missing
pieces in making the genotype-to-phenotype map. This project will establish the
importance of rare alleles to fitness related traits across a diverse range of
Zea germplasm. While the project will look at the full range of allelic
variation, there will be special emphasis on testing hypotheses regarding rare
alleles, as these comprise the most poorly understood yet potentially
transformative class of variation. Extensive genomic profiling of nearly 90,000
diverse genotypes will be combined with a range of field trials to determine the
phenotypic effects of individual polymorphisms. Using predictions generated from
comparative genomics, molecular biology, and population genetics, this research
will test hypotheses relating different classes of polymorphism to phenotypic
variation. Statistical and computational models will be developed that
incorporate the combined effects of rare alleles, and these models will be
empirically tested in hybrid maize trials. The range of life histories of maize
and its wild relatives, combined with the ability to phenotype at a massive
scale, make maize a premier model for the study of the importance of rare
alleles in the genotype-to-phenotype map.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maize is the
largest production crop in the world, and plays a central role in US agriculture
and food production. Maize also has the greatest molecular and phenotypic
diversity of any major crop species. This diversity enabled domestication and is
key for future maize improvement. Understanding the role of rare alleles in
maize genetic architecture will aid in the selection and development of future
breeding lines, especially in predicting hybrid performance. In addition, this
project will generate valuable germplasm and genomic annotation resources that
will be used by many other groups to dissect numerous other traits and
facilitate genomic breeding, allele mining, and genetic analysis. These
resources will be made available through a project website (www.panzea.org),
integration with community websites (MaizeGDB and Gramene), and stock centers
[Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center and the North Central Regional Plant
Introduction Station (NCRPIS)]. The outreach program, including the Maize:
Mysteries of an Ancient Grain museum exhibit and related online teacher
materials, Genotype-by-Sequencing (GBS) workshops, and the training of postdocs,
graduate students and undergraduates, has reached a large number of people
throughout the U.S. This successful program will be expanded to double the
number of exhibit venues, increase the number of workshops/short courses, and
supplement these with video courses.