* 1238336
* SHF: EAGER: Clustering Programming Artifacts to Enrich Code Foraging Environment
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Nan Niu, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2014
* USD 80,000.00

Software developers have difficulty, and therefore waste a significant amount of
time, navigating around the code base as they perform software maintenance
activities. Thus, a major challenge that confronts software engineering is to
understand how developers seek relevant code and further invent tools that
facilitate code navigation. Previous research has resulted in some ad hoc tools
without any theoretical basis, along with some descriptive theories derived by
observing developer behavior. These approaches have produced only modest
improvements. A more comprehensive and effective solution can only be reached
through a theoretical understanding of the code navigation task itself. This
research seeks a unified theory for code navigation based on mathematically
modeled foraging mechanisms that evolved to help our animal ancestors to find
food. These same mechanisms appear to work as users seek useful information in
the vastness of the Web. Developers, like organisms foraging for food, need to
evolve the strategies to maximize the gains of useful information to their
maintenance tasks per unit cost. The research will explore the usefulness of
this analogy and adopt theories, models and tools that could eventually help
lower the cost and effort of software development and maintenance.

This EAGER proposal focuses on an exploration of the extent to which the code
foraging environment can be automatically enriched by software clustering. The
hypothesis guiding this research is that the way programming artifacts are
grouped (clustered) can affect the profitability of the information foraging
environment, which in turn can shape the way developers navigate the code base.
In order to test the hypothesis, the PI will (i) develop an experimental
framework to assess topical locality in software, (ii) create a new set of
metrics to guide the evaluation of code rearrangement and foraging tools, and
(iii) compare well-established source code clustering algorithms to discover
effective enrichment mechanisms. The research will be evaluated through
experiments with large open-source projects that have recorded detailed
developer interaction logs.