* 1238650
* Broadening Participation Reseach Grant: The Impact of Engagement, Capacity and Continuity in Preparing Elementary Education Pre-Service Teachers for Science Teaching.
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Justina Osa, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 314,430.00

The Virginia State University HBCU-UP Broadening Participation Research in STEM
Education project is entitled The Impact of Engagement, Capacity and Continuity
in Preparing Elementary Education Pre-Service Teachers for Science Teaching. The
proposed effort is a partnership between the School of Engineering, Science and
Technology and the School of Education and is designed to use the Engagement,
Capacity and Continuity (ECC) theory to determine the impact of the current
elementary education program on preservice teachers' interest, motivation, and
confidence to teach science. The objectives are (1) to examine and enhance
innovative instructional practices for preservice elementary education students
in order to increase their scholarly interest, awareness, and motivation to
teach science; (2) to examine and enhance innovative instructional practices for
preservice elementary students in order to increase their capacity as scholars;
and (3) to examine the institution?s current systematic practices and underlying
support systems for elementary preservice education
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the ECC Trilogy for Student Success as the
conceptual framework, the study proposes to validate and expand the ECC model
for determining the essential program components to prepare highly qualified and
successful minority elementary preservice science teachers and to retain them in
the profession. The model has been validated with pre-college populations but
not with the targeted population for this study. The study builds on existing
knowledge about the difficulties beginning teachers encounter when faced with
the realities of teaching and how habits of mind can negatively impact K-6
science teaching and further acerbate the achievement gap. The aim is to produce
new knowledge to predict the success of preservice teachers for science
teaching. The study can potentially enhance the preparation of underrepresented
preservice teachers and build capacity in the teaching and learning of science.