* 1238835
* Variational Inequalities and their Applications in the Predictive Modeling of Heterogeneous Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/07/2012,06/30/2015
* Liping Liu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 06/30/2015
* USD 188,762.00

The research objective of this project is to create a fundamental understanding
and methods for predicting the properties of heterogeneous media including
precipitated solids, multiphase multifunctional composites and self-assembled
crystals, and to exploit such knowledge for new models for heterogeneous media
and optimal design of composite materials. Composites are broadly used in daily
life ranging from plastic bags and concrete (used as a construction material) to
the Boeing 787 Dreamliner whose fuselage is made of carbon composites. The
challenge facing researchers today consists of extending this success to
smart/multifunctional composites. These are composites that serve several
functions and can be excited by and respond to multiple external stimuli. The
properties of multifunctional composites are predominantly determined by the
microstructure of the constituent phases. The present research systematically
addresses how microstructures influence the properties of multifunctional
composites and what are the optimal microstructures for a desired property,
e.g., the magnetoelectric coupling coefficient. These predictive modeling and
optimal design problems are addressed by an inverse method: microstructures are
"a priori" designed to find the quantitative relation between microstructures
and material properties. Also, a numerical toolset will be developed to compute
optimal microstructures for various applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
bottleneck of many technologies, e.g., batteries and turbine engines, hinges on
the development of new multifunctional materials. The results of this research
can be used to develop new multifunctional composites and new manufacturing
processes for these technologies, which have the potential to mitigate some
aspects of the current energy crisis. Educationally, an interactive
visualization demonstrations project will be launched to promote students'
interest and responsibility to learn engineering.