* 1238140
* EngrTEAMS: Engineering to Transform the Education of Analysis, Measurement, and Science in a Team-Based Targeted Mathematics-Science Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Tamara Moore, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 12/31/2019
* USD 7,998,001.00

This project is increasing grade 4-8 student learning of science concepts, as
well as mathematical concepts related to data analysis and measurement, by using
an engineering design-based approach to teacher professional development and
curricular development. The partnership involves the University of Minnesota's
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education Center and the
Center for Compact and Efficient Fluid Power (CCEFP), the Saint Paul Public
Schools, the North Saint Paul-Maplewood-Oakdale School District, and the South
Washington County Schools. These three school districts are contiguous, and
represent schools that are inner city, urban, and suburban.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is helping 200 teachers develop engineering
design curricular units for each of the major science topic areas within the
Minnesota State Academic Science Standards for grades 4-8 with a focus on
vertical alignment and transition from upper elementary to middle-level,
impacting 15,000 students over the life of the grant. The partnership is using
summer professional development and curriculum writing workshops, paired with a
cognitive coaching model, to allow teachers to design engineering design-based
curricular units focused on science concepts, meaningful data analysis, and
measurement. These curricular units are going through an extensive design
research cycle to ensure a quality product and then will be submitted to
TeachEngineering (teachengineering.org), an online peer-reviewed digital
library, for use across the United States and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurable outcomes of the EngrTEAMS project are
to:&lt;br/&gt; - Increase student mastery of grade-level standards in science
and data analysis/measurement.&lt;br/&gt; - Increase student understanding of
engineering and engineering design. &lt;br/&gt; - Promote a coherent transition
between intermediate and middle school science learning through aligning the
curricula for developmentally appropriate learning of concepts and aligning the
pedagogies for research-based learning opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt; -
Develop a more effective and sustainable coaching model to support teachers in
science classrooms.&lt;br/&gt; - Promote curricular design that allows content
to be taught more meaningfully in the same or less time as more standard ways of
approaching the teaching of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
advancing understanding about engineering design-based pedagogies and cognitive
coaching models in science and the impacts of those on 4th-8th grade students'
achievement in mathematics, science and critical thinking abilities. It is
enhancing the student learning in and attitudes towards STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project partners' student population is diverse. Many
of the Saint Paul School District's students come from immigrant or refugee
families and 45% live in homes in which English is not the first language
spoken. Because the teachers who teach in high-needs schools will implement the
curriculum modules, this project is documenting the learning outcomes of
underrepresented populations when presented with curriculum modules. The
research findings are providing directions for designing effective curriculum
and learning of STEM. The dissemination of the curriculum modules on peer-
reviewed websites and the findings of the research studies are informing
practitioners, administrators, researchers, and policy makers who aim to improve
student achievement and interest in STEM careers.