* 1238801
* Meeting:   EU-US Training in Marine Bioinformatics; June 17-30, 2012, Bremen, Germany
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Jennifer Biddle, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 04/30/2014
* USD 49,999.00

Modern molecular and genomic approaches have enabled biologists to ask and
answer questions that had previously been intractable. These modern approaches
yield vast volumes of data, which require the use of computational tools for
effective and efficient analysis. Marine microbiologists are increasingly
employing such methods to interrogate complex marine microbial communities,
which have defied greater understanding by use of other approaches. However,
most marine science educational programs are not prepared to offer the
computational training needed to utilize the most modern tools. A course in
marine bioinformatics will be offered to train today?s marine scientists in
these modern computational tools to enhance their ability to gain novel
understanding and insights about these marine microbial systems. The US-EU
Taskforce on Biotechnology Research recommended that this type of training
course be developed to build such capacity. The training course will be held in
the summer of 2012 at Jacobs University in Germany. The main aims of the Marine
Bioinformatics training course are to bring together young scientists in a forum
that will set the groundwork for future overseas collaborations, and to provide
a resource for graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and faculty to
acquire the skills-set necessary for proper experimental design and for analysis
of diversity, (meta)genomics, (meta)transcriptomics, (meta)proteomics,
(meta)metabolomics, and associated environmental contextual data from the marine
environment. The course will train 30 participants, with 15 from each side of
the Atlantic. Participants will be recruited from a range of backgrounds such as
computer science, bioinformatics, marine microbial ecology, molecular
microbiology, environmental science and oceanography. The course will be
organized by scientific chairs: Jennifer F. Biddle, School of Marine Science and
Policy, University of Delaware, Lewes DE, USA and Frank Oliver Glöckner, Max
Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen &amp; Jacobs University,
Bremen, Germany. This course will impact early career scientists by providing
them broad interdisciplinary training to expand their research skills. Each
participant will be required to report on their efforts to disseminate course
material after the course ends, and online content will be posted for those
unable to attend. The course website can be found at
http://www.microb3.eu/events/workshops/eu-us-training.