* 1238999
* Girls' and Women's Labor and Household Production in China's Economic Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/19/2011,11/30/2013
* Melissa Brown, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2013
* USD 18,855.00

This project examines the labor and economic contributions made by Chinese girls
and women in the early 20th century, before and during industrialization. It
tests whether the now-defunct practice of footbinding served as a form of labor
control, pushing girls and women to participate in lucrative handcraft
production. The project contributes to gender studies, economic development
studies, and their integration. If, as it turns out, economic change is more
important in eliminating practices that are often viewed as injurious to women's
bodies (such as female circumcision), then efforts to change these practices
must address their economic basis, and not only work on the level of education
and advocacy. Evidence from southern China suggests that footbinding was
strongly correlated with local economic practices, but the southern pattern has
never been tested in north and central China. Time is running out, as most
elderly women who are the best source of information will be gone within the
decade. This project surveys 1600 women about their own labor and that of their
older female relatives, which will produce data on about 8,000 women going back
to the 1880s. Sixteen sites across eight provinces were carefully selected to
include locales with historical data available and to represent regional
diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the common
misconceptions that girls played an insignificant economic role in China prior
to the emergence of factory industrialism, and that footbinding, driven by
cultural beliefs about beauty and sexuality, made female labor nearly worthless.
Producing more accurate estimates of the labor inputs of Chinese girls and women
contributes to contemporary research on global economic history. Understanding
the economic implications of footbinding, which was once at the center of heated
debate over women's bodily well-being, social integration, traditional cultural
values, and human rights, contributes to current policy debates about women's
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;