* 1238052
* Workshop on Advancing Experimental Rock Deformation Research: Scientific and Technical Needs
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2013
* USD 60,000.00

This is a workshop to bring together the Users of Experimental
Rock&lt;br/&gt;Deformation data with the Practitioners of Experimental Rock
Deformation. Users are those who&lt;br/&gt;make direct use of laboratory data in
models, calculations, or in the interpretation of geological&lt;br/&gt;or
geophysical observations. Practitioners are those actively engaged in
laboratory-based&lt;br/&gt;experimental research on the mechanical properties of
Earth materials; some Practitioners are&lt;br/&gt;also Users. The purpose of the
workshop is to assess the scientific and technical needs of
these&lt;br/&gt;groups and to begin a process of responding to those needs.
There are important research&lt;br/&gt;objectives in geomechanics that can be
identified, from both a scientific and societal&lt;br/&gt;perspective, and there
are recognized needs for technological and community resources
in&lt;br/&gt;order to meet the scientific needs. The workshop will focus on
geomechanics of the relatively&lt;br/&gt;shallow portion of the Earth. This will
include the mechanics of the upper mantle and lower-to-mid crust, the
seismogenic zone, accretionary wedges, energy- and waste-related subsurface
systems, and the role of thermalhydro-chemical processes in all these
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will support attendance by early
career scientists and students. The results will be broadly disseminated and
will produce a strategic, community-building document for rock deformation.