* 1238926
* Collaborative Research:  Carriers, Charge State, and Diagnostic Use of the Long-Mysterious Diffuse Interstellar Bands
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Daniel Welty, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 09/30/2014
* USD 97,703.00

This work investigates which atoms, ions, small and large molecules cause
certain interstellar absorption features known as "Diffuse Interstellar Bands"
(DIBs). About 600 absorption lines associated with these families of
interstellar bands are known since the 1920s but their association which
specific molecules is still unknown. Here researchers with different expertise
in atomic and molecular spectroscopy, interstellar gas and dust, and laboratory
chemistry, come together to tackle this long-standing open question.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to compile and organize existing
observations in databases and to add new measurements of DIBs seen toward about
220 stars to assess and to search for empirical relations between the different
DIB absorption features as well as other interstellar parameters such as density
and ionization state. The existing list of DIBs of all spectral widths to
uniform limit is expanded with new observations to include broad and narrow
lines that only appear under certain physical conditions. For this purpose, a
new atlas of stars illuminating such interstellar regions will be assembled.
Another goal is to observe certain diffuse interstellar clouds to obtain the
types and absorption strengths of DIBs as a function of increasing density and
ionization state, which relates to the spatial distribution of particular
compounds and on-going reactions within the cloud. The team members have
guaranteed access to observing facilities (e.g., Apache Point Observatory) to do
this part of work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As long as the types of compounds
(molecules with more than 15 atoms are suspected) responsible for the DIB
absorptions remain elusive, it is not possible to fully account for the chemical
inventory and processes of the interstellar medium. The identification of the
carriers of the DIBs will be a major step forward in understanding the chemical
inventory in molecular clouds from which stars and planets
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of this collaborative
project is very strong. It provides undergraduate- and graduate students with
opportunities to work on problems related to more than one discipline.