* 1238212
* LTER-PIE: Interactions Between External Drivers, Humans and Ecosystems in Shaping Ecological Process in a Mosaic of Coastal Landscapes and Estuarine Seascapes
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Charles Hopkinson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2017
* USD 4,171,697.00

Intellectual Merit: The Plum Island Ecosystems (PIE) LTER has, since its
inception in 1998, been working towards a predictive understanding of the long-
term response of coupled land-estuary-ocean ecosystems to changes in three
drivers: climate, sea level, and human activities. The Plum Island Estuary-LTER
includes the coupled Parker, Rowley, and Ipswich River watersheds, estuarine
areas including a shallow open sound, and extensive tidal marshes. PIE is
connected to the Gulf of Maine in the Acadian biogeographic province, which is a
cold water, macrotidal environment that is geographically and biologically
distinct from coastal ecosystems to the south of Cape Cod, Massachusetts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next four years the LTER will build upon the
progress they have made in understanding the importance of spatial patterns and
connections across the land-margin ecosystem. The overarching goal is to
understand how external drivers, ecosystem dynamics, and human activities
interact to shape ecological processes in a mosaic of coastal landscapes and
estuarine seascapes. Understanding how landscapes and seascapes evolve and
change, and how those changes control ecosystem processes, is both a fundamental
science question and a critical management question. During the remainder of PIE
III LTER researchers will continue to address the role of temporal change and
variability in climate, sea-level rise and human activities on ecological
processes in our long-term monitoring but they will also initiate new activities
that examine spatial arrangements and connectivity. LTER research questions are
focused around two themes: 1) What controls the spatial arrangements and
connectivity between ecological habitat patches in the coastal zone? 2) How do
the spatial arrangement and the connectivity between ecological habitat patches
in coastal watersheds and the estuarine seascape influence ecological processes?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address their goal researchers will: 1) Quantify recent
changes in spatial arrangements and connectivity in the watershed and estuary
and investigate their drivers. 2) Supplement long-term monitoring with
additional measurements in the watershed and estuary to understand how ecosystem
processes are influenced by different spatial arrangements and connectivity. In
the watershed these include areas where the river network has been modified by
suburbanization and beaver dams. In the estuary LTER investigators will examine
feedbacks between form and function in contrasting areas that appear to be
responding very differently to sea-level rise; in one case maintaining the marsh
platform and in another losing marsh area, forming ponds and transitioning to a
lower elevation. 3) Continue existing and add new large scale manipulative
experiments to increase mechanistic understanding of ecological processes in
various critical land and seascape patches and their responses to drivers. 4)
Develop and apply models to understand how biogeochemical and trophic processes
emerge at broader scales in a spatially complex coastal environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term data collection, however, will remain a central
activity as many of the hypotheses, as to the importance of geomorphic change to
ecosystems processes, have come from our observations that spatial arrangements
and their connections at PIE are rapidly changing, on the time scale of decades.
Further, the LTER continues to expand efforts to understand how management
decisions are influenced by both geomorphic and ecosystem changes. These
interactions and feedbacks are important drivers of change at PIE and as a
consequence LTER researchers have increasingly integrated human activities
within the PIE conceptual framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
LTER K-12 schoolyard program, "Salt Marsh Science", serves over 1,000 students
in grades 5-12 in ten schools and the LTER hopes to continue to expand this into
more schools. LTER education coordinator, Ms. Duff, has co-founded an effort to
eradicate perennial pepperweed that involves over 1000 students and adults. This
effort has attracted regional attention and partners. The LTER serves college
undergraduates through internships, research projects and field trip. REU
opportunities for undergrads exist through the PIE-LTER, the NSF funded Clark
"HERO" program, the MBL-Brown partnership, and the U. of New Hampshire. The LTER
will continue the collaboration with the MBL-Brown IGERT Program, where graduate
students are exploring the intersection between modern genomics and ecosystems
science. Outreach is an important part of the PIE LTER mission and includes
inter-LTER efforts and participation in the MBL's science journalism program.
The LTER has close connections with nearly all of the management agencies and
NGOs in the region and LTER researchers serve on many advisory boards. All data
collected by the PIE LTER are centralized and made available though a web site.