* 1238878
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Understanding Risks and Disruptions in Supply Chains and their Effect on Firm and Supply Chain Performance
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Mahour Parast, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,400.00

The Research Initiation Award entitled - Understanding Risks and Disruptions in
Supply Chains and their Effect on Firm and Supply Chain Performance - has the
overall goal to develop strategies for risk management for supply chains to
enable organizations and their engineers, decision makers, and technology
managers to create more effective strategies and to manage and mitigate risks
and disruptions in their supply chains. The specific research objectives are to
identify the sources and scope of risks and vulnerabilities in supply chains,
and to determine the effects of different sources and scopes of risk on firm and
supply chain performance. The educational objectives are to promote interest and
motivation of students to study risk management for supply chains, to develop
new instructional materials, and to educate the technical community about risk
management for supply chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is innovative in
its approach to risk management because it encompasses both the stages and scope
of risks and defines and develops a matrix for risk management for supply
chains. It is transformative since it provides the first comprehensive view of
managing risks and disruptions within supply chains in different industries with
respect to the stage and scope of the risks. It facilitates the formation and
establishment of an integrative discipline - risk engineering/risk management -
based on foundations from engineering, technology, and management. Both
qualitative and quantitative methods will be used to collect data and
information regarding the nature of risks and disruptions. Based on the review
of the literature and identification of key variables, a survey instrument will
be developed for the collection of data. In order to re-validate the findings
from the survey data, data on the US airline industry will be used.