* 1238469
* EAGER-Profiles: Using researcher profiles to demonstrate the impact of investments in science
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Griffin Weber, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 03/31/2014
* USD 299,355.00

Evaluating the return on investment in science involves accurately associating
research inputs (e.g., grants and contracts) with research outputs (e.g.,
publications and patents). Because many of today's significant discoveries are
produced by large multi-institution, cross-disciplinary teams -- often supported
by different sponsors, with potential impact spread across different fields --
accurately linking outputs to inputs can be challenging. This research
investigates whether and to what extent an online profiling system that
aggregates research data around the individual researcher facilitates the
processes of linking research inputs to outputs and provides benefits to
scientists, institutions, publishers, and agencies. It compares the value of
using different data sources, such as federal systems, institutional
repositories, commercial databases, manual data entry by librarians and
administrators, and data entry by the scientists themselves, to populate a
prototype website that profiles computer scientists from multiple institutions.

Intellectual Merit: The research breaks new ground in a variety of ways. It
determines the cost and effort required to obtain each data source, including
the resources needed to disambiguate names in order to link data on scientific
contributions to the correct people responsible for them; it calculates the
potential reduction in administrative burden each data source provides by
measuring the amount of time it takes for a scientist, without the help of a
researcher profiling system, to manually locate the data and enter it into an
online form; and it evaluates which data sources contain the most information
about high-impact cross-institutional or multi-disciplinary research, using data
mining techniques to generate collaboration and topic-cluster maps.

This study is appropriate for the EAGER program because it is both high-risk --
in that the outcome depends on the coordination of multiple software products,
institutions, agencies and data sources in a rapid timeframe -- and high-reward,
in that a successful prototype would accelerate the implementation of a national
researcher profiling system that benefits multiple stakeholders.

The field of Computer Science exemplifies all the challenges and potential
rewards of a nation-wide researcher profiling system. Computer scientists are
funded by many different agencies (NSF, NIH, DOE, DOD, NASA, etc.); their
research outputs take many forms (publications, conference presentations,
software, databases, algorithms, patents, etc.); and they collaborate across
many disciplines (such as medicine, economics, engineering, physics, and social
science).

Broader impacts: A publicly-accessible national researcher-profiling system
based on linked open data promises numerous benefits beyond enabling more
accurate measures of return on federal investment in science. These benefits
include the potential to streamline the grant application and reporting process
for researchers, identify reviewers without conflicts of interest, help
researchers find collaborators, match trainees and junior investigators with
mentors and jobs, and enable scientists to showcase their work.