* 1238904
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Fostering Innovation and Excellence in Computing Systems: Establishing an Innovative Systems Laboratory
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Akhtar Lodgher, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 296,140.00

The Targeted Infusion Project entitled -Fostering Innovation and Excellence in
Computing Systems: Establishing an Innovative Systems Laboratory - has the goal
to foster innovation in undergraduate students in the Computer Science program.
To foster innovation, this project uses a novel approach which systematically
introduces innovation in a step-wise fashion in six courses, followed by the
completion of a senior design project in the Innovative Systems Laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to introduce innovation
in six fundamental computer science courses using top down and bottom up
approaches; create a web service, cloud computing and mobile computing based
infrastructure framework and the associated infrastructure components within
this general framework; and use this general framework to develop innovative web
services and cloud computing based computing systems projects. The anticipated
outcomes of this project are an increase in the number of undergraduate students
from groups underrepresented in computer science (African American, Hispanic,
and women), who learn the skills to innovate and demonstrate that they can use
the current technologies to create innovative computing systems. The approach is
scalable and replicable. This project will provide detailed setup instructions,
training guides, source code and documentation to other small Computer Science
programs nationwide.