* 1238231
* Sequencing the Aegilops tauschii Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jan Dvorak, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2018
* USD 9,279,263.00

PI: Jan Dvorak (University of California, Davis)

CoPIs: Ming-Cheng Luo (University of California, Davis), Katrien M. Devos
(University of Georgia, Athens), Steven Salzberg (John Hopkins University) and
Yong Q. Gu and Olin D. Anderson (USDA-ARS, Albany/University of California,
Davis)

Collaborators: Hans-Georg Müller (University of California, Davis), Jeffrey L.
Bennetzen (University of Georgia, Athens), Zhiyong Liu (Chinese Agricultural
University, Beijing), Philippe Leroy (INRA/IBP, France), Eric Lyons and Carol
Soderlund (University of Arizona, Tucson), Zhengqiang Ma (Nanjing Agricultural
University, China), Long Mao (Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences), Klaus
F.X. Mayer (Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany), Richard W. McCombie (Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory), Qixin Sun (Northwest A&F University, China), Thomas Wicker
(University of Zurich, Switzerland) and Frank M. You (Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, Winnipeg)

Bread wheat is one of three pillars on which the global food supply rests.
Despite wheat's exceptional importance, a high quality draft sequence of the
wheat genome is not available due primarily to its hybrid origin (polyploidy)
and the enormous size of its genome. To assist the international bread wheat
genome sequencing effort, a high quality draft of the genome of Aegilops
tauschii, one of the three progenitors of bread wheat, will be produced. The
large size and great complexity of the Ae. tauschii genome necessitate adopting
the ordered-clone sequencing strategy for generating a high quality genome
sequence draft. This strategy will involve the sequencing of about 50,000
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones harboring large fragments of Ae.
tauschii DNA that have been ordered to represent the contiguous sequence of
nucleotides in Ae. tauschii chromosomal DNA. Pools of BAC clones will be
sequenced with a next generation DNA sequencing platform and assembled into long
contiguous sequences. The correctness of the assembled sequences will be
validated with a novel optical nanotechnique. Genes and transposable elements in
the assembled sequences will be annotated. In this way, the sequence, location,
and orientation of all genes and transposable elements in the Ae. tauschii
genome will be determined.

The most immediate impact of the Ae. tauschii genome sequence produced by this
project will be in predicting the location of genes in wheat and its relatives,
thus accelerating progress in genome sequencing of wheat and its relatives and
facilitating gene discovery and manipulation in these species through
traditional breeding methods and biotechnology. The Ae. tauschii genome sequence
will serve as a reference in analyses of genomic changes that have taken place
in the wheat genome since wheat's origin, providing significant and fundamental
contributions to the understanding of grass genome structure and evolution.
Association of the more than 36,000 genes predicted within the draft genome
sequence with biological functions will be a daunting task. For this reason, the
project will engage the large research community interested in analyzing genes
of Ae. tauschii in community-based manual gene annotation and graphical
compilation of the results in the project database. To maximize the awareness
about the project resources among the wheat breeders and other stakeholders,
regular presentations/workshops of these resources will be made at professional
meetings attended by wheat breeders. The project will also provide excellent
interdisciplinary training for students and postdocs in plant genomics,
bioinformatics, DNA sequencing and sequence assembly, validation, and analysis.
Validated sequences of BAC contigs and sequences parsed to individual BAC clones
will be deposited on a monthly basis to a project website (to be developed). All
sequences will be deposited at the long-term NCBI repository and incorporated
into the Gramene, GrainGenes, and MIPS comparative databases. Individual BAC
clones or their groups from the nine libraries of Ae. tauschii AL8/78 and the
minimal tiling path (MTP) across the contigs are publicly available and
distributed through http://probes.pw.usda.gov/WheatDMarker/.