* 1238929
* HBCU-UP Research Initiation Award Grant: Response of Microbial Communities to Short-Timescale In-situ Soil Moisture Dynamics
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Jessica Furrer, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,508.00

The Research Initiation Award entitled - Response of Microbial Communities to
Short-Timescale In-situ Soil Moisture Dynamics - seeks to understand the role of
microbial communities in the global carbon cycle, which is the subject of much
interest in light of current needs to quantify, model and manage carbon inputs
to the atmosphere. Soil water content is a critical determinant of microbial
heterotrophic activity and is therefore the single most important parameter
linking the water cycle and the carbon cycle in terrestrial habitats. There is a
need to integrate a physically-based understanding of soil water processes with
an in-depth study of their effects on the microbial community at multiple
trophic levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research hypothesis of this work is
that microbial responses to wetting/drying cycles vary among microbial taxa
primarily as a result of two factors: 1) differences in physiological responses
to desiccation, and 2) varying locations within the soil matrix resulting in
differential exposure to desiccation stresses. The two trophic levels under
consideration in this project are bacteria and bactivorous protozoa. The study
will quantify the dynamics of soil microbial community structure as a time-
dependent function of soil moisture, then target specific taxa showing
appreciable changes. Follow-on work will examine which factor is most
influential in determining the desiccation response for specific microbial taxa.
The project includes undergraduate students by providing them with an
opportunity to gain research skills in both microbial ecology and soil
hydrology, making them attractive candidates for graduate-level study in the
environmental field or in industry.