* 1238089
* Advanced Manufacturing and Prototyping Integrated To Unlock Potential (AMP-IT-UP)
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* James Smith, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 7,314,455.00

Advanced Manufacturing and Prototyping Integrated to Unlock Potential (AMP-IT-
UP) is a partnership between the Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) and the
Griffin-Spalding County School System (GSCS) that focuses on grades six through
nine. In this project, students in these middle grades explore their creativity
in STEM Innovation and Design (STEM-ID) courses, using rapid prototyping
equipment located on GSCS campuses. Students become inspired and drawn into the
study of STEM as they watch their creations become reality.

The mathematics, engineering and science modules developed in this partnership
promote inquiry and situated learning which contextualizes STEM topics to
demonstrate their relevancy to AMP-IT-UP students. Through extracurricular local
and national clubs and competitions, student experiences are broadened and
deepened. The clubs include Junior Makers and Innovation clubs that are mentored
by GT faculty and students. This mentorship provides role models for the
students and provides the personal touch that is so critical for student
retention and self efficacy. The competitions include robotic competitions such
as FIRST LEGO League and FIRST Robotics. Approximately 2,400 students each year
participate in the exploratory STEM course modules with a total of approximately
1,200 participating in the extracurricular activities.

AMP-IT-UP is conducting research into various aspects of the impact of the STEM-
ID courses on the students and their teachers. Some of the effects being
measured include exploring how participation affects academic engagement,
content understanding, knowledge transfer and student persistence in STEM.
Another related research topic involves the implementation of the professional
development of the teachers who are using the STEM-ID materials as well as the
fidelity of the curriculum deployment. AMP-IT-UP is also developing a
theoretical model for understanding changes to the complex system that is
education by utilizing resources from an interdisciplinary team that includes
experts in both engineering and the social sciences.

Both core partners in this Math and Science Partnership illustrate the mutually
beneficial nature of their work together. GSCS is being transformed by the
middle school teacher development efforts that are enhancing teachers' ability
to conduct experiential learning in their classrooms. The GT community is being
transformed by a greater interaction with the middle school students and
teachers, resulting in an increased emphasis on experiential and active learning
environments in the GT undergraduate curriculum as well as an increased
commitment to service learning among GT faculty and students.