* 1238142
* Genetic Networks Regulating Structure and Function of the Maize Shoot Apical Meristem
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,12/31/2021
* Xiaoyu Zhang, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2021
* USD 7,579,252.00

PI: Michael Scanlon (Cornell University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Diane
Janick-Buckner and Brent Buckner (Truman State University), Gary Muehlbauer
(University of Minnesota-Twin Cities), Thomas Owens (Cornell University),
Patrick Schnable (Iowa State University), Marja Timmermans (Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory), Jianming Yu (Kansas State University) and Xiaoyu Zhang (University
of Georgia)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Carolyn Lawrence (USDA-ARS/Iowa
State University) and Dan Nettleton (Iowa State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shoot apical meristem (SAM) is responsible
for development of all above ground organs in the plant. SAM structure and
function correlates with agronomically-important adult traits in the maize
plant, and is also affected by planting density and shade stresses induced by
agricultural environments. The ultimate goal of this project is to increase
understanding of the regulatory networks controlling SAM structure and function
and the responses of these networks to environmental stresses. The specific
objectives are to: 1) describe the SAM allometric space in maize and its
relatives using nanoscale computer tomographic scanning to provide 3-dimensional
images of the phenotypic diversity of SAM structure and identify adult plant
traits correlated with SAM structure; 2) identify differentially expressed genes
in SAM size/shape outliers and mutants with abnormal SAM structures and generate
a co-expression network of key genes implicated during SAM structure and
function; 3) perform quantitative genetic analyses to identify specific
variations within genes that correlate with variations in SAM structure/function
and adult plant traits, and test functions of 40 key genes using reverse genetic
aaproaches; 4) analyze the shade avoidance response and its effects on SAM
structure and function; and 5) investigate epigenetic changes of SAM functional
domains in response to shade avoidance using novel protocols that distinguish
the stem cell organizing regions from the organogenic domains in the maize SAM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will provide the framework for scientific
training and the public release of original data. Undergraduates at Truman State
University, a small liberal arts institution, will be trained in morphological
and LM-RNAseq analyses of maize mutants. REU students and undergraduates
enrolled in Plant Physiology courses at Cornell University will participate in
physiological experiments. This project will generate extensive transcriptomic
data and vector constructs for tissue-specific epigenetic analyses which will be
available to the scientific research community. Molecular markers and phenotypic
data for diverse maize lines will be supplied to Panzea
(http://www.panzea.org/). Genetic mapping associations, physiological shade-
avoidance response data, transcriptomic and phenotypic data will be curated at
MaizeGDB (http://www.maizegdb.org/), and seed stocks for maize shoot mutants and
SAM size variants will be released through the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock
Center (http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu/).