* 1238705
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD GRANT: STATISTICAL MODELS FOR REAL-TIME PARAMETER PREDICTION FROM PROBE VEHICLE DATA AT TRAFFIC INTERSECTIONS
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Gurcan Comert, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2014
* USD 198,262.00

The objectives of the project entitled: Statistical Models for Real-Time
Parameter Prediction from Probe Vehicle Data at Traffic Intersections, are to
develop new queue length estimate models at traffic intersections, to teach
undergraduate students mathematical and computational modeling skills, and to
develop project based undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will investigate the estimation of system parameters such as queue length,
delay, and flow rate at traffic intersections based on data from vehicles
instrumented with wireless communication and location tracking technologies, so
called probe vehicles. Estimating system states in real-time can enable optimal
control through efficiently allocating the available capacity such that a
defined performance metric is optimized, for example the queue length is
minimized. To estimate these performance measures in real time, various
surveillance technologies are being employed to measure traffic flow parameters
which are subsequently utilized in models for delay estimation and prediction.
However, these detection technologies are not effective in estimating queue
lengths or delays. Research is needed to develop models using probe information
such as count, location, and time, and to understand how probe vehicle
technology could potentially improve the estimation of desired parameters.
During this project,first queue length estimators for two-lane isolated
intersections with left and right turn movements for Poisson arrivals, then
platoon arrivals will be developed. Fixed and random service time distributions
will be investigated. Finally, developed models will be tested with VISSIM
microscopic simulation platform in order to show if the models are accurately
estimating the desired parameters and under what conditions the models are
adequate.