* 1238658
* Conference:Scialog:Accelerating Scientific Breakthroughs in Solar Energy Conversion with Team Science and Dialog 2013.  The conference will be held at Biosphere 2 near Tucson, AZ.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Richard Wiener, Research Corporation for Science Advancement
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to accelerate breakthroughs in solar energy conversion to
electricity and fuels. The approach is to attain this objective through synergy
created by grants to researchers with highly innovative ideas, support for
intensive dialog at conferences and community building across disciplines.
Scientists who receive grants are typically not more than five years past
earning tenure. Such awardees are poised to attempt truly transformative
research projects that were too risky while working toward tenure. Annual
meetings are held at Biosphere 2 and are attended by a diverse group of
scientists who participate in highly interactive sessions to identify
bottlenecks, find avenues for breakthroughs, and build new scientific teams to
facilitate the breakthroughs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convening these outstanding early career awardees
with other preeminent researchers to engage in alternative methods for creative
dialog and for building scientific teams will have a transformative impact on
the field of solar energy conversion. Scialog is demonstrating a novel approach
to convening scientists to accelerate high-risk research and showing that
authentic dialog is a valid scientific methodology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scialog will directly support
high risk projects for approximately forty outstanding early career U.S.
academic scientists and their research groups, including postdoctoral
researchers, undergraduate and graduate students, and technicians, many of whom
are women and/or from underrepresented minorities. Based on this support, many
of these young researchers will be prepared to form the vanguard of the next
generation of U.S. scientific innovators.