* 1238547
* Implementation Grant: DREAM STEM-Driving Research, Entrepreneurship, and Academics through Mastering STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Yolanda Anderson, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,949,931.00

The Implementation project entitled - DREAM STEM-Driving Research,
Entrepreneurship, and Academics through Mastering STEM - has the goal of
contributing to greater participation of African Americans in the STEM workforce
by providing the knowledge and skills for research and innovation. The
objectives are: to increase science, technology, enginnering and mathematics
(STEM) enrollment, particularly in Chemistry, Environmental, Earth, and
Geospatial Sciences, Mathematics, and Physics programs; to increase retention in
all STEM degree programs; to improve persistence in and increase the number of
graduates from all STEM degree programs; to stimulate faculty research and
innovations in STEM teaching and learning; and to enhance scientific education
and technical training for STEM students. The objectives will be achieved
through three primary project components: 1) Entrepreneurship in science
education; 2) Development of students' identity as scientists; and 3) Faculty
development through teaching and learning research innovation mini-grants. The
project will include a Research, Discovery and Innovation Summer Institute to
engage students in the science and engineering research and development portion
of the entrepreneurship cycle, which can result in product and process
innovations. By means of an extracurricular activity through a highly integrated
science-based entrepreneurship program at North Carolina Central University
students will earn a certificate in technological entrepreneurship when they
graduate with a BS degree in a STEM discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
information and knowledge expected to be obtained from the project will be
determinants of whether students who developed entrepreneurial thinking and got
entrepreneurial training will enroll in, be retained in, and persist in STEM
degree programs at a higher rate; whether activities that facilitate science
identity will retain students in STEM degree programs at a higher rate and
improve their persistence to a STEM degree; and whether competitive mini-grants
for faculty development will lead to innovations in STEM teaching and learning.
Knowledge and lessons learned from the project will be disseminated to a wider
audience through presentations at national meetings and publications in peer-
review journals.