* 1238409
* Collaborative workshop proposal: Drawing the roadmap for the semantic/ontology based infrastructure for Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Hassan Babaie, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 9,940.00

EarthCube is focused on community-driven development of an integrated, and
interoperable knowledge management system for data in the geo- and environmental
sciences. By utilizing a cooperative, as opposed to competitive, process like
that which created the Internet and Open Source software, EarthCube will attack
the recalcitrant and persistent problems that so far have prevented adequate
access to and the analysis, visualization, and interoperability of the vast
storehouses of disparate geoscience data and data types residing in distributed
and diverse data systems. This award funds a series of broad community
interactions to gather adequate information and requirements to create a roadmap
for a critical cyberinfrastructure capability (semantics and ontologies) in the
development of EarthCube. In the context of cyberinfrastructure, semantics and
ontologies are what allows heterogeneous and distributed data systems to become
interoperable. They enable scientists to register, discover, access, and
integrate data irrespective of its structural heterogeneity. This work convenes
public, online/virtual meetings and seeks broad community input in the
development of a process to have the geoscience and cyberinfrastructure
communities converge on a way forward in the realm of semantics and ontologies
for data, with the end product being a capability implementation roadmap. Also
involved in the process is the identification of appropriate community agreed
upon use cases. Broader impacts of the work include development of approaches,
protocols, and standards that may be applicable across the sciences and the
fostering of close interaction between communities that do not commonly
interact, to a great extent, with one another moving them toward a common goal
of the creation of a new paradigm in data and knowledge management in the
geosciences.