* 1238196
* EarthCube Community Workshop: Designing A Roadmap for Workflows in Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Martyn Clark, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

EarthCube is focused on community-driven development of an integrated and
interoperable knowledge management system for data in the geo- and environmental
sciences. By utilizing a cooperative, as opposed to competitive, process like
that which created the Internet and Open Source software, EarthCube will attack
the recalcitrant and persistent problems that so far have prevented adequate
access to and the analysis, visualization, and interoperability of the vast
storehouses of disparate geoscience data and data types residing in distributed
and diverse data systems. This awards funds a series of broad, inclusive
community interactions to gather adequate information and requirements to create
a roadmap for a critical capability (workflow) in the development of EarthCube,
a major new NSF initiative. Workflow in the context of EarthCube, and
cyberinfrastructure in general, encompasses a broad range of topics including
distributed execution management, the coupling of multiple models into composite
applications, the integration of a wide range of data sources with processing,
and the creation of refined data products from raw data. A key benefit of the
funded work in terms of evaluating and creating community consensus on the best
way forward for this capability (i.e., workflow) is the ability to document the
provenance of data used in modeling and reproduce model and data-enabled
scientific results. The funded workshop and information collecting activity will
be open to all interested parties and is being led by a diverse and expert team
of cyberinfrastructure developers, computer scientists, and geoscientists.
Broader impacts of the work include converging on approaches, protocols, and
standards that may be applicable across the sciences. They also include the
fostering of close interaction between communities that do not commonly interact
with one another and focusing them on the common goal of creating a new paradigm
in data and knowledge management in the geosciences.