* 1238362
* 2012 Rock Deformation Gordon Research Conference: Feedback Processes in Rock Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Peter Kelemen, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2013
* USD 22,505.00

This project provides funding for travel and registration support to U.S. based
early-career professionals and students to attend the Gordon Research Conference
" Feedback Processes in Rock Deformation", which will be held in Andover, NH
from August 19-24, 2012. The Rock Deformation conference series highlights the
latest research and future trends in brittle and ductile rock mechanics, with
experimental, field and theoretical contributions. The broad goals are to assess
the understanding of the nature and controls on rock strength, fracture,
friction, ductile deformation, and both fluid and melt flow during natural
tectonic loading. This particular conference focuses on feedback mechanisms,
which are very important in controlling the rates and mechanisms of rock
deformation. Positive feedbacks lead to accelerating rates, and commonly to
spatial focusing whereas negative feedbacks commonly cause decelerating,
spatially distributed deformation and reaction. Major topics addressed at this
conference include: (1) mechanisms of failure in geological materials at high
confining pressure; (2) fluid-assisted slip, earthquakes and fracture; (3)
reaction-driven cracking; (4) localized fluid transport (feedbacks involving
chemical reaction; mechanical feedbacks); and (5) dynamic triggering of
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference addresses many cutting-edge
frontier research topics in tectonics, geophysics, and related fields. The
conference theme has special relevance for extraction of unconventional
hydrocarbon resources, implementation of enhanced geothermal systems, geological
carbon capture and storage, and understanding seismic hazards. The conference
would promote the participation of students, early career scientists, and
researchers from underrepresented groups in the earth sciences.