* 1238784
* Targeted Infusion Project: A Problem-Based Learning Approach to Teach Gaming and Development of Gaming Instructional Modules to Enhance Student Learning in Lower Level Core C
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Sharad Sharma, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,500.00

The Targeted Infusion Project entitled - A Problem-Based Learning Approach to
Teach Gaming and Development of Gaming Instructional Modules to Enhance Student
Learning in Lower Level Core Courses - has the goal to implement a problem-based
learning approach to teaching game development that focuses on developing
critical thinking in game design and development of gaming instructional modules
to enhance student learning in lower level core Computer Science courses. The
objectives are: to develop gaming instructional modules; to enhance the Computer
Science course curriculum with problem-solving activities based on gaming
instructional educational modules to improve students' understanding of the
theoretical concepts; to prepare competitive engineers and computer scientists
at Bowie State University, a Historically Black University; to assess and
evaluate student understanding; and to disseminate the project findings through
journal articles, conferences and colloquia
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deliverables of this project will be a
repository of gaming instructional modules that could be integrated in any
computer science curriculum with minimal modifications to existing courses.
Outreach activities include the use of networking sites such as Facebook and
YouTube, which will lead to increased public interest in the field of Computer
Science and help to recruit students from underrepresented groups to pursue STEM
careers. The students trained and educated will be better positioned for
admittance to graduate school and employment in a constantly evolving
interdisciplinary workforce.