* 1238202
* Natural Variation and Drought Responses in Developing Maize Inflorescences
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Sarah Hake, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/29/2020
* USD 6,817,527.00

PI: Erik Vollbrecht (Iowa State University)

CoPIs: Jos√© Dinneny (Carnegie Institution for Science), Qunfeng Dong (University
of North Texas), Sarah Hake (Plant Gene Expression Center-Albany/USDA-ARS),
David Jackson (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory)

Key Collaborators: Torbert Rocheford (Purdue University), Andrea Eveland (Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory)

The maize inflorescences, the tassel and the ear, produce more grain than any
other crop. The genetic processes that control tassel and ear development also
underlie construction of inflorescence architecture across the grasses,
including other grain and cereal crops that help feed the world. Thus,
understanding the architecture of the maize ear is of especially broad relevance
for agricultural research. When water availability is limited during the early
growing season, early season drought stress disturbs or blocks maize ear
development, which negatively impacts yield. Critical regulators of plant
development and networks of gene expression that control distinct steps in
generating maize ear architecture have been identified, but how they interact
with drought stress is unknown. The project will use current knowledge as a
foundation for understanding how two kinds of variation, in natural genetic
factors and in the environment in the form of early season drought stress,
modulate ear architecture.

Three scientific objectives will be pursued. First, existing high throughput
genomics data will be integrated with more traditional breeding data as the
basis of a web-accessible database. Serving as a repository for additional
project data, and as a resource for queries by standard and specialized analysis
tools, the database will thus provide rapid and complex data responses to
address a spectrum of biologically relevant questions, including those in the
project's second and third research objectives. Second, the nucleotide
differences responsible for natural, quantitative genetic variation that
controls the complex trait of inflorescence architecture will be elucidated. The
project will use genomics tools and resources to identify and clone key genetic
factors that have quantifiable effects on inflorescence architecture through
their interactions with known genes. These quantitative genes will be integrated
into emerging regulatory networks. Third, the mechanisms by which early season
drought stress impacts the developmental processes that define the architecture
of the maize ear will be identified. Here the project will couple spatial and
temporal assessments of ear development to high throughput gene expression
profiling.

These drought studies will spearhead interdisciplinary research at the interface
of plant stress biology and development. Together the research will establish
the molecular basis in maize of what plant breeders have historically called
background effects, or the genetic landscape within which genes of major effect
act, and illustrate how drought stress alters the timing and execution of
endogenous mechanisms that regulate changes in inflorescence architecture.

Previous drought stress studies in maize have mostly focused on mid and late
season growth periods, however early season drought stress, which affects the
establishment of inflorescence development programs, also leads to substantial
reductions in yields. Predicted changes in global climate and expanded
cultivation of maize in developing countries will likely increase the impact of
early season stress on yields. Understanding the genes and gene interactions
that control maize inflorescence development, and how this transcriptional
network responds to abiotic stress is necessary to provide the tools for
sustaining maize yields. The project will provide insights to the important
background effects that breeders seek to understand and address, and can work
with. Thus, the research may ultimately be useful to plant breeders selecting
for inflorescences that will be more productive in environments where drought
stress is encountered. Seed stocks from the project will be available at the
Maize Genetics Co-op Stock Center (http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu/) and all
project data will be made available from the project web site
(http://www.maizeinflorescence.org), and distributed to permanent, public
repositories such as MaizeGDB (http://www.maizegdb.org/). The project integrates
highly controlled greenhouse conditions and agriculturally relevant field
conditions with genomics resources to understand how environmental and
developmental pathways converge. This work will cultivate broad and
comprehensive training opportunities across diverse disciplines that encompass
plant development, quantitative genetics, abiotic stress responses and
bioinformatics. Educational training workshops will be organized to provide
experiential learning opportunities both in the US and Mexico, in the lab and in
the field. Postdoctoral scholars and graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students will be mentored in the context of this multi-disciplinary research
program.