* 1238003
* Early Adopters of Curriculum Initiative in Parallel and Distributed Computing at EduPar-12
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Sushil Prasad, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2013
* USD 49,977.00

The penetration of parallel and distributed computing (PDC) technology into the
daily lives of users has made it imperative that computer scientists and
engineers provide rapidly changing, but yet effective, efficient and reliable
technology to consumers. This points to the urgent need for imparting a broad-
based skill set in PDC technology at various levels in the educational fabric.
However, the rapid change in computing technology and research advances
challenge educators in knowing what to teach in any given semester. Employers
face similar challenges regarding what constitutes basic expertise. In this
context, a working group has taken up the challenge of developing PDC curricular
guidelines for Computer Science and Computer Engineering undergraduates, with
particular emphasis on identifying a core curriculum that represents what every
graduate should know about PDC. Throughout 2010, the working group has
deliberated upon various topics and subtopics, specifying both the expected
minimum level of coverage and the desired learning outcomes; it employed Bloom's
classification as the medium for expressing the desired level of expertise on a
topic. A preliminary version of the core curriculum was released in Dec, 2010
(http://www.cs.gsu.edu/~tcpp/curriculum/index.php). A major mechanism for
evaluating a snapshot of our guidelines is the Early Adopter competition, with
grants from NSF and Intel. About four dozen early-adopter institutions are
trying out this curriculum. We organized a workshop in Anchorage, May 2011, to
bring together the early adopters and others interested in PDC education,
primarily to receive the feedback from the Adopters, but also to stimulate
discussion of curricular and other educational issues. This inaugural EduPar
workshop - the first of its kind at IPDPS, being focused on educational matters
- was a great success. This has led to a follow up EduPar-12 workshop that is
being organized at IPDPS-12 in Shanghai with the support of this grant. The
proposed curriculum is being revised currently for a formal released.