* 1238420
* EAGER: Readiness of Disciplinary Data Systems for Cross-Domain Interoperability within a Standards-Based EarthCube Reference Framework
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Ilya Zaslavsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2014
* USD 217,932.00

This EAGER award promotes a new paradigm in the development of an integrative
and interoperable data and knowledge management system for the geosciences for a
new NSF initiative called EarthCube. Led by a team of experts from across the
fields of geoscience, cyberinfrastructure, engineering, and computer science
this project focuses on using a collaborative, as opposed to competitive, method
to create community consensus on the most appropriate means to realize
interoperability of databases containing disparate data types that are widely
distributed among many large and small data repositories. To achieve this goal,
the project will create registries of interoperable infrastructure components
for information-sharing of geoscience data; define user requirements for such a
system; and carry out proof-of-concept, cross-domain interoperability workflows
using federated catalogs, cross-linked vocabularies, common data services, and
shared model semantics. One of the unique aspects of this project is that the
approach employed utilizes an inclusive, community-driven, collaborative
approach. It also engages individuals from most of the major NSF-funded
geoscience data facilities, creating a much needed forum to exchange tools,
services, and best practices allowing for a better return on research money
investment. Broader impacts of the project include a focus on engaging students
and young researchers in cross-domain data-intensive research, the likelihood
that impacts of the project will crossover to other science domains, and the
fact that some core project members were from under-represented groups in
science and engineering. An additional broader impact is an international
component that engages UK scientists as members of the core project team.