* 1238401
* Midwest Number Theory Day and Conference for Graduate Students
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Bruce Berndt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The University of Illinois at Urbana-Chamapaign is hosting Number Theory Day on
Friday, October 12, 2012, prior to the annual Midwest Graduate Student Number
Theory meeting on the following two days. Because number theory is one of the
fastest growing areas within mathematics and because many of its findings have
proven to be of enormous use to not only researchers in other sciences but to
the broader public as well, it is important that students are exposed to and
learn about all of these possibilities. On Number Theory Day, six researchers in
number theory, reflecting the breadth of current research in the subject, will
give lectures of approximately 45-50 minutes each. The speakers represent a wide
range of interests within number theory, including algebraic number theory,
automorphic forms and Hilbert modular varieties, modular forms, combinatorial
number theory, elementary number theory, and analytic number theory.

In recent years, the field of number theory has stretched well beyond previous
boundaries and has been of critical importance in not only other branches of
mathematics but in computer science and physics as well. Moreover, in the past
two or three decades, applications of number theory to cryptography and coding
theory have provided a safer and more secure environment for our country. A
generation or more ago, these applications could not have been envisioned. It
should be emphasized that the applications arose out of fundamental research
that had been previously conducted without knowledge of the applications that
would be made further down the road. Even within number theory, the boundary
lines among different disciplines within the subject are not as fixed as in the
past. Thus, students specializing in number theory must be familiar with a wide
range of areas within the subject. In selecting speakers for Number Theory Day,
which precedes the Graduate Student Number Theory Conference at the University
of Illinois, the organizing committee has attempted to recognize the wide
expanse of the subject. Moreover, as students listen to the lectures of other
students in number theory from neighboring universities, they will further be
exposed to the enormous breadth of the subject. Additional information is
available on the conference website: http://www.math.illinois.edu/mntcg9/