* 1238852
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Incorporation of Sustainability Concepts into Undergraduate Civil Engineering Curriculum Using Project-Based Learning
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Taher Abu-Lebdeh, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 501,875.00

The Targeted Infusion Project - Incorporation of Sustainability Concepts into
the Undergraduate Civil Engineering Curriculum Using Project-Based Learning - at
North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCA&amp;T) has the objective to enhance
civil engineering students' knowledge about sustainability and its implications
by incorporating concepts on sustainability into the undergraduate curriculum
using a project-based learning approach. The specific objectives of the project
are to create instructional materials related to sustainable development, to
incorporate the contents into a three-course sequence in the civil engineering
curriculum for undergraduates, and to evaluate the impact of this intervention
on students' learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates
concepts on sustainability into the undergraduate curriculum by creating a
three-course sequence from existing courses in the civil engineering curriculum
while transforming these courses from lecture-based to project-based. To
successfully introduce topics related to sustainability, theoretical concepts
and hands-on projects will be implemented simultaneously. In this study
transportation was selected because of the comprehensive, broad and tangible
nature of the transportation field as well as the significant implications of
sustainability in the transportation sector. Based on the theory of
constructivism (a theory of learning which states that by reflecting on our
experiences, we construct our own understanding of the world), transportation
was deemed to be appropriate due to the daily interaction and personal
experiences of students with aspects of transportation systems. As a result of
the implementation of this intervention, students will be able to understand the
basic philosophy and the importance of incorporating concepts on sustainability
into their activities in future design, construction and maintenance.