* 1238704
* HBCU-UP RIA: Analytical Studies of Multihop Wireless Networks with the Log-normal Shadowing Model
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Lixin Wang, Paine College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 162,262.00

This project will conduct analytical studies on multi-hop wireless networks
under a realistic shadowing model with an important boundary effect taken into
consideration. The project will investigate the critical transmission power
required for each node to ensure that the network is connected asymptotically
almost surely under a shadowing model, and explore the relation between the
probability that the network is connected and the probability that the network
has no isolated nodes. The impact of radio irregularity on network connectivity
and radio interference in practical multihop wireless networks under the
shadowing model will be examined. The ultimate goal of this project is to make
significant improvements for research and education in computer science at Paine
College and increase the participation of African American undergraduate
students in computer science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid
proliferation of mobile and wireless devices provides an excellent opportunity
for theoretic research in the wireless networking area. The log-normal shadowing
model is a realistic radio propagation model which has been widely used. The
important boundary effect must be taken into consideration in any practical
multihop wireless networks. Under such a shadowing model with the boundary
effect included, little is known about connectivity of practical multihop
wireless networks and the impact of radio irregularity on connectivity and
interference. The results of this research will be of interest in areas such as
throughput capacity, virtual backbone, topology control, routing protocols,
information theory and networking. Multihop wireless networks are expected to
play a key role in solving problems such as securing our homeland, protecting
the infrastructure, monitoring conditions in the biosphere, or in the diagnosis
and treatment of illnesses.