* 1238464
* Workshop for the Future of Discovery, Innovation, and Learning, October 9, 2012, University of Michigan
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* James Duderstadt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2013
* USD 88,853.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a workshop that focuses on the
impact of rapidly evolving information and communications technology, i.e.,
cyber-infrastructures, on the activities of discovery, innovation, and learning.
Cyber-infrastructure in discovery and learning is of significant current
interest. Paradigm shifts that have impacted many industries appear poised to
transform higher education and the academic research
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the workshop are to set an agenda
for how to transform the what, the how, and who participates in discovery and
learning; to personalize and broaden participation in discovery and learning;
and to accelerate discovery and the transfer from discovery to innovative use.
The specific workshop objectives are to: 1) explore and articulate key research
questions, likely game-changers, and possible paradigm shifts, 2) frame an
interdisciplinary research agenda for the next decade, and 3) identify possible
research programs, experiments, and organizational structures that would best
meet the needs of the nation in this rapidly changing environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;New paradigms are rapidly
emerging for learning and education that challenge the use of cyber-
infrastructure as a platform for enhancing knowledge communities and for
expanding their scope and participation unconstrained by time and distance. Our
world has entered a period of rapid and profound economic, social, and political
transformation driven by knowledge and innovation. Much of this workshop focus
is to set an agenda for understanding the rapidly changing needs of society for
workforce learning and skills, new knowledge, research, innovation, and
creativity in a world increasingly integrated and transformed by digital
technology. The impact of demographic change, workplace needs (adaptive,
ubiquitous, and lifelong learning opportunities), and learning structures
(explicit, tacit, and intuitive knowledge) are considered as well as redesigns
for learning systems at the K-12, higher education, workplace, and lifelong
learning. And, the discussion and products of this workshop will likely be
useful in the pursuit of new science.