* 1238985
* EAGER: Integrated On-Board SiC-based Level-3 Charging for Plug-In Electric Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Alireza Khaligh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2015
* USD 95,498.00

Research Objectives and Approaches: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to investigate, design, and develop an integrated on-board silicon
carbide (SiC) based level-3 charger, compatible with level-1 and level-2
charging, using the propulsion machine and its inverter for next generation of
plug-in electric vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to conduct a
comprehensive propulsion motor and inverter analyses to propose a
rectifier/charger topology to charge the battery. The research will investigate
the possibility of eliminating power factor correction inductors for both
single-phase and three-phase charging by utilizing the propulsion machine
windings, without producing torque.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will achieve breakthroughs in control,
modeling and design of power electronic interfaces for electric vehicles. It
will be fundamental research for scientific understanding of motor-integrated
inverter/chargers. This important work will (a) lead to generic methodologies
for obtaining optimal design of level-3 chargers and introducing control
strategies to prevent torque generation during three-phase charging; and (b)
involve multidisciplinary research in power electronics, adjustable speed
drives, control, and power management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projected outcome of this research will promote
widespread adoption of EVs through enabling EV owners to take longer trips and
refuel along the way, similar to a gas station visit. The highest quality
integrated education and research will be ensured to meet the emerging workforce
and educational needs of U.S. energy industry by educating young and talented
students. The results will be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and
educational achievements. Efforts will be made to engage students from
underrepresented groups in the project.