* 1238767
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Developing a Social Computing Program at North Carolina A&amp;T State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Albert Esterline, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Developing a Social Computing Program
at North Carolina A&amp;T State University - has the goal to establish a
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science (BSCS) concentration in Social
Computing. Graduates with training in social computing are prepared to inform
empirical research, professional practice, and public and social policy as it
pertains to both information technology and social change in a globalized
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a joint effort of the Departments
of Computer Science, Mathematics, and Sociology and will strengthen partnerships
among the departments. The project will create a new, interdisciplinary
curriculum model for a BSCS concentration in Social Computing. Such a curriculum
will allow students in the field of computer science to learn about social
computing and social computational systems, allow students in mathematics to
apply mathematics to social computing, and allow students in sociology and
psychology to learn about social computational systems. New courses such as
introduction to social computational systems, mathematics for social computing
science, and social issues relating to social computing will be developed. The
curriculum and instructional materials developed by this project can be adopted
by faculty at other colleges and universities. The project team will host a
workshop at the ASE/IEEE International Conference on Social Computing. The team
will disseminate instructional materials for the new courses and introduce the
software tools that were developed in the social computing lab. This project
will increase the educational and career opportunities for African American
students majoring in computer science, mathematics, and sociology at NCA&amp;T
State University.