* 1238731
* MCA-PGR:  A Phylogenetically Informed Investigation of Transcriptome Evolution and Transcriptome Response of the Tropical Crop Genus Leucaena (Leguminosae) to Psyllid Herbivores
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* C. Donovan Bailey, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 01/31/2017
* USD 861,269.00

PI: C. Donovan Bailey (New Mexico State University - Las Cruces)

Senior Collaborator - Colin Hughes (Zurich Botanical Garden)

The extensive application of next generation sequencing in agricultural research
has focused on yield improvements in the most important global food crops (e.g.,
corn, wheat, rice, and soybean). However, lesser-known crops in tropical systems
are also of tremendous significance; yet these receive comparatively little
research attention. Several such plant groups are broadly known as "multipurpose
crops", often representing key elements in sustainable agriculture that are
fundamental to production gains in mainstream crops grown in impoverished
regions. One such lesser-known system includes members of the genus Leucaena,
which comprises 24 nitrogen-fixing species of small trees and shrubs. The
unusually high leaf protein content of Leucaena (particularly L. leucocephala)
helped to garner the titles "miracle tree" and "alfalfa of the tropics" and
resulted in small- and large-scale plantings reaching 5 million lowland tropical
hectares by the late 1980s. These introduced plantations provide: 1) unique
protein-rich leaves for animal feed in livestock production systems, 2) green
manure used as nitrogen-rich fertilizer for crops and for soil stabilization in
alley-cropping systems, and 3) rapidly renewable woody biomass for construction,
fuelwood, and even biofuels through lignocellulosic precursors. The goal of this
project is to investigate how plant transcriptomes change through time and in
association with diversification of species. Specifically, a cost- effective and
phylogenetically informed approach will be used to sequence, assemble, and
compare sets of expressed genes (transcriptomes) from all species of Leucaena.
Insect feeding trials will be used to identify genes and broad metabolic
pathways associated with psyllid insect resistance and susceptibility among
different species of Leucaena. In addition, the project will use the data
generated to investigate broad patterns of transcriptome size variation and
identify some of the specific changes that have been associated with speciation
through geographic isolation in comparison to hybrid speciation associated with
genome duplication (allopolyploidy). Finally the data generated will be used to
develop molecular markers for plant breeding and other studies.

Newly developed breeding tools for tropical woody species are critical for
future widespread use as contributors to sustainable agriculture in poor
tropical regions of the world. NMSU is a minority serving university with
existing programs successfully attracting underrepresented individuals to
careers in scientific research. Furthermore, this project includes the
implementation of a new course and undergraduate laboratories developed to
advance interest and the understanding of plant genome research among students
at a Hispanic Serving Institution using a plant system of interest to
Mesoamerican culture and heritage. Support of this MCA-PGR project will provide
extensive training and mentoring for the PI, associated postdoctoral fellow and
graduate student who will work closely with a primary investigator applying new
genomics technologies to address these research questions. Sequence data derived
from this project will be made available through a project website and long-term
through the NCBI's Short Read Archive. Links to specific data sources will be
provided as they are developed and released at http://biology-
web.nmsu.edu/bailey/.