* 1238201
* Post-translational Modifications as Modulators of Crop Plant Defense Signaling: a Systems Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Stephen Kron, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Lyons
* 11/30/2017
* USD 2,053,146.00

PI: Jean T. Greenberg (University of Chicago)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Stephen J. Kron (University of Chicago) and Howard C. Hang (Rockefeller
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of pathogenic microbes with
plants elicits signaling pathways that can dictate the outcome of infection.
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) elaborated after microbial perception
enable a flexible mechanism for plants to activate networks of signaling events
that promote host resistance. However, proteins such as acetyltransferase (AC-
TR) effectors that are injected into plants by microbes can modify host
proteins, which are then affected in their signaling functions due to
alterations in folding, cellular location, enzymatic activity, ability to bind
other proteins and/or stability. The recent availability of genomic sequence
data of economically important plants and new technologies now makes it feasible
to do systems-level global analysis of PTMs and to further dissect their impact
on disease resistance. The goal of this project is to dissect how PTMs of plant
proteins during infection modulates the ability of crop plants to defend against
pathogenic bacteria. The project will (1) optimize in vitro methods for studying
protein acetylation using AC-TR effectors from bacteria and host substrates; (2)
perform global analyses of host protein acetylation in tomato using AC-TR
effectors and test the role of select acetylated targets in plant defense; and
(3) evaluate the impact of acetylation on defense signaling by analyzing global
changes host protein phosphorylation, another PTM that is potentially
competitive with acetylation. The project will develop reagents that will be
used (and disseminated to the community) to quantitatively study signaling
dynamics and relate changes in dynamics due to acetylation to infection
outcomes. The global analysis of PTMs performed during this research will
enhance the value of genomic studies and give a systems-level understanding of
defense signaling that will expand the opportunities for crop improvements. The
project will integrate research and teaching to provide interdisciplinary
training to project personnel in proteomics, chemical biology, biochemistry,
molecular genetics and plant-microbe interactions. It will also have broad
impact by providing new tools and reagents to the community for analyzing
defense signaling, and giving access to students from other universities to
practical training through workshops on the analysis of PTMs. Inclusion of
students from underrepresented groups will also have an impact on broadening
participation in research of diverse groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
innovation of the project is the development and application of new methods for
analyzing different acetylation sites in proteins at a global scale in relation
to other potentially competitive modifications. The approach will be
transformative for the study of acetylation in relation to other protein
modifications in crop plants and applicable to a broad variety of plants and
other organisms. A key outreach component will be three-day workshops for
students from other institutions to learn the principles of detecting
modifications of plant proteins. Students will gain hands-on experience on the
generation and analysis of data on post-translational modifications using mass
spectrometry. Additional outreach efforts will include participation in
discussions about this project and demonstrations with school groups that visit
the University of Chicago and Rockefeller University, coordination with teachers
to modernize science curricula and discussions about research with the public at
community fairs. This project will provide important interdisciplinary training
in chemical biology, proteomics, biochemistry, molecular genetics and plant
pathology to project personnel, including postdoctoral scholars and students at
the graduate, post-baccalaureate, undergraduate and high school levels. Project
personnel will be drawn from diverse groups to broaden participation in research
science. Finally, the project will develop useful reagents (antibodies) and
protocols to detect modifications in tomato proteins. The public will have
access to the information generated by the project such as specific proteins
that are subject to modification and approaches to monitor modifications through
peer-reviewed publications and the project website. The public will also have
access to reagents generated such as antibodies and tomato seeds as well as
primary MS/MS spectra upon request. Proteomics datasets will also be deposited
in one or more databases such as P3DB (http://p3db.org/).