* 1238977
* Time-Resolved Electrospray Mass Spectrometric Studies of Atmospheric Gas-liquid Reactions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Hoffmann, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 674,297.00

Important but poorly constrained multiphase chemical pathways limit current
understanding of the atmospheric processing and global budgets of volatile
organic compounds. Electrospray mass spectrometry (ES-MS) is a powerful tool
with which to investigate interfacial reactions on liquid microjets at high
temporal resolution. The approach allows simultaneous detection of reactants,
primary products, and intermediates in the absence of secondary chemistry for a
wide variety of chemical reactions under realistic conditions. Through this
project, the PI will incorporate a technique of gas-beam modulation and pulsed
ion-gating detection to his existing coupled reactor and ES-MS system. The new
approach will resolve reactive events on surfaces of water droplets in the
absence of an applied external field. The new instrument will be used to
investigate the heterogeneous chemistry of biogenic gases on the surface of
mildly acidic water. Previous evidence indicates that the weakly hydrated H3O+
in small water clusters is able to protonate non-alkane organic gases at the
air-water interface below pH 4. It is likely that biogenic olefins would be
similarly protonated and engage in cationic oligomerization on typical
environmental surfaces. This phenomenon would provide a universal mechanism for
the dry deposition of most volatile organic gases. The project will addresses
important issues in global atmospheric chemistry using innovative experimental
approaches based on a newly proposed technique. Results are expected to fill
outstanding gaps in current understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of
biogenic gases and secondary aerosol formation and provide fundamental insight
into the scavenging and subsequent air-to-water transfer of atmospheric CO2 on
water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will (1) help resolve multi-phasic
interfacial processes that are important to atmospheric chemistry and thereby
lay the foundation of more realistic model mechanisms and (2) expose students to
new, wider perspectives and skills in global environmental chemistry. Education
and outreach activities include mentoring a postdoctoral fellow, a graduate
student, and undergraduate students. Educational opportunities will be extended
to community college students (through a partnership with Oak Crest Institute of
Science) and to members of traditionally underrepresented groups (through
Caltech's MURF program and a collaboration with Pasadena City College).