* 1238485
* EAGER: Ultra High-speed Bandwidth for Performance Improvements in Radar Networks for Weather and Aircraft Surveillance
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Michael Zink, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 03/31/2014
* USD 289,029.00

This project demonstrates the benefits of connecting radars to ultra high-speed
networks to improve hazardous weather warning and response and the
identification and tracking of small, low-flying aircraft by developing new
detection algorithms that operate directly on uncompressed, high-bandwidth radar
data. Although radar networks are a critical part of the nation's infrastructure
for weather observation and aircraft surveillance, today's best-effort Internet
is used to transport data from radars to a variety of end users for decision-
making. To allow for real-time delivery, the radar data are compressed and
important information can be lost during this process. Transmitting uncompressed
radar data over ultra high-speed networks could enable advanced, very
geographically precise detection and prediction of weather hazards resulting in
benefits to public safety and the economy. In addition, the ability to track,
small low-flying aircraft is important for drug enforcement and for tracking
Unmanned Aircraft Systems used for homeland security and law enforcement that
are expected to be prevalent in urban areas in the near future. The project will
be conducted using a test bed of high resolution, low-cost radar located in the
Dallas Fort Worth Metroplex linked to users such as emergency managers and
National Weather Service forecasters. To manage the increased demand for
processing and networking resources from the usage of high-bandwidth data
techniques related to the usage of on-demand networks (SDN) and compute
resources (cloud computing) are studied.