* 1238075
* Conference Grant Proposal for 39th IEEE ICOPS. Conference to be held in  Edinburgh, Scotland; July 8-12, 2012
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* John Verboncoeur, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 05/31/2013
* USD 8,000.00

ICOPS is an internationally renowned, well-attended conference involving topics
of direct interest to the NSF, Universities, DOE, Air Force, and many others.
The meeting is sponsored by the IEEE Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Society (NPSS).
ICOPS has been held annually since 1974. Recent meetings were held in Chicago IL
(2011), Norfolk VA (2010), San Diego CA (2009), Karlsruhe Germany (2008),
Albuquerque NM (2007). This year's meeting will be held in Edinburgh Scotland UK
at the early July 2012.

In 2012, the PI is projecting an attendance of approximately 700 participants.
It is anticipated that 25% will be Government/Federal attendees and 75% will be
non-federal attendees. The conference will include plenary, oral, and poster
sessions on research in plasma science and technology and a Prize Addresses by
the recipients of the the IEEE Marie Shklodowska-Curie Award and the IEEE NPSS
Plasma Science and Applications Committee Award. Oral sessions will include both
invited and contributed papers. Invited papers are allotted 25 minutes for
presentation and 5 minutes for questions. Contributed papers are allotted 12
minutes for presentation and 3 minutes for questions. The ICOPS Minicourse is on
Plasma Medicine and Health Care.

Applications of plasma technologies are expanding in many new areas for
materials processing, lighting, environmental protection, and medical research
and treatment. All of these technologies depend on a strong underpinning of
basic research traditionally supported by our meeting. The program of the 39th
ICOPS will emphasize both the traditional areas of plasma science and these new
areas of growth through the plenary talks and the regular technical program.

This award provides funding to partially support student travel grants,
particularly for underrepresented minorities, activities to promote women in
engineering, and help in awards costs. The travel grants will be awarded to
those students who will be presenting papers (oral talks and posters) as first
authors.