* 1238189
* TAL Effector Targeting in Plant Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Frank White, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,983,056.00

PI: Frank White (Kansas State University) Co-PIs: Adam Bogdanove (Cornell
University), Bing Yang (Iowa State University), and Volker Brendel (Indiana
University)

Rice, a major food source for the world population, presents an excellent
opportunity for in-depth analyses of the adaptive processes of plant disease
susceptibility. In particular, the two groups of bacteria within the species
Xanthomonas oryzae are the causal agents of bacterial blight and bacterial leaf
streak diseases of rice. The bacteria cause disease, in part, modulating host
gene expression utilizing a remarkable repertoire of transcription activation-
like (TAL) effectors. TAL effectors are proteins synthesized in bacteria and
transferred to plant cells during the infection process. The host
transcriptional responses to TAL effector attack are complex, and unraveling of
the transcriptional "shock" due to the large repertoire of TAL effectors
injected into the host cells behooves a more detailed understanding of host gene
response to individual TAL effectors. At the same time, other disease complexes
that involve large repertoires of TAL effectors in the respective pathogen, and
additional disease complexes will be profiled. This project will characterize
the host gene expression responses to infection by Xanthomonas pathogens of
rice, wheat, cotton, soybeans, and alfalfa using high through-put nucleic acid
sequencing technologies. The role played by select host genes whose expression
is found to be highly up-regulated in response to specific TAL effectors will be
analyzed using advanced gene targeting technologies. TAL effectors function by
binding to sequences in the host genome that direct the expression of individual
genes, which are known as promoters. The project will also develop refined
bioinformatic tools derived from shared features of promoters that are targeted
by specific TAL effectors. This information will improve our insight into the
vulnerabilities of plants to transcriptional shock and greatly further our
ability to predict TAL effector target sites in a genome and to effectively
design custom TAL effectors for targeted gene manipulation.

This project will elucidate the processes in rice susceptibility and resistance
to bacterial blight and bacterial leaf streak, and establish important, broadly
relevant concepts of plant-pathogen interactions and TAL effector biotechnology.
The results will provide insight into strategies for achieving durable and broad
resistance against disease, which, in itself, can have wide-reaching impacts on
the environment and quality of life. The research will enhance the educational
environments at ISU, KSU, Cornell, and IU and strengthen international
collaborative research. Research activities will be integrated with education
and outreach by mentoring graduate student and postdocs, providing internships
for under-represented undergraduate students, and providing research experiences
to high school students and teachers. Workshops will be conducted that will be
open to interested national and international students and researchers in the
field. The public will have access to the data at various public databases
including the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database at NCBI. Links to data,
publications and repositories will also be available at a project website at
Gramene.