* 1238394
* WORKSHOP: ThinkTank (Doctoral Consortium) at ICAD 2012
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Bruce Walker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 24,640.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 8
promising graduate students from the United States plus about 4 from abroad, for
a total of 12, along with distinguished research faculty. The 2-day event will
take place immediately preceding and in conjunction with the 2012 International
Conference on Auditory Display (ICAD 2012), which will be held June 18-22 at the
PI's institution in Atlanta. ICAD is the premier international forum for
presenting research on the use of sound to display data, monitor systems, and
provide enhanced user interfaces for computers and virtual reality systems. It
is unique in its singular focus on auditory displays and the array of
perception, technology, and application areas that this encompasses; this
includes, for example, data sonification, auditory wayfinding, auditory graphs,
speech interfaces, virtual environments, and associated perceptual, cognitive,
technical, and technological research and development. Many of the
interdisciplinary research and development efforts are of direct relevance to
persons with perceptual disabilities, especially visual impairments; for
example, developing wayfinding systems for the blind requires research into
effective distance cues and object identifiers used in auditory displays.
Research into the efficacy of auditory graphs may be used to help visually
impaired students and scientists participate more fully in science. Even
household devices can have more effective auditory displays that provide richer
information than the basic "beeps" they presently tend to have. A common
approach in this field is Universal Design, wherein a display strategy is
developed once, to be used by all kinds of users, including those with and
without specific access issues. More details about the conference are available
at http://icad2012.icad.org.

The doctoral consortium will bring together graduate students from diverse
backgrounds (e.g., engineering, computing, music, and psychology), so that they
can experience the broad spectrum of approaches to auditory displays, assistive
technologies and universal design, while exploring their research interests
through interaction with peers and under the guidance of a panel of
distinguished experts in the field. To these ends, the ThinkTank will develop a
supportive community of scholars and a spirit of collaborative research, by
providing participants with a friendly and open, yet rigorous, scientific forum
to present their research ideas, to listen to ongoing work from peer students,
and to receive constructive feedback. Student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the ThinkTank and will receive feedback from
the faculty panel. The feedback is designed to help students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to related research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. The ThinkTank will also provide students
with relevant information about important issues for doctoral candidates,
whether they are considering academic or industrial career paths. The event will
further offer invited speakers and discussion groups, and will involve many
students as part of the audience and discussion groups, in addition to those
presenting their work. Each student participant will furthermore present a
poster about his/her work during the conference proper. An evaluation of the
ThinkTank will be conducted and the findings will be made available to the
organizers of future conferences and consortia.

Broader Impacts: This event will promote scholarship and networking among new
researchers in an important emerging interdisciplinary area, and will help shape
ongoing and future research projects that have clear and important implications
for development of assistive technologies and universal access. The doctoral
consortium will afford participants exposure to a larger community, allowing
them to bond among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. Because the students and faculty constitute a
diverse group across a variety of dimensions, including nationality and culture,
scientific discipline, and institution (no more than one apiece), the students'
horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field.