* 1238431
* FDA SIR: Tools, Processes, and Artifacts for Certifiable Clinical Applications in Interoperable Medical Device Frameworks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* - Robby, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2013
* USD 80,000.00

This project is a collaboration under the NSF-FDA Scholar-In-Residence (SIR)
program. The objective of this research is to advance regulatory science for
next generation composite medical systems that are based on the concept of
medical application platforms (MAP). A MAP is a safety- and security-critical
real-time computing platform for (a) integrating heterogeneous devices, medical
IT systems, and information displays via a communication infrastructure and (b)
hosting application programs ("apps") that provide medical utility via the
ability to both acquire information from and update/control integrated devices,
IT systems, and displays. The intellectual merit of the project lies in
constructing and evaluating a prototype framework for developing and certifying
MAP apps that follow the Integrated Clinical Environment(ICE) architecture
standard. The project will study approaches for rigorous requirements and
architecture specifications that will enable ICE apps to safely interoperate
with other medical devices and other service within ICE. These concepts will be
illustrated using mock ICE apps developed during the project. In consultation
with engineers from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the project will
construct model risk management and regulatory artifacts associated with ICE
apps.

The impact of this work centers around helping FDA engineers understand the
architectural and safety issues associated with MAPs and identifying best
practices that can lead to high assurance of MAP-based medical systems.
Additionally, the project will produce concrete app examples that will provide
science-based inputs into the design of a new regulatory approach that supports
compositional regulation of heterogeneous multi-vendor ICE systems.