* 1238157
* Mathematics and Science Teacher Education Residency
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Stephen Uzzo, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2019
* USD 7,609,229.00

The Mathematics and Science Teacher Education Residency (MASTER) project -
including as core partners Hunter College of the City University of New York,
New Visions for Public Schools, the New York City Department of Education, and
the New York Hall of Science, with additional support from Internationals
Network for Public Schools - is creating an innovative residency and induction
program in the service of increased student learning in high-needs New York City
schools. Building upon research showing that teacher education is most effective
when enacted in concert with highly aligned, practical learning of content in
the pedagogical context, the MASTER partners are designing, implementing,
refining, and testing a model of secondary science and mathematics candidate
recruitment, teacher preparation, induction and professional development.
Moreover, the MASTER project is supporting three cohorts of 25 novice teachers
and their mentors to serve in New Visions/NYC DOE schools, leading to the
establishment of school communities that support collaborative pre-service
teacher learning and ongoing teacher development. Upon satisfactory completion
of their first residency year, MASTER residents receive their initial New York
State certification in Adolescence Education in Mathematics, Biology, Earth
Science, or Chemistry; in year two, after successful coursework completion and
demonstration of effective instruction, they earn their Hunter College master's
degree. The MASTER effort includes multiple approaches designed to develop
teachers' pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) in conjunction with training in
inquiry-based instructional strategies in an effort to increase the
effectiveness of novice science and mathematics teachers and their mentors in
delivering high quality instruction to urban secondary students. The project
also impacts whole-school reform efforts through ongoing, aligned induction work
with in-service teachers, and the production and dissemination of materials
aligned to Common Core State Standards for Mathematics and Next Generation
Science Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MASTER bridges the divide between
traditional, alternative and clinically based programs by creating a clinically-
rich, carefully sequenced, formatively assessed model that is constantly being
evaluated against concrete outcome measures of student learning. As a
comprehensive approach to building pre- and in-service teachers' PCK in order to
increase student achievement, MASTER responds to the Math and Science
Partnership program's call for innovations in the preparation of K-12 teachers
of science, mathematics, engineering, and/or computer science at the pre-service
level and support of new teachers during their early years in the profession. To
validate outcomes, and produce findings that others may incorporate in their own
designs for teacher preparation, MASTER research and evaluation is focused on
demonstrating that:&lt;br/&gt; - The PCK-focused residency and mentor training
curricula created by partners with distinct and deep expertise will increase the
likelihood that novice and experienced mathematics and science teachers develop
effective and engaging practices.&lt;br/&gt; - Participating mentor teachers and
their colleagues will develop as peer leaders and will share their learning
across departments and schools, creating a shift in school-wide instructional
culture.&lt;br/&gt; - Students in participating teachers' classrooms will engage
in project-based learning with PCK-trained teachers across multiple years,
thereby increasing the likelihood that they will deepen their
science/mathematics learning and take more science classes as well as higher-
level mathematics courses (beyond the New York City requirements for
graduation).