* 1238048
* Genomic and Functional Analysis of Circadian Rhythms and Growth Vigor in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Z. Jeffrey Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,499,998.00

PI: Z. Jeffrey Chen (The University of Texas at Austin)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Frank G. Harmon (University of California - Berkeley/USDA-
ARS)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biological clocks orchestrate spatial and temporal
control of growth and metabolism, leading to synchronous interactions between
circadian rhythms and metabolic homoeostasis. In plants, maintenance of robust
circadian rhythms promotes growth and fitness. Hybrids formed between strains or
allopolyploids formed between species often show hybrid vigor or heterosis:
superior levels of growth, biomass, and fertility in the hybrids compared to the
parents. The mechanisms underlying heterosis are poorly understood. A recent
study found a direct link between growth vigor and the circadian clock.
Alterations in the expression waveform of key circadian clock genes in
Arabidopsis hybrids and allotetraploids promote metabolic outputs including
chlorophyll biosynthesis and starch metabolism. Upregulation of light signaling,
photosynthesis, and starch metabolic genes in hybrids results from epigenetic
repression of the circadian clock repressor genes during the day that, in turn,
causes upregulation of clock activators and downstream metabolic genes. Although
diurnal rhythms in gene expression, photosynthesis, and starch metabolism have
been documented in maize, it is unknown whether the circadian-mediated metabolic
vigor found in Arabidopsis hybrids and allopolyploids is directly applicable to
the improvement of hybrid crops such as maize. Maize is among the best organisms
for studying heterosis. Moreover, maize performs C4 photosynthesis,
characterized by anatomical and biochemical specialization that increases net
carbon assimilation at high temperatures. Part of this specialization in C4
plants may involve clock-regulated metabolic pathways. This project will test
how circadian rhythms control metabolism and development in maize, as well as
how circadian and other regulatory networks affect growth vigor in maize
hybrids. Specific objectives are to (1) determine direct targets of clock genes
in biological pathways including metabolism in maize hybrids and their inbred
parents; (2) test how circadian clock gene expression and growth vigor in maize
hybrids are controlled at levels of chromatin and metabolism; and (3) elucidate
molecular bases for circadian regulation of metabolism and growth vigor in maize
inbreds and hybrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research is
transformative for many fundamental areas of biology ranging from circadian
rhythms, first discovered in heliotrope plants in 1726, to hybrid vigor or
heterosis, a widespread phenomenon that has intrigued many scientists, including
Charles Darwin. The results from this work impact directly on improvement of
hybrid crops, most notably maize and sorghum, which are of great importance to
agriculture, food security, biofuels, and human health. Mechanistic insights
into circadian regulation of metabolic vigor in plant hybrids are also
applicable to the circadian rhythms in metabolism and physiology found in other
sexually reproducing organisms like humans. With regard to outreach and
training, this project will provide summer student internships for future
science teachers through the UTeach program. The University of Texas at Austin
(UT Austin) developed the UTeach program, and many other institutions across the
country have replicated it. In addition, the project will provide research
training opportunities for Master of Science (MSc) students at Alcorn State
University and Mississippi Valley State University, two Historically Black
Colleges/Universities. Sequence data will be available for public through GEO,
MaizeGDB, and Gramene. Requests for seed and information about germplasm
generated in this project will be available through MaizeGDB.