* 1238125
* Physiological and Genetic Mechanisms Underlying Salt Tolerance in Rice Across Developmental Stages
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Argelia Lorence, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 02/28/2018
* USD 2,035,509.00

PI: Harkamal Walia (University of Nebraska)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Dong
Wang, Aaron Lorenz, Ashok Samal(University of Nebraska), Argelia Lorence
(Arkansas State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Mark Tester
(Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics), Abdelbagi Ismail
(International Rice Research Institute, The Philippines), Susan McCouch (Cornell
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salinity is one of the major environmental
limitations for irrigated agriculture with yield losses estimated to exceed $12
billion dollars annually. Only 17% of agriculture is under irrigation, yet it
provides a third of the global food supply. Rice is arguably the most important
crop for global food security, but is also the most salt-sensitive among staple
cereals. The extent of genetic variation for salt tolerance in rice is largely
unknown and under-utilized. This project aims to fill this knowledge gap by
utilizing newly developed genomic resources in combination with recent advances
in high-throughput image-based phenotyping to elucidate the underlying genetic
basis of adaptive responses to salinity stress. This project will provide
genome-level information that will link genes and pathways associated with
physiological responses associated with salinity tolerance in rice. Knowledge
derived from this work will ultimately inform breeders as to which alleles
present in the vast genetic diversity of germplasm banks can be introduced into
elite cultivars for salt tolerance. This comprehensive study of physiological
impact of salt stress in rice will be broadly useful for other cereals such as
wheat and maize. Both the biological knowledge and the methodologies used and
refined during the course of data analysis will be valuable for large-scale
biology projects that have significant phenomics and genomics
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sequence data will be deposited at the NCBI and
Gramene. Phenotypic, sequence, and GWAS data will be available via the project
website. Image analysis software and scripts will be available upon request.
Investigators will develop multidisciplinary active learning modules for
undergraduate students in Plant Physiology and Image Analysis courses at the
University of Nebraska and at summer workshops for graduate students and
predominantly minority undergraduates at Arkansas State University. Development
of instructional material based on the research in this project will be broadly
useful in both traditional and online learning environments. Six students and
postdoctoral scientists will be trained in multidisciplinary research at the
intersection of plant physiology, quantitative genetics, bioinformatics and
image informatics. Training students in phenomics will fill a void as high-
throughput phenotyping is increasingly deployed in industry but not yet
available at most public institutions for research and training.