* 1238136
* iEvolve with STEM: Inquiry and Engagement to Invigorate and Optimize Learning for Everyone
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2019
* William Midden, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 12/31/2019
* USD 7,277,348.00

This project is improving student performance in science through adoption of a
"citizen science" model supported by teacher professional development, which
also cultivates "action research" skills. The lead partner is Bowling Green
State University with additional core partners being the Perkins Local Schools
and the Sandusky City Schools. Supporting partners are The Ohio State University
Stone Lab, University of Toledo, Owens Community College, Lourdes University,
The Toledo Zoo, Metroparks of the Toledo Area, and the Erie County Soil and
Water Conservation District. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key innovations are: 1)
students and teachers in grades 3 through 8 participate in science research
projects led by professional scientists in association with a variety of
community and higher education partners; 2) teachers learn how to lead students
in science research by participating in a rigorous 3-year program of
professional development as members of Professional Learning Communities; 3)
teachers and students learn to lead through publication of their findings to
their peers, to their local communities, and to the professional science
community; and 4) teachers adopt efficient strategies for differentiating
instruction to maximize learning for all students. The primary research
questions focus on how student engagement and motivation relate to achievement
of rigorous learning outcomes and to what degree classroom participation in
citizen science research improves motivation, engagement, and achievement. The
instructional innovations directly impact learning for more than 6,000 students
in grades 3 through 8.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of iEvolve with STEM
are being broadly disseminated as Bowling Green State University is the
administrative home for the Northwest Ohio Center for Excellence (NWO), a
coalition of five institutions of higher education, a large number of school
districts, and a variety of non-profit organizations and businesses devoted to
or involved in STEM in diverse ways. The project vision is part of a larger,
more comprehensive vision for the entire 29 county region of northwest Ohio.