* 1238895
* Implementation Project: Philander Smith College HBCU-UP Project II
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Samar Swaid, Philander Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,749,999.00

The project entitled - Philander Smith College HBCU-UP Project II - builds on a
very successful previous implementation project and has the goal to have an
impact on the institutional capacity by enhancing the competitiveness, currency,
and efficiency of the STEM education experience at Philander Smith College
(PSC). In the 2011-2012 academic year, 221 of the 732 students enrolled at the
institution were STEM majors. The project seeks to increase the number of
research prepared students, STEM graduates, and students attending graduate
schools with a STEM focus. The project aims to enhance the current STEM
undergraduate research infrastructure, improve STEM education by developing and
implementing cyberinfrastructure-based strategies in teaching and learning, and
prepare incoming freshmen for the transition from high school to college.

The project will establish models that promote the integration of inquiry-based
learning environments in STEM disciplines through scholarly research. It seeks
to infuse effective innovative cyberinfrastructure-based resources, concepts,
and tools to enhance the overall integration of technology in PSC's STEM
educational setting. Stakeholders include underrepresented high school students,
undergraduate students, and the overall STEM community. Results will be
published to contribute to the body of knowledge that will lead to the
understanding of educating underrepresented undergraduate students in STEM at a
small liberal arts institution.