* 1238625
* GeniVille: Exploring the Intersection of School and Social Media
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Paul Horwitz, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2014
* USD 498,251.00

This project examines the design principles by which computer-based science
learning experiences for students designed for classroom use can be integrated
into virtual worlds that leverage students' learning of science in an informal
and collaborative online environment. GeniVille, developed and studied by the
Concord Consortium, is the integration of Geniverse, a education based game that
develops middle school students' understanding of genetics with Whyville,
developed and studied by Numedeon, Inc., an educational virtual word in which
students can engage in a wide variety of science activities and games. Genivers
has been extensively researched in its implementation in the middle school
science classroom. Research on Whyville has focused on how the learning
environment supports the voluntary participation of students anywhere and
anytime. This project seeks to develop an understanding of how these two
interventions can be merged together and to explore mechanisms to create
engagement and persistence through incentive structures that are interwoven with
the game activities. The project examines the evidence that students in middle
schools in Boston learn the genetics content that is the learning objective of
GeniVille.

The project uses an iterative approach to the modification of Geniverse
activites and the Whyville context so that the structured learning environment
is accessible to students working collaboratively within the less structured
context. The modification and expansion of the genetics activities of the
project by which various inheritance patterns of imaginary dragons are studied
continues over the course of the first year with pilot data collected from
students who voluntarily engage in the game. In the second year of the project,
teachers from middle schools in Boston who volunteer to be part of the project
will be introduced to the integrated learning environment and will either use
the virtual learning environment to teach genetics or will agree to engage their
students in their regular instruction. Student outcomes in terms of engagement,
persistence and understanding of genetics are measured within the virtual
learning environment. Interviews with students are built into the GeniVille
environment to gauge student interest. Observations of teachers engaging in
GeniVille with their students are conducted as well as interviews with
participating teachers.

This research and development project provides a resource that blends together
students learning in a computer simulation with their working in a collaborative
social networking virtual system. The integration of the software system is
designed to engage students in learning about genetics in a simulation that has
inherent interest to students with a learning environment that is also engaging
to them. The project leverages the sorts of learning environments that make the
best use of online opportunities for students, bringing rich disciplinary
knowledge to educational games. Knowing more about how students collaboratively
engage in learning about science in a social networking environment provides
information about design principles that have a wide application in the
development of new resources for the science classroom.