* 1238877
* Pan-STARRS1:   Operations; Public Data Release; Education and Outreach
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Eugene Magnier, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,366,907.00

AST-1238877&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Panoramic Survey Telescope &amp; Rapid
Response System (Pan-STARRS) is an innovative wide-field imaging facility
developed at the University of Hawaii's Institute for Astronomy (IfA). The first
telescope, Pan-STARRS1 or PS1, began full operations in May of 2010. Operating
the PS1 System includes managing the observatory, the telescope and its camera,
an image processing pipeline, a relational database, and servers for the reduced
science products. The PS1 Surveys include five specific studies covering a wide
range of astronomical problems: 1) a ~30,000 square degree survey of the entire
sky north of declination -30 degrees, 2) a medium deep survey of some 70 square
degrees in well-studied fields at high galactic latitude, 3) a solar system
ecliptic plane survey optimized for the discovery of Near Earth Objects and
Kuiper Belt Objects, 4) a stellar transit survey towards the Galactic bulge, and
5) a deep survey of the Andromeda galaxy (M31) to detect microlensing events.
The PS1 Surveys will extend the scientific impact of the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey (SDSS) with better image quality, depth, and area coverage, and will open
up time-domain astronomy to enable the discovery of transient and variable
phenomena. In order to make the PS1 data public and accessible as soon as
possible and thus fully to exploit their scientific potential, the Space
Telescope Science Institute (STScI) will create and support an archive of the
PS1 data products that can serve the entire astronomical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports three primary activities for
the PS1 project: 1) finish the last four months of PS1 operations and complete
the survey; 2) re-reduce the entire PS1 data set with a final astrometric
reference catalog and the best ("uber") photometric calibration; and 3) enable a
PS1 archive at STScI capable of serving the calibrated image data as well as a
database of all detections and ~30 billion astronomical objects. The impact of
making the PS1 data products available to the astronomical and outreach
communities cannot be overstated. The photometric data alone will provide a high
quality standard reference within the field of view of any astronomical imaging
program on any telescope observing within the PS1 survey region. The impact of
SDSS has been enormous: PS1 can confidently be expected to be even more
significant, due to its better spatial resolution and depth, wider and deeper
components, and access to the time domain.