* 1238265
* Collaborative Research: Center for Advanced Forestry Systems Phase II
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Jay Raymond, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP 1238324
&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State University &lt;br/&gt;Goldfarb
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP 1238265 &lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech &lt;br/&gt;Fox
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP 1238305 &lt;br/&gt;Oregon State University
&lt;br/&gt;Howe &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP 1238319 &lt;br/&gt;Purdue University
&lt;br/&gt;Michler &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for a
second five-year term (Phase II) of the NSF Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Advanced Forestry Systems (CAFS) sites including the North
Carolina State University (lead), Virginia Tech, Oregon State University and
Purdue University. The collaborative research conducted under the CAFS umbrella
focuses on optimizing genetic and cultural systems to produce high-quality raw
materials for new and existing forest products industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 50 years, much forestry research has taken
place in university-based, industry-supported, cooperative research programs.
These "coops" continue be extraordinarily successful at achieving research and
technological advances on topics of great relevance to the forest industry.
However, the ability to focus on specific disciplinary topics in response to
industrial guidance is also a limitation. Many of the problems and opportunities
facing forestry today, bridge disciplinary and regional boundaries. For
technological advances to be made, it is necessary to approach research
questions on multiple spatial and temporal scales, including the molecular,
cellular, individual-tree, stand, and ecosystem levels. The proposed Center
(CAFS) has been successful at providing the administrative structure and funding
that has allowed scientists from these existing cooperatives to initiate much
need cross-disciplinary research in areas of genetics, site manipulation, and
growth and yield modeling. The proposal presents a plan for the 2nd five-year
phase for the four original university CAFS sites, North Carolina State, Oregon
State, Purdue, and Virginia Tech. This proposal also serves as a research and
administrative template for the other five university sites that have joined
CAFS since its interception in late 2007. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
conducted by CAFS increases the competitiveness of forest products industries
and forest landowners by solving problems on multiple temporal and spatial
scales and determining fundamental solutions that transcend traditional species,
regional, and disciplinary boundaries. Member organizations of the Center
benefit by becoming knowledgeable about a wider range of technological
capabilities. In addition, technology transfer between Center scientists and
member personnel fosters rapid implementation of new technologies. The broader
scientific community benefits through refereed publications and presentations at
scientific meetings. During the Phase II period, graduate student training will
continue to be featured in Center research and technology transfer. Aggressive
recruiting for graduate students among under-represented groups will be
conducted, increasing the diversity of the workforce for both academia and
industry in this traditionally diversity-deficient discipline. Opportunities
will continue to be sought to involve undergraduate students in Center research
activities, exposing them to the excitement of forest science and encouraging
them to pursue graduate education.