* 1238912
* Targeted Infusion Project (TIP) Grant: Engaging Minority Students in Software Engineering Through Active Learning
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Umphress, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,966.00

The Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Engaging Minority Students in Software
Engineering Through Active Learning - seeks to adapt and implement industry
practices in a software engineering course. The project will construct, teach,
and assess a course that immerses students in realworld software engineering
practices through active learning. Students will work in an interactive
environment in which they are instructed on new techniques and then mentored in
the use of those techniques through a series of hands-on exercises. The faculty
at Alabama State University will work in collaboration with the software
engineering faculty at Auburn University to develop a software process that fits
the educational environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project
are to adapt software development industry best practices to classroom use;
incorporate software development tools into a student-friendly software
development environment; develop innovative learning materials and teaching
strategies for integrating and effectively using software industry best
practices in software engineering courses through active learning; Beta-test
instructional material; analyze achievement of outcomes through student and
industry feedback; and develop a web portal to provide communication and
dissemination for the project community as well for other HBCU's and computing
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this project to have a
significant impact on how software engineering courses are taught and how
students learn these concepts. The development of learning materials and
teaching strategies will be guided through the participation of faculty from
diverse institutions, including high schools, two-year and four-year colleges,
and of industrial practitioners.