* 1238719
* Implementation Grant: Coaching for Academic and Professional Success (CAPS) in STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Phillip Archer, Virginia Union University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,750,000.00

The implementation project entitled - Coaching for Academic and Professional
Success in STEM - builds on a planning grant and has the goals to reinvigorate
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education at the
Virginia Union University and significantly increase the number of graduates
that compete successfully for admission into graduate programs and/or the STEM
workforce. The main objectives of this project are to increase recruitment,
retention, and graduation rates in all STEM disciplines by at least 50% within
the next five years while maintaining the academic rigor that is required for
student success after graduation. Three strategic initiatives are designed to
meet the objectives: (1) the establishment of a STEM Summer Institute that
improves the preparedness of rising freshmen for college; (2) the implementation
of high-impact educational practices across the STEM curricula, and (3) the
establishment of a STEM Coaching Team.

While the strategies implemented in this project will improve STEM education at
Virginia Union University, it is anticipated that they will be equally effective
at other small liberal arts institutions and that this project can serve as a
national model. The project emphasizes the importance of close relationships
between undergraduate STEM programs, high schools, graduate institutions, and
employers of STEM graduates, and, consequently, will enhance the mission of each
of these partners.