* 1238612
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the Bias of Alternative Statistical Inference Methods in Sequential Mixed-Mode Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Zeynep Suzer Gurtekin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,153.00

Sequential mixed-mode surveys use a mix of modes or data collection methods such
as mail, telephone, in-person, and web to increase the number of people who
respond to a survey. In sequential designs, there is usually no control in
assigning subgroups of respondents to modes. As a result, nonrandom assignment
of modes is an inherent characteristic of sequential mixed-mode surveys. This
design is important since there are usually limited funds to probe people to
respond. While the goal of using mixed modes is clear, one compelling research
question is how the nonrandom mix of mode impacts survey data and how these
effects should be handled in estimating survey population characteristics such
as mean income, and health insurance coverage. To date, since the nonrandom mix
of modes poses a challenge in evaluating the mode effects, the existing
inference methods assume that mode effects can be ignored in sequential mixed-
mode surveys despite their unknown impact on the quality of the survey
estimates. This research develops and evaluates the statistical inference
methods accounting for nonrandom mode effects to test the comparability of the
survey estimates from the different modes. In parallel, this project also
develops statistical inference methods accounting for both nonresponse and
nonrandom mode effects in the presence of nonignorable mode effects. The public-
use Current Population Survey (CPS), 1973, and Social Security Records Exact
Match, and the nonpublic-use American Community Survey (ACS) data will be used
to conduct empirical and simulation evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research provides federal agencies, survey organizations, research centers, and
other data producers assessment and inferential methods that adjust for both
nonresponse and nonrandom mode effects in the context of sequential mixed-mode
surveys. Some large surveys have employed some variation of mixed-mode surveys
in order to meet budget constraints. On the other hand, in the presence of
nonignorable mode effects, the bias properties for the survey population
characteristics are not known and the existing assessment and inferential
methods do not control for the nonrandom mode effects. This research produces
sequential mixed-mode assessment methods which will test the ignorability of the
mode effects which can be a threat for the quality of survey data. In parallel,
this research also produces methods of inference which will yield higher quality
survey estimates in the presence of nonignorable mode effects.