* 1238718
* Supporting U.S.-Based Students to Attend the 2012 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2012)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Mohammed Zaki, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2013
* USD 26,000.00

Supporting U.S.-Based Students to Attend the 2011 IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining (ICDM 2012)&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ding, Wei, University of Massachusetts
Boston &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides NSF Student Travel Fellowships
to graduate students enrolled in Ph.D. programs in data mining or closely
related areas to attend and participate in the 2012 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining in Brussels, Belgium, from December 10-13, 2012.
Special efforts will be made to attract women and members of groups that are
underrepresented within the data mining research community. The NSF student
travel award recipients will be able to attend the plenary and contributed
talks, workshops and tutorials that are part of SDM 2012, as well as a Doctoral
Forum. The Doctoral Forum is designed to allow doctoral students who are at an
early stage in their research careers to present their work, interact with their
peers from other universities as well as receive one-on-one mentoring from
leading data mining researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
Participation in premier research conferences is an essential component of
research-based advanced training of Ph.D. students in data mining. The ICDM 2012
Doctoral Student Forum provides an opportunity for Ph.D. candidates to receive
constructive feedback and mentoring from established researchers in data mining.
Such interactions serve to broaden the training of students, enhance the quality
of the dissertation research performed by the students at their home
institutions, and ultimately, help them make informed decisions that advance
their long-term career objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Data
mining is playing an increasingly important role in many emerging data-rich
applications ranging from computational biology to computer-assisted discovery
and counterterrorism efforts. The award will help broaden the representation of
women and members of underrepresented minority groups within the Data Mining
research community. It also contributes to the training of a cadre of new
generation scientists equipped with sophisticated tools to extract knowledge
from data in areas that are growing in importance in our increasingly digital,
interconnected world.