* 1238778
* Broadening Participation Research Grant:  Career Commitment and Retention in STEM:  Building the STEM Workforce
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2016
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 419,998.00

The Tennessee State University HBCU-UP Broadening Participation Research in STEM
Education project is entitled Career Commitment and Retention in STEM: Building
the STEM Workforce. The proposed effort is a collaboration among faculty in the
College of Education; College of Engineering; and College of Agriculture, Human
and Natural Resources. The goal is to expand the current theory on effective
career development and management interventions for minority STEM students. The
study will examine the impact of a research- and theory-based intervention to
develop career management skills on commitment to, engagement and retention in,
graduation from, and engagement in STEM post graduate study and careers. The PIs
hope to provide evidence of the additive impact of specific training in career
development and management for minority students at minority-serving
institutions using theory- and research-based culturally competent career
management interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposed
project is designed to determine whether a research- and theory-based
intervention to promote the development of career management skills among
minority STEM undergraduates will increase (a) career planning and management
skills and knowledge over that developed through existing STEM professional
development activities; (b) commitment to and interest, performance, retention,
and professional engagement in STEM careers; and (c) participation in
professional organizations, volunteer research, internships, field experiences,
conferences, and publishing needed for obtaining entrance to graduate programs
and high quality employment. The project is designed to determine also whether
participation in such interventions will decrease time to graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project responds to the need for minority
students to have realistic expectations about STEM career pathways and concrete
professional development plans. The dynamic nature of STEM careers requires
students to keep abreast of changing skill requirements. The proposed project
will provide STEM majors with increased confidence in their commitment to a STEM
career and enable them to develop clear plans for matriculating through
undergraduate study and beyond.