* 1238243
* Integrative Analysis of Plasticity in Cell Fate Determination in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2018
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 10/31/2018
* USD 4,474,574.00

PI: Julia Bailey-Serres (University of California -
Riverside)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Siobhan Brady and Neelima Sinha
(University of California - Davis) and Roger Deal (Emory University)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the germination of a seed to the fertilization events
that lead to the next generation, plant development is exquisitely orchestrated
by genetically determined processes that are fine-tuned by environmental cues.
This entails the precise regulation of networks of genes in individual cells
over the course of the plant life cycle. This project will decipher the complex
regulation of genes within specific types of cells of the plant. This will be
accomplished by transfer of methods pioneered by this team in the model plant
species Arabidopsis thaliana to three important crops: rice, alfalfa, and
tomato. These technologies allow for the isolation of cell nuclei containing DNA
and RNA and the ribosomes that translate mRNA into protein from targeted
subpopulations of cells of a leaf, root or other organs, without the need for
dissection. The new genetic resources developed will be used to study how
development is perturbed by two major environmental threats to US agriculture:
drought and flood. The outcome will be a greater understanding of the
integration of plant development with environmental cues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have multiple broader impacts. Using
parallel multi-tiered and computationally robust analyses, the project will
address two important biological questions: How does gene regulation in the stem
cells (meristem) of roots and shoots differ across species? How does
environmental stress influence the development of specialized cell types in the
root? The findings will provide insights that could facilitate downstream
improvement of abiotic stress tolerance. It will also generate resources for the
evaluation of cell-type specific expression in three important crops. The seed
material and data sets will be shared with the plant genome research community
through the NCBI Short Read Archive (SRA, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) and
Gramene (http://www.gramene.org/). Finally, the project will engage postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students in advanced interdisciplinary training in
biology and computational sciences, who will benefit from the experience of
mentoring undergraduate students in research. Finally, the project will engage
high school students in the classroom and the laboratory, develop teaching
tools, and foster greater understanding of the importance of plant research to
humankind.