* 1238352
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Leadership and Political Change at the End of the Formative Period  in the Nepena Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,800.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Marc Bermann, Hugo Ikehara will investigate changes
in prehispanic settlement patterns and elite activities during the Late and the
Final Formative Periods (1200- 200 B.C.) in the Nepeña Valley, Peru. This time
period has been identified as one of marked societal transformation on the
prehispanic Peruvian North Coast, including the disintegration of the
overarching Cupisnique-Chavín religious tradition, considered one of the
ideological foundations for local and regional political leadership. However,
practices related to this cult were abandoned before 750 B.C. in the Coast and
around 500 B.C. in the Highlands. The following period has been characterized as
a time of intensified conflict and social reorganization. The research will
explore the proposition that in this relative political and ideological
"vacuum," varied and alternative power strategies, rooted in ideology, economic
processes, or military force will quickly arise, as ambitious leaders search for
the most effective new means of establishing authority or power. As a way of
better understanding archaeological "collapse," this research aims at
identifying the factors that might shape different political trajectories in
such settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the focus of this research is
archaeological, the level of social organization observed in prehistoric Peru
bears significant resemblance to many parts of the present day countries in the
developing world. The project provides insight into how, over the long term,
political and social organization changes in response to collapse of central
authority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the Nepeña Valley has shown that
part of this process was the abandonment and construction of large public
architecture centers. Mr. Ikehara's research will involve a four-month, 100%
archaeological survey of the Upper Nepeña Valley, mapping of major centers, and
a program of intensive surface collection. The data generated will be used to
address issues of: (1) regional political organization; (2) the nature of public
ceremony, and its role in local and regional social integration; (3) the forms
and variability in power strategies pursued by elites, and (4) demographic
trends and changes in man-land relationships. Recent improvements in survey
methods and in local ceramic chronology will permit multiscalar study of
continuity and change in elite activities from the Late through the Final
Formative Period. The proposed research therefore aims at producing a better
understanding of sociopolitical flux in the Andean past, and exploring how such
flux can be studied without excavation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research include: the implementation of long-term research that
will serve as a framework for integrating current research at different sites in
the valley, as well as the results of archaeological research from decades past;
an Andean test of a survey methodology that has proven effective in China,
Colombia, and other regions around the world. Project results will be
disseminated in peer-review publications in the United States and in Peru, and
the data will be made available to a global public online through the University
of Pittsburgh data base in comparative archaeology website. Peruvian students
from different universities will participate in the fieldwork, and will be
trained in current survey techniques. Special reports from the project will be
disseminated to cultural heritage authorities in Peru to aid in planning for
site conservation and tourism.