* 1238330
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Cloud and Autonomic Computing site at University of Chicago
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Katarzyna Keahey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 08/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed planning activity seeks to undertake planning of the establishment
of a new Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) site at the
University of Chicago of the existing Center for Cloud and Autonomic Computing.
The center currently involves Arizona, Florida, Mississippi State and Rutgers,
and industry and government partners in the field. The University of Chicago
site intends to provide additional capabilities for the center. The site intends
to explore joint efforts to accelerate the understanding of infrastructure cloud
computing (also known as Infrastructure-as-a-Service or IaaS cloud computing),
its potential for scientific community and to transfer this understanding into
industry solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned site, in combination with
the existing center plans to help build innovation capacity in cloud computing.
The outcomes from the center have the potential to broadly impact the public and
private sectors through impact on distributed computing systems which today are
critical to a range of applications crucial to science, engineering, healthcare,
financial services, transportation, and command and control systems. The site
plans to have a significant impact on students via mechanisms including the
Google-sponsored Summer of Code Program, the PIs involvement in Women in the
Computing, Environment and Life Science organization at Argonne and development
of tools for education. &lt;br/&gt;