* 1238524
* Research Initiation Award Grant - Colloidal Mixtures: Microstructure and Mechanics
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Subramanian Ramakrishnan, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,871.00

The Research Initiation Award entitled - Colloidal Mixtures: Microstructure and
Mechanics - investigates mixtures of colloidal particles which are used in a
wide array of commercial and industrial products. In many applications, the
colloidal suspensions transform between fluid and disordered solid states when
parameters such as the colloidal volume fraction and the strength and nature of
the colloidal interactions are varied. Understanding the connection between the
microscopic and macroscopic properties remains a central challenge for the field
of colloid science. X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS) has emerged as
a technique uniquely suited for revealing the salient nanometer-scale structural
dynamics in glassy colloidal suspensions. This project combines XPCS with
rheometry in new ways to make direct connections between the microscopic
dynamics and rheology of mixtures of nanocolloidal suspensions.

The project will consist of four stages: 1) By investigating the consequences of
a bimodal size distribution combined with intrinsic short-range attractions
between colloids, the experiments will open a new avenue for controlling
suspension phase behavior and rheology. 2) The experimental characterization of
the microstructure, dynamics and mechanical response in these colloidal
materials will provide a series of benchmarks for rigorous testing of different
theories. 3) The developed theory of predicting the flow properties from
measured microstructures will result in a microscopic understanding of the
rheological properties. Coupled with the knowledge of how experimentally
controlled variables affect these microscopic parameters opens up avenues for
controlling the flow properties of dense suspensions and gels. 4) Techniques
will be developed at Argonne National Laboratory to study the dynamics of
colloidal gels and this will be extremely useful in studying the dynamics of a
variety of soft condensed matter systems and will be of interest to a number of
other users at ANL. The project is expected to lead to a fundamental and
microscopic understanding of dynamics of condensed matter systems and to
revolutionize processing of such systems by control of their rheology and flow
properties.