* 1238831
* IOS BP:   APS IOSP Fellows - Broadening Participation Through Research Experiences and Professional Socialization
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Marsha Matyas, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2018
* USD 535,000.00

The American Physiological Society (APS) will address critical needs for
increased diversity among physiologists conducting integrative organismal
systems (IOS) biology research by building an annual cohort of underrepresented
(UR) undergraduate students engaged in IOS research working with members of APS'
Comparative and Evolutionary Physiology Section (CEPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;APS
will build on the strengths of its existing programs to create long-term
solutions to specific needs for increasing diversity in the IOS field. The APS
IOSP Fellows will conduct research during the summer, present at APS
conferences, gain skills through online professional development activities, and
become proponents for IOS research via APS' social media outlets and Physiology
Understanding Week. APS expects IOSP Fellows to become active participants in
the IOS professional community and will evaluate both short- and long-term
impacts of the Fellowship. The project will increase the number of UR students
participating in IOS-related research; develop a professional network of support
among UR students and researchers; and increase understanding of, and interest
in IOS careers among the target group of students.&lt;br/&gt;APS will also
create a resource collection on supporting students with disabilities in the
research lab. The collection will be freely available via APS' NSDL digital
library, the Archive of Teaching Resources
(www.apsarchive.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With diversity as a national
imperative in STEM fields, this project will create and evaluate resources to
improve research hosts' skills in working with UR students from broad
backgrounds and with diverse needs and resources for engaging UR undergraduates
in research experiences, in professional socialization activities, and as
advocates for science to the general public. This will provide a model for other
scientific societies in identifying and addressing specific needs in their
ongoing diversity efforts, which will be shared with the community at the PI
meeting.