* 1238526
* Estimating the Ecosystem Benefits of Urban Forestry
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Laurie Geller, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 10/31/2013
* USD 25,002.00

It has long been recognized that increasing the tree canopy in an urban area can
provide a variety of benefits to the environment and to people. Our ability to
quantify these benefits is improving, due to new scientific research, modeling
tools, and advances mapping and monitoring technologies. But many uncertainties
and challenges remain in developing rigorous and widely accepted methods for
estimating such benefits. The National Academy of Sciences will organize a
workshop to examine current capabilities to characterize and quantify the
benefits (that is, ecosystem services) provided by trees and forest canopy cover
within a metropolitan area, including air pollution mitigation, water pollution
mitigation, carbon sequestration, urban heat island mitigation, reduced energy
demand from shading of buildings, possibly also including the direct benefits to
public health and well-being. Some related discussion topics may include gaps in
understanding and ability to model, measure and monitor such services; current
capabilities for assigning quantitative economic&lt;br/&gt;value to these
services; strategies to sustain long-term canopy cover in a way that maximizes
benefits and minimizes costs and potential ?dis-benefits (for example, increased
pollen load, risk of fire and storm damages, water requirements); and
opportunities for enhancing coordination among federal agencies, academic
researchers, and other stakeholders working on all these issues. The workshop
will be organized by a planning group with expertise in a range of relevant
disciplines. It will include a mix of plenary presentations, panel discussion
sessions and small breakout sessions, to encourage debate and interaction among
all participants. A summary report will be made freely available through the
National Academy Press website, and dissemination activities will be conducted
to ensure that the results are widely distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that these discussions will help shape the future research agenda among
numerous parties working on this topic, such as researchers within the Forest
Service, Environmental Protection Agency, National Park Service, NASA remote
sensing programs, Center for Disease Control public health programs, Department
of Energy energy efficiency programs, state and local forestry and land
management organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations and academic
researchers. The workshop may also help inform decisions that are currently
being made by municipal leaders weighing investments in expanding urban tree
canopies based on the benefits they will provide, and by state and regional
officials attempting to include tree planting as an official measure in air
quality and water quality&lt;br/&gt;control and climate change action plans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will provide a neutral forum for convening a
wide diversity of relevant stakeholders for sharing of information and
perspectives. It will also provide an opportunity for communication across
different realms of research that traditionally focus on just&lt;br/&gt;one type
of ecosystem service (such as forest impacts on air pollution, water pollution,
or carbon uptake) encouraging more integrated approaches that cut across
different realms.