* 1238373
* Collaborative Research: Long-term Anthropogenic Influences on the Crater Lake Environmental Landscape of Western Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Peter Schmidt, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 23,660.00

With National Science Foundation support, an interdisciplinary team of Drs.
Meghan Howey, Peter Schmidt, Michael Palace, Joel Hartter, Lawrence Kiage, and
Bunny Lejju will conduct one field season of archaeological and paleoecological
research on the Ndali crater lake landscape in western Uganda, a complex series
of crater lakes and in-filled crater swamps east of the Rwenzori mountains which
forms a particularly distinct setting in the Albertine Rift. Exponential
population growth and unchecked land conversion have made the Albertine Rift one
of the world's most threatened biodiversity hotspots. This research aims to use
deep history to inform present and future trajectories of landscape change in
the Albertine Rift. To build towards that goal, it is necessary to test whether
linkages can be established between local archaeological and paleoecological
records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ndali crater lakes and swamps are excellent
environments for archiving evidences (biotic and abiotic) of past landscapes and
as such, they have been the focus of paleoecological research. These records
consistently show possible evidence of human-driven disturbance but there has
been a tendency to attribute change to climate change rather than anthropogenic
influences. One reason for this is the absence of archaeological evidence around
these lakes that might connect historical human occupation to these findings.
There is good reason to expect robust cultural activity here, as the Ndali lakes
are located less than two hundred kilometers northeast of the epicenter for the
development of iron smelting technology in East Africa west of Lake Victoria and
are located in the same forest band that would have provided fuelwood and other
resources to support people in industrial production. Indeed, preliminary work
17 years ago by Dr. Schmidt confirmed deep-time human occupation around the
northern-most crater lakes with strong signatures from the Early and Later Iron
Age. To date no work has expanded these preliminary findings. Through a
combination of expanded archaeological testing on crater rims and contiguous
terraces and new paleoecological cores in filled calderas, swamps, and crater
lakes, this pilot research program will establish if archaeology and
paleoenvironmental data can be successfully articulated. The close proximities
between crater lakes and human settlements opens the potential to make direct
inferences about human influence on the landscape, human resource exploitation,
and the resilience of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems to human disturbance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New approaches and answers are needed to address current
demographic and ecological crises facing the Albertine Rift. This pilot work
will help build a research program that offers new answers by crossing the
humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences, looking backwards as well as
forwards, and prioritizing local historical knowledge as important to address
current stresses.