* 1238819
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development of an Engineering Physics Program Concentration at NCCU
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Benjamin Crowe, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 03/31/2017
* USD 349,966.00

The Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Development of an Engineering Physics
Program Concentration at NCCU - has the goal to design new courses and
laboratories that infuse engineering principles and design into the curriculum
with special emphasis on problem solving and developing communication skills.
Students in the program will gain substantial experience with laboratory
methods, data analysis, and computational methods. Graduates will be well
equipped to pursue research and development careers in new and emerging
technologies in industry that cut across engineering and science disciplines or
to pursue graduate studies in science or engineering. The engineering physics
curriculum is intended to recruit students to the physics program.

The planned activities are to extend physics-based laboratory courses to the
engineering physics curriculum; infuse engineering physics into relevant courses
in the Physics Department course inventory; develop new theme-based engineering
physics courses and laboratories; establish a 3-plus-2 program with North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University; develop the engineering
physics curriculum; and recruit Engineering Physics majors. The proposed
activities are centered in a department where African American students compose
about 2/3 of the undergraduate population. The results of the project activities
will be disseminated to the broader Physics community through presentations at
meetings of professional Physics educators.