* 1238363
* Broadening Participation Research Grant: Applying the Performance Pyramid to STEM Education
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Sivanandan Balakumar, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 349,970.00

The Lincoln University HBCU-UP Broadening participation Research in STEM
Education project is entitled Applying the Performance Pyramid to STEM
Education. The study proposes the use of a comprehensive theoretical model
derived from performance evaluation in business settings to examine the support
needs of underrepresented minority STEM students. The theoretical model is
intended to explain the reasons why curricular innovations may or may not be
effective. It will also guide curricular design by giving innovators the
flexibility to develop programs that appear different from established programs
but still bear the same foundational principles of performance success. The
broad goals of the proposed project are to (1) improve the participation and
success of African American students in STEM disciplines; (2) adapt a
performance model to create measures to examine minority student support in STEM
programs; and (3) broadly communicate the performance model, measures, and
research findings through communication with local and national stakeholders.

The proposal outlines three studies that test the Performance Pyramid model of
evaluating the foundations of differential engagement of ethnic groups in STEM
disciplines. The first study will be a needs assessment to identify the level of
perceived support available to African American STEM majors. The second and
third studies will use the needs assessment data to design two innovative
programs (Math2 and STEM Alliance) to increase support, learning, and
persistence of African American STEM majors. The study will apply the
Performance Pyramid support systems as a framework to determine the foundational
reasons why African American students succeed in STEM disciplines. This can
ultimately produce a viable model for assessing academic support systems for
minority STEM students and increase retention.