* 1238172
* Transforming STEM Competitions into Collaboratives: Developing eCrafting Collabs for Learning with Electronic Textiles
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 499,873.00

This project supports the development of technological fluency and understanding
of STEM concepts through the implementation of design collaboratives that use
eCrafting Collabs as the medium within which to work with middle and high school
students, parents and the community. The researchers from the University of
Pennsylvania and the Franklin Institute combine expertise in learning sciences,
digital media design, computer science and informal science education to examine
how youth at ages 10-16 and families in schools, clubs, museums and community
groups learn together how to create e-textile artifacts that incorporate
embedded computers, sensors and actuators. The project investigates the
feasibility of implementing these collaboratives using eCrafting via three
models of participation, individual, structured group and cross-generational
community groups. They are designing a portal through which the collaborative
can engage in critique and sharing of their designs as part of their efforts to
build a model process by which scientific and engineered product design and
analysis can be made available to multiple audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project engages participants through middle and high school elective classes and
through the workshops conducted by a number of different organizations including
the Franklin Institute, Techgirlz, the Hacktory and schools in Philadelphia.
Participants can engage in the eCrafting Collabs through individual, collective
and community design challenges that are established by the project.
Participants learn about e-textile design and about circuitry and programming
using either ModKit or the text-based Arduino. The designs are shared through
the eCrafting Collab portal and participants are required to provide feedback
and critique. Researchers are collecting data on learner identity in relation to
STEM and computing, individual and collective participation in design and
student understanding of circuitry and programming. The project is an example of
a scalable intervention to engage students, families and communities in
developing technological flexibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research and
development project provides a resource that engages students in middle and high
schools in technology rich collaborative environments that are alternatives to
other sorts of science fairs and robotic competitions. The resources developed
during the project will inform how such an informal/formal blend of student
engagement might be scaled to expand the experiences of populations of
underserved groups, including girls. The study is conducting an examination of
the new types of learning activities that are multiplying across the country
with a special focus on cross-generational learning.