* 1238838
* ACE Implementation:  Nanoscience Transforming STEM Education at Hampton University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Raymond Samuel, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2019
* USD 3,410,126.00

The project entitled - Nanoscience Transforming STEM Education at Hampton
University - has the goal to develop and implement an integrated,
multidisciplinary STEM research and education program in nanoscience that
prepares students for graduate studies and professional careers in the field of
nanoscience. The project seeks to answer the question: Will the implementation
of an interdisciplinary, nanoscience project at the institution accomplish a
desired transformation within the university that will result in improved
recruitment, retention and graduation of more, highly-qualified STEM graduates
for entry into graduate schools or the STEM workforce? The objectives are to
develop an undergraduate nanoscience curriculum concentration; engage students
in nanoscience-related research throughout the academic year and summer session
at national laboratories, industries and international universities; offer
professional workshops and seminars; provide "next steps" educational and career
support; provide professional faculty development to increase their publications
records; promote the nanoscience project to incoming and current STEM students
to interest them in pursuing the nanoscience concentration; and increase
awareness of local high school students in nanoscience and career opportunities
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation activities require
participation across targeted disciplines including Biological Sciences,
Chemistry, Engineering, Mathematics and Physics where minorities and women are
underrepresented. The institution's student body is approximately 88% African
American. This project will greatly assist in the institution's ongoing efforts
to strengthen the undergraduate research environment in nanoscience and STEM
research and to increase the number of women and minorities who pursue
Ph.D.degrees and careers in nanoscience and STEM fields. A significant component
of the project is to give students international research partnership
experiences by having internship opportunities at international universities and
thereby better prepare them to participate in the global workforce.