* 1238040
* Investigating the Mechanistic Basis and Adaptive Significance of the Coordination of Plant Growth by External and Internal Cues
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Laura Galloway, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 12/31/2017
* USD 2,046,342.00

PI: Stacey Harmer (University of California-Davis) Co-PI: Ben Blackman
(University of Virginia)

Plants optimize their use of local resources by synchronizing their growth with
day/night cycles, resulting in daily rhythms in leaf, stem, and root growth.
This coordination is accomplished through an intricate interplay between the
light signaling, circadian clock, and hormone signaling networks. However, the
manner in which these networks interact to control plant growth is poorly
understood. This project exploits the robust ability of sunflower to track the
sun to characterize pathways that coordinate plant growth with daily
environmental fluctuations. First, developmental and environmental factors that
control solar tracking will be defined. Next, high-throughput analysis of
hormone and gene transcript levels in different portions of solar tracking stems
will be carried out, allowing the identification of candidate genes and pathways
controlling these growth rhythms. Finally, genome-enabled association and
linkage mapping techniques will take advantage of the abundant natural variation
present in common sunflower and its wild relatives to provide essential
information about the role of solar tracking in plant adaptation to the
environment. Together, these studies will elucidate the interactions between
diverse signaling networks that optimize plant growth with environmental changes
and provide insights into ways to improve plant performance.

Plant yield is enhanced by daily growth patterns of stems and leaves that allow
more efficient photosynthesis and higher water use efficiency. Although a number
of molecular pathways that regulate plant growth have been identified, an
understanding of how they are coordinated with each other and with environmental
cues remains elusive. Solar tracking in sunflower is an extremely appropriate
trait for addressing these basic questions since it provides a unique entry
point to determine how internal and external cues regulate growth across a
single organ. By asking fundamental questions about how this coordination occurs
and evolves, these studies will reveal important insights into how to enhance
crop plant performance and conserve plant diversity in the face of global
climate change and an increasing human population. In addition, this project
will generate extensive resources that will be useful to the entire Compositae
community. To provide public access to these resources, transcriptome and
functionally annotated marker data will be deposited in public databases
including the NCBI Short Read Archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/), the
Compositae Genome Project (http://compgenomics.ucdavis.edu/), the Sunflower
Genome Resources Consortium (http://www.sunflowergenome.org), and DRYAD
(http://datadryad.org/). Germplasm will be deposited with the National Plant
Germplasm System (http://www.ars-grin.gov/npgs/). A student crowd-sourcing
method will be developed for the analysis of time-lapse videos of plants grown
in natural and controlled environments. This image analysis software developed
with the iPlant Collaborative will be made freely available via the iPlant
Phytobisque web portal
(https://pods.iplantcollaborative.org/wiki/display/ipg2p/PhytoBisque). Finally,
cross-disciplinary training in genomic, ecological, and quantitative approaches
will be provided for the undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows involved in these studies.