* 1238396
* A Comparative Study of STEM Graduate Education between the United States and England:  Emerging and Continuing Patterns for Select Minority Groups
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Aurolyn Luykx, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 10/31/2013
* USD 73,834.00

This planning project is a step toward developing a subsequent multi-year
comparative study between the United States and England regarding emerging and
continuing patterns of minorities in graduate Science Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) and related fields. The potential comparative study that
results from this planning process will seek to build upon pronouncements and
policies of two leading G-8 nations, the United States of America and England,
to produce STEM graduates in order to move forward with competitive global
endeavors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In late 2011, the National Center for
Educational Statistics highlighted descriptive educational data among
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries.
Specifically, the United States was compared with several OECD countries where
the indicators of achievement varied. While such information is useful, the
statistics do not delve into the sociocultural, academic, and policy dynamics
that help to comprehend the phenomena contributing to the distinctions. The
potential comparative study that results from this planning process will examine
the underlying variables, focusing on STEM graduate and related programs,
specifically in two leading G-8 countries where some racial and ethnic
minorities have not been full participants, despite the absence of de jure
impediments. The demographic groups that will be included in the comparative
study include African Americans, Mexican/Hispanic Americans, African English,
Caribbean English, and Pakistani English, who have been educationally
disadvantaged and/or underrepresented in the United States and England in STEM.