* 1238379
* SDCI Net: Phoebus: An Integrated System for End-to-end High Performance Networking
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,999.00

End-to-end high performance networking must continue to develop to keep pace
with the computing ecosystem. While the community continues to make significant
strides in high-performance computing, the ability to transfer the vast amounts
of data generated by scientists has failed to increase commensurately. When
scientists spend time dealing with data movement, or are limited by lack of
timely access to data, the potential for scientific progress is hampered. Today,
there are many application communities struggling with the well-known
performance problems in TCP/IP in order to do the real work they need to
do.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal would support the continued development and
deployment of Phoebus, a protocol and service implementation for improving end-
to-end transfers to gigabit speeds. Phoebus provides a network "inlay" that
augments the network topology with an additional layer of protocol and
functionality. Phoebus leverages the ubiquitous TCP/IPv4 implementation on the
end hosts, while providing an adaptor to translate to a variety of alternate
protocols over the wide area, including creation of virtual networks on the fly.
Many data-intensive applications can use Phoebus without modification and
without making any system-level changes.&lt;br/&gt;Phoebus makes use of a
session-layer protocol called XSP, for eXtensible Session Protocol, for end-to-
end communication and uses various transport layer protocol instances on
different segments of the network, as appropriate. In many cases, performance
can be improved by simply using existing protocols tuned based on network
conditions and properties. Similarly, a high performance TCP alternative can be
used when more assumptions about the underlying network can be
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phoebus is essentially a WAN accelerator for research
and education networks. This project will work with various application
communities to modify their software as necessary to make use of Phoebus and
XSP. This will enable the creation of an automatically tuned data movement
service, as well as the creation of appliances to act as "on-ramps" to dynamic
circuit networks. Broader impact will therefore include significantly improved
data transfer performance for scientific applications. Intellectual merit is
found in the work's creative approach to adapting the concept of WAN
acceleration to a multi-prototcol high bandwidth high delay environment.