* 1238044
* Research Initiation Awards: Impact of wave on the dynamics of a coastal plume
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Meng Xia, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,421.00

The Research Initiation Award project entitled - Impact of Wave on the Dynamics
of a Coastal Plume - has the goal to use observational data and numerical
modeling experiments to answer three questions about coastal plume dynamics: do
wave fields modify coastal plume dynamics; do the river plumes impact on the
surface gravity wave field; and is the interaction between the wave field and
bathymetry a key factor for the formation of coastal plume dynamics? The
research seeks to obtain an understanding of plume dynamics, estuary-ocean water
exchange and estuary/coastal wave-current interaction, including the estuarine
dynamics of Maryland Coastal Bays and Chesapeake Bay. The educational goal of
the project is to increase the engagement of African American undergraduate
students in ocean and coastal science research.

Many previous plume studies have been focused on correlations between external
forcing such as wind or river runoff and plume dynamics. The novelty of this
project is its approach to consider the effects of a wave field on plume
dynamics and circulation processes. The observational data will provide the
historic analysis between plume dynamics for different wave types under other
similar external forcing. High resolution numerical models will analyze the
effects of waves, such as wave height, period, direction and the plume formation
to complement the observational data to enhance an understanding of the effect
of waves on plume formation. An understanding of plume dynamics is critical to
the understanding of such issues as nutrient loading and eutrophication,
bacterial contamination of beaches, carbon exchange and juvenile fish, crab and
oyster recruitment. The nearshore circulation induced estuarine plume dynamics
could be potentially linked to the life histories of estuarine dependent fish
migrations. Given the important relationship of river plumes with the larval
transport and fish migration, this work has implications for the shelf-to-
estuary transport of pollutants and/or the larval transport and survival of
important marine species.