* 1238286
* I/UCRC:  Smart Vehicle Concepts Center - Phase II
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2019
* Rajendra Singh, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 559,045.00

Center for Smart Vehicle Concepts (SVC) &lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 1238286
&lt;br/&gt;Singh &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to establish
a single-site Phase II I/UCRC for Smart Vehicle Concepts (SVC). The center
mission focuses on precompetitive technology and research of common interest;
smart vehicle components and sub-systems (ground and aerospace vehicles); new
smart material-based actuators and sensors; new devices for vehicle development
work; superior dynamic response and quiet and smooth operations; improved
performance; enhanced safety; and higher energy efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Phase II Center will focus on novel and
emerging trends in automotive and aerospace vehicle design where smart
structures, next-generation suspension or mounting devices, vastly improved
actuators or valves, and intelligent sensors will be integrated to develop
vehicle components or sub-systems of the future. In order to achieve its
objectives, the Phase II Center will cooperate with its industrial partners to
conduct R&amp;D and education in 4 strategic thrust areas: (1) Interfacial
Mechanisms; (2) Adaptive Noise, Vibration, and Harshness; (3) Safety; and (4)
Energy. The site will focus on active material based composites, piezoelectric
and magnetostrictive materials, ferromagnetic shape memory alloys, and MR fluid
based devices, and achieve force, motion, noise &amp; vibration control
performance goals including superior spectral bandwidth. The SVC will continue
to be the only major center in the U.S. that can provide to industry and other
educational institutions world-class information, thereby enabling the forces
and motions necessary for 21st century automotive and aerospace systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OSU team is uniquely poised to develop and grow the
center, with interdisciplinary emphasis on modeling, simulation, design, and
control of smart vehicle subsystems and components. By providing not only
technical results and solutions but also being a major educational and training
source, the SVC will help the U.S. automotive (and even aerospace) industries to
remain competitive in an increasingly difficult global economy. The Ohio State
University has an excellent track record in research, education and cooperation
with vehicle industry. This cooperation will represent a unique synergy in
research and education that will benefit not only the proposing universities,
students, community, but also the industry and the U.S. economy at large. The
researchers at OSU will aggressively work to recruit women and minority
undergraduate and graduate students to participate in the SVC through existing
outreach campus organizations and targeted recruitment activities.