* 1238055
* I/UCRC for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution, Phase III
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Manuel Rossetti, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,070,048.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP 1238055
&lt;br/&gt;University of Arkansas &lt;br/&gt;Meller &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks funding for a third five-year term (Phase III) of the NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Excellence in Logistics and
Distribution (CELDi) at the University of Arkansas. CELDi is a university-based
enterprise that provides innovative solutions for logistics and distribution
excellence with its member organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of CELDi resides in the unique logistics and distribution models and tools
that are created through Center research. The models and tools are tailored to
the specific organizations and also generalized for dissemination into the
academic sphere. As an applied research and education consortium, CELDi is a
partnership amongst the National Science Foundation (NSF), nine major research
universities and upwards of 30 member organizations in the commercial, military
and government sectors of the economy. CELDi proposes to build on the success of
its Phase II award and to capitalize on a Phase-III award to move from Good to
Great and long-term financial viability by a)increasing its name recognition to
provide a mechanism to grow CELDi, b)leveraging the substantial collective
research expertise of the Center, and c)investing in current student researchers
to better serve its member organizations and the logistics and distribution
fields of the future. The success of CELDi's initiatives will be measured by the
verifiable impact of the proposed centers research on commercial and public
sector member organizations, the value created through synergy of our member
organizations and member universities, and the professional success of all
personnel involved in the center's endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
two main, broader impacts of CELDi. The first is demonstrating that a model of
applied research conducted in member organization facilities is a successful
technology transfer mechanism in terms of assisting the members to achieve
logistics and distribution excellence. The other main, broader impact of CELDi
research relates to students. CELDi has instituted a number of mechanisms that
focus on developing student skills, from one-on-one mentoring sessions, group
mentoring sessions, pairings of students and IAB members at lunches, a best-
poster contest, and roundtable topics associated with IAB student connections.
This direct impact on current university students is supplemented through RET
projects that allow CELDi to also impact the next generation of university
students. CELDi will also continue its efforts to increase the pool of talented
students from under-represented groups by actively recruiting and engaging such
students. Over the past five years, CELDi research has led to fourteen "CELDi
Success Story Awards," which are defined as projects that "have significant,
verifiable impact on the partnering organization(s)." Over the next five years,
it is expected that over 20 "success stories" will be achieved and over 200
student careers will be enhanced through CELDi activities.