* 1238723
* Research Initiation Award Grant for Identifying changes in serotonin receptor function due to naturally occurring single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Hugh Fentress, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this project at Fisk University is to identify novel signaling
pathways that may be used by the serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) receptor
which are revealed by examining subtly modified receptor structures, such as
those encoded by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found in human
individuals. The objectives of the proposed research are to introduce into
heterologous cells cDNAs encoding natural occurring polymorphic 5-HT2CRs whose
sequence modifications are in regions previously identified as critical for
coupling to G protein-mediated signaling pathways, and to characterize the
functional consequences of these SNP-encoded sequence modifications. At least
two undergraduate students per year will be involved in the research.
Furthermore, master?s students in the lab will serve as role models for the
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study the functional
consequences of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the serotonin (5-HT)
2C receptor. 5-HT is a neurotransmitter that modulates a variety of
neurophysiological responses by binding to one of 14 different receptor
subtypes, one of which is the 5-HT2C receptor (5-HT2CR). The 5-HT2CR is a seven-
transmembrane (7TM) spanning, G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that is involved
in neuronal excitability, spatial learning, and appetite. Recent studies reveal
that GPCRs may be a misnomer since many 7TM Receptors also activate cellular
processes via non-G protein-coupled responses, primarily via the protein
arrestin. The relative contribution of G Protein versus arrestin-mediated
signaling is not well understood for the 5-HT2CR. SNPs identified in humans,
which can lead to changes in protein sequence and, in some cases, altered
activities, can provide insights into critical structure-function relationships
of a protein. Though over 2,000 SNPs have been identified in the human 5-HT2CR,
little characterization of structural and functional consequences of those SNPs
has occurred, and no studies have explored whether or not such changes in
receptor structure modify the preferential signaling via G protein-coupled
versus arrestin-mediated pathways.