* 1238319
* I/UCRC:   Center for Advanced Forestry Phase II
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Douglass Jacobs, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 208,000.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION

IIP 1238324 North Carolina State University Goldfarb

IIP 1238265 Virginia Tech Fox

IIP 1238305 Oregon State University Howe

IIP 1238319 Purdue University Michler

This proposal seeks funding for a second five-year term (Phase II) of the NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Forestry Systems
(CAFS) sites including the North Carolina State University (lead), Virginia
Tech, Oregon State University and Purdue University. The collaborative research
conducted under the CAFS umbrella focuses on optimizing genetic and cultural
systems to produce high-quality raw materials for new and existing forest
products industries.

Over the past 50 years, much forestry research has taken place in university-
based, industry-supported, cooperative research programs. These "coops" continue
be extraordinarily successful at achieving research and technological advances
on topics of great relevance to the forest industry. However, the ability to
focus on specific disciplinary topics in response to industrial guidance is also
a limitation. Many of the problems and opportunities facing forestry today,
bridge disciplinary and regional boundaries. For technological advances to be
made, it is necessary to approach research questions on multiple spatial and
temporal scales, including the molecular, cellular, individual-tree, stand, and
ecosystem levels. The proposed Center (CAFS) has been successful at providing
the administrative structure and funding that has allowed scientists from these
existing cooperatives to initiate much need cross-disciplinary research in areas
of genetics, site manipulation, and growth and yield modeling. The proposal
presents a plan for the 2nd five-year phase for the four original university
CAFS sites, North Carolina State, Oregon State, Purdue, and Virginia Tech. This
proposal also serves as a research and administrative template for the other
five university sites that have joined CAFS since its interception in late 2007.

The research conducted by CAFS increases the competitiveness of forest products
industries and forest landowners by solving problems on multiple temporal and
spatial scales and determining fundamental solutions that transcend traditional
species, regional, and disciplinary boundaries. Member organizations of the
Center benefit by becoming knowledgeable about a wider range of technological
capabilities. In addition, technology transfer between Center scientists and
member personnel fosters rapid implementation of new technologies. The broader
scientific community benefits through refereed publications and presentations at
scientific meetings. During the Phase II period, graduate student training will
continue to be featured in Center research and technology transfer. Aggressive
recruiting for graduate students among under-represented groups will be
conducted, increasing the diversity of the workforce for both academia and
industry in this traditionally diversity-deficient discipline. Opportunities
will continue to be sought to involve undergraduate students in Center research
activities, exposing them to the excitement of forest science and encouraging
them to pursue graduate education.