* 1238323
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Security and Software Engineering Research Center (S2ERC) at Georgetown University
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Eric Burger, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 08/31/2014
* USD 13,780.00

The proposed planning activity seeks to undertake planning of the establishment
of a new Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) site at
Georgetown University of the existing Security and Software Engineering Research
I/UCRC. The center is currently comprised of Ball State University, Iowa State
University, Virginia Tech, and industry and government partners in the field.
The Georgetown University site intends to bring capabilities in real-time
network security, security policy, and governance to the center. Initial
research projects are anticipated to be in areas such as secure network
interoperability; tailored trusted spaces for secure communications; social,
behavioral, and economic impediments to inter-enterprise communication; and the
social impact of inter-enterprise communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planned site, in combination with the existing center plans to help build
innovation capacity in security and software engineering through its work in
network security and the inclusion of governance and policy in the security
software engineering process. The outcomes from the center have the potential to
broadly impact the public and private sectors through realization of more
readily acceptable and usable security systems and technology. The site plans to
have a significant impact on students through integration of center research
concepts into the curriculum. Graduate students from the social, behavioral, and
economic sciences, as well as law, business, government, and policy, are planned
to be involved in the work, thus touching a demographic not typical of computer
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;