* 1238192
* Alliance for Physics EXcellence (APEX)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Manmohan Aggarwal, Alabama A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2019
* USD 7,999,999.00

The Alliance for Physics Excellence (APEX) project is led by Alabama
Agricultural and Mechanical University (AAMU) and includes as core partners the
University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa (UA-T), Drake State Technical College, the
American Association of Physics Teachers/Physics Teaching Resource Agents, and
the Huntsville City School system. The partnership also includes supporting
partners from the 11 Alabama Math Science and Technology Initiative (AMSTI)
regional in-service centers, Madison County Schools, Scottsboro City Schools,
Madison City Schools, and the Alabama State Department of Education. The vision
of APEX is to promote significant gains in student learning by transforming
secondary physics education throughout Alabama. APEX is serving as a
comprehensive agent of change by successfully integrating cutting edge teaching
practices within secondary physics programs, and it is directly impacting 25% of
the physics teachers (with 41,000 students) throughout all Alabama school
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is
transformation of the work of pre-service and in-service physics teachers as
they gain a deeper content knowledge of physics and also employ effective
pedagogical strategies based on physics education research. These teachers go on
to apply that knowledge within their own classroom "action research," and this
serves as a catalyst to encourage teacher experimentation within their classes -
while also encouraging the sharing of these findings with physics teaching
colleagues. APEX builds on three components, each with its own subset of goals
relating to the overarching project goal. The first component is a physics
education center for teacher training that works toward: (1) increasing the
quantity of highly qualified in-service teachers and the number of
underrepresented minority pre-service teachers; (2) increasing the depth and
breadth of content knowledge, pedagogy, and instructional technology knowledge
and skills; (3) promoting the development of the undergraduate physics teacher
education programs at AAMU and UA-T; (4) implementing a cyber infrastructure
resource repository for sharing and disseminating best teaching practices and
lessons learned; and (5) distributing laboratory equipment to schools via the
Alabama Science in Motion program. A second component builds on a physics
teaching research program to promote and guide action research in the classroom,
thus enhancing evidence-based best practices in these Alabama classrooms. The
third component is a physics leadership development initiative that works with
policy makers and administrators to encourage their broad support of physics
teachers and programs. APEX's best practices, lessons learned, and research
findings are being disseminated in journals of physics education, as well as
being presentated at regional and national STEM education conferences.