* 1238109
* Impacts of the Biosphere on Global Tropospheric Chemistry and Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Colette Heald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 468,868.00

This research effort will investigate impacts of land use change on atmospheric
composition with a primary focus on ozone (O3) and secondary organic aerosol
(SOA) from pre-industrial (1850) to future conditions (2100). The responses of
biogenic emissions, tropospheric composition, deposition, and feedbacks to
changes in land use, vegetation, and anthropogenic emissions will be simulated
with fully coupled biosphere-atmosphere model system (NCAR's Community Earth
System Model, CESM). The current-generation scheme for SOA processing will be
expanded to treat atmospheric aging and resulting functionalization and
fragmentation. The new scheme will be tested against field observations and
sensitivities to various poorly constrained factors will be quantified. The
impacts of O3 damage to vegetation will be incorporated into the land model and
the potential direct impacts of O3 on biogenic volatile organic compound (BVOC)
emissions will be evaluated. Analysis of the impacts of historical land use
change will focus primarily on the southeastern United States (US) where
temperature trends have been tentatively attributed to changing vegetation and
SOA. This part of the investigation will draw on results of the Southern Oxidant
and Aerosol Study (SOAS) field campaign should it be funded. This effort will
help resolve outstanding factors that control tropospheric concentrations of O3
and SOA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address social- and policy-
related issues relevant to understanding major drivers of future air quality and
associated impacts on public health. In addition, this effort will develop a
next-generation scheme that explicitly evaluates the atmospheric aging of SOA
for general application in global models. The research will support and
contribute to the education of a graduate student and postdoctoral fellow. A
graduate-level class will be developed to further explore biosphere-atmosphere
interactions in the classroom setting. Finally, the research activities will be
tied to an outreach project through the Boston Museum of Science in which
undergraduate summer students will work on the museum's Current Science and
Technology exhibits to bring atmospheric chemistry research to the public.