* 1238383
* TARGETED INFUSION GRANT: Enhancement of the Undergraduate Physics Program in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Howard University
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Prabhakar Misra, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,798.00

The project entitled - Enhancement of the Undergraduate Physics Program in the
Department of Physics and Astronomy at Howard University - has the overall goal
to expand and enhance the learning experiences of undergraduate students taking
targeted Physics courses in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Howard
University. It is expected that there will be an improved learning environment
driven by four activities: implementation of an Atmospheric Physics minor;
conversion of the existing General Astronomy course into a hybrid on-
line/laboratory class; upgrade of the Howard University Planetarium and
Astronomical Observatory; and development of a recruitment and scholarship
program and a peer support program for undergraduate Physics
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities take advantage of the well-
established track record that the department has developed in Physics and
Atmospheric Science education and research. This approach can be modeled by
other Physics Departments that face similar challenges. The lessons learned from
these efforts have the potential to improve and enhance smaller Physics programs
that struggle with issues of low enrollment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities are centered in a department where minority students compose nearly
100% of the undergraduate population, thus assuring participation of members of
such groups. The improvement of the department's facilities will strengthen
outreach efforts to the public at large. The results of the project activities
will be disseminated to the broader Physics community through presentations at
meetings of professional Physics educators.