* 1238314
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Wind Energy, Science, Technology, and Research (WindSTAR)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* John Niedzwecki, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,500.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Wind Energy, Science, Technology, and Research
(WIndSTAR) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1238307 University of Massachusetts Lowell;
Christopher Niezrecki &lt;br/&gt;1238314 Texas A&amp;M; John Niedzwecki
&lt;br/&gt;1238302 University of Texas at Dallas; Mario Rotea &lt;br/&gt;1238185
Iowa State University; Matthew Frank &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center
for Wind Energy, Science, Technology, and Research (WIndSTAR) will aim to
enhance national excellence in wind energy research and development that has
direct relevance to industry, and to develop a cadre of diverse undergraduate
and graduate students with world-class training who will support and eventually
lead in the analysis, design, manufacture, installation, operation, and
maintenance of wind energy systems. The research efforts will be anchored by the
University of Massachusetts Lowell as the lead institution, partnering with
Texas A&amp;M, the University of Texas at Dallas, and Iowa State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind energy systems for electricity production are complex
engineered systems that operate on land or over water to produce usable power.
These systems consist of an array of wind turbines placed on appropriate support
structures and interconnected to deliver electric power to the utility grid. The
potential for land-based and offshore wind energy is tremendous, but to achieve
this potential will require a coherent and industry-relevant research and
development program that involves industry, academe and government. The proposed
I/UCRC will address industrially relevant research to advance and support the
development of wind energy systems with low-cost energy and high reliability.
The partners intend to engage in a cooperative program of research and education
in the following areas: A) Composites in Wind Energy, B) Foundations and Towers,
C) Manufacturing and Design, D) Structural Health Monitoring, Non-Destructive
Inspection, and Testing,E) Control Systems and Storage, and F) Wind System
Planning, Siting, Operations, and Maintenance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed center will provide a forum in which wind turbine manufacturers,
manufacturers of key components, suppliers of ancillary equipment, service
companies, and wind project developers can work together to solve problems that
are of mutual interest. In addition, the center will work to develop and
integrate educational activities that enhance recruitment and retention of
diverse student populations. The Center intends to collaborate with KidWind,
which provides teaching materials for K-12 teachers, and manages regional and
national challenges for team turbine design competitions. The center will
provide a conduit for the transfer of ideas among KidWind, industry, and academe
and will engage industrial partners to develop regional training programs
between educators and industry to create a sustainable pipeline of future STEM
workers with strong interest by women and underrepresented groups.