* 1238951
* Workshops for a Community Roadmap for Governance of Geoscience Cyberinfrastructure (EarthCube)
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Geoffrey Fox, Arizona Geological Survey
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2013
* USD 99,999.00

EarthCube is focused on community-driven development of an integrated and
interoperable knowledge management system for data in the geo- and environmental
sciences. By utilizing a cooperative, as opposed to competitive, process like
that which created the Internet and Open Source software, EarthCube will attack
the recalcitrant and persistent problems that so far have prevented adequate
access to and the analysis, visualization, and interoperability of the vast
storehouses of disparate geoscience data and data types residing in distributed
and diverse data systems. This awards funds a series of broad, inclusive
community interactions to gather adequate information and requirements to create
a roadmap for a critical capability (governance) in the development of
EarthCube, a major new NSF initiative. Community/stakeholder buy-in and adoption
of standards; common tools and aproaches, if possible; best practices;
cyberinfrastructure protocols; and workflows are essential to any holistic
approach to creating an interoperable and service-oriented architecture that
serves the needs of the geoscience research community wishing to do data-enabled
science. The funded series of online/virtual workshops that will engage a brod
spectrum of the geoscience community were considered innovative and exciting,
especially the proposed application of social networking outreach utilities to
engage early career scientists and students. A prime deliverable of the project
will be a road map of how to move forward in terms of setting up broadly agreed
upon structures to oversee the development of EarthCube activities in the
associated working groups and concept grants. Broader impacts of the work
include converging on mutually agreed upon processes to allow decision making
with regard to whether or not standards or specific protocols should be
established, and if so what they should be. They also include the fostering of
close interaction between communities that do not commonly interact with one
another (the geosciences and those in cyberinfrastructure and computer science)
and focusing them on the common goal of creating a new paradigm in data and
knowledge management in the geosciences.