* 1238599
* Databrary:   An open video-based data-sharing system for developmental science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Rick Gilmore, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,665,719.00

Behavior develops from a variety of factors interacting across domains and time
scales. To capture the richness of behavioral development and understand its
complexity, most developmental scientists record video. However, researchers
rarely share video data, and this has slowed progress, impeded understanding,
and diminished the impact of public investments in behavioral science. The
Databrary project aims to increase scientific transparency and accelerate
discovery in developmental science by making it easy and convenient for
scientists to share video data. No large-scale repository for sharing digital
video data currently exists; the researchers involved in this project will
create a web-based repository (databrary.org). They will develop data management
tools to make contributing video files and metadata convenient and reliable for
researchers, and they will create mechanisms to enable transcoding, searching,
browsing, visualizing, streaming, and downloading files from the Databrary.
OpenSHAPA (openshapa.org), a free, open-source video-coding tool will become the
common file format for the Databrary. The investigators will develop tools to
convert data coded in other systems to the OpenSHAPA format, and they will
enhance OpenSHAPA to support integration of multimedia data such as eye
tracking, motion tracking, physiological measures, and brain imaging. The
investigators will address cultural, historical, technical, and privacy/ethics
challenges associated with open video data sharing by building a
user/contributor community of developmental scientists. With community input,
they will develop template permission language so that investigators can
contribute datasets to the library, and they will develop contributor and user
agreements to ensure appropriate levels of access. The investigators will
provide training and technical support to the emerging user community through
workshops, webinars, and on-site training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By creating
tools for open video data sharing, the project will deepen insights and
accelerate discovery in developmental science. The contribution of a particular
dataset will no longer depend on the private activities of researchers from one
laboratory, but instead benefit from the critique and imagination of many
researchers with different viewpoints. Researchers will be able to view one
another's datasets and reanalyze them to test competing hypotheses, perform
integrative analyses, learn from prior examples, and address new questions
beyond the scope of the original study--enabling new possibilities for research
in labs with limited financial and technical resources. Moreover, the
infrastructure they develop will have broad impacts for data sharing and data
management in the entire behavioral science community.