* 1238253
* A Research+Practice Collaboratory
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Joni Falk, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2016
* USD 7,346,532.00

The Exploratorium comes together with the Education Development Center,
Inverness Research, TERC, the University of Colorado - Boulder, and the
University of Washington to form a Research+Practice (R+P) Collaboratory. The
Collaboratory seeks to address and reframe the gap between research and practice
in K-12 STEM education. This gap persists despite decades of work by many
leading organizations, associations, and individuals. Attempts to close the gap
have generally focused on creating resources and mechanisms that first explain
or illustrate "what research says" and then invite educators to access and
integrate findings into practice. Recently, however, attention has turned to the
ways in which the medical sciences are addressing the gap between research and
clinical practice through the developing field of "translational research." In
medicine, the strategy has been to shift the focus from adoption to adaptation
of research into practice. Implicit in the notion of adaptation is a bi-
directional process of cultural exchange in which both researchers and
practitioners come to understand how the knowledge products of each field can
strengthen the professional activities in the other. Along these lines, the R+P
Collaboratory is working with leading professional associations and STEM
improvement efforts to leverage their existing knowledge and experience and to
build sustainable strategies for closing the gap. Activities
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Collecting, creating and synthesizing
translational research resources to expand STEM educators' and educational
leaders' access and awareness to current relevant research.&lt;br/&gt; -
Supporting multiple opportunities for cross-sector (research and practice;
education and social sciences; formal and informal) meetings to foster critical
engagement and cultural exchange. &lt;br/&gt; - Testing, documenting and
innovating new resources and mechanisms at Adaptation Sites and disseminating
both products and results through the R+P Resource Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R+P Collaboratory is developing an online 'Go-To'
Resource Center website that houses the resources collected, created, and
curated by the Collaboratory. The Resource Center also has significant 'Take-
Out' features, with all materials meta-tagged so that they can be automatically
uploaded, reformatted, and integrated into the existing communication and
professional development mechanisms (e.g., newsletters, digests, conferences,
and websites) of a dozen leading professional associations within a Professional
Association Partner Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of new and emerging
standards in the STEM disciplines, the Collaboratory is focusing its work on
four salient and timely bodies of research: (a) STEM Practices, (b) Formative
Assessment, (c) Cyberlearning, and (d) Learning as a Cross-Setting Phenomenon.
Special emphasis is being placed on research and practice that focuses on the
learning of children and youth from communities historically underrepresented in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of the R+P Collaboratory includes
research and evaluation of its own efforts through studies aimed at answering
the following questions:&lt;br/&gt; - How are Collaboratory resources and
engagement activities accessed, experienced and leveraged by
participants?&lt;br/&gt; - What resources, mechanisms and learning contexts
support cultural exchange among STEM education researchers and
practitioners?&lt;br/&gt; - What new kinds of practices result when research-
based evidence is adapted into evidence-based practices, and how does it change
learning opportunities for K-12 aged children?&lt;br/&gt; - How can effective
strategies, mechanisms and resources of the Collaboratory be scaled and adapted
to new contexts?