* 1238600
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Formal Design of Semi-Autonomous Cyberphysical Transportation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Paul Green, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop fundamental theory, efficient
algorithms, and realistic&lt;br/&gt;experiments for the analysis and design of
safety-critical cyber-physical transportation systems&lt;br/&gt;with human
operators. The research focuses on preventing crashes between automobiles at
road&lt;br/&gt;intersections, since these account for about 40% of overall
vehicle crashes. Specifically, the main&lt;br/&gt;objective of this work is to
design provably safe driver-assist systems that understand
driver?s&lt;br/&gt;intentions and provide warnings/overrides to prevent
collisions. In order to pursue this goal,&lt;br/&gt;hybrid automata models for
the driver-vehicles-intersection system, incorporating driver&lt;br/&gt;behavior
and performance as an integral part, are derived from human-factors experiments.
A&lt;br/&gt;partial order of these hybrid automata models is constructed,
according to confidence levels on&lt;br/&gt;the model parameters. The driver-
assist design problem is then formulated as a set of partially&lt;br/&gt;ordered
hybrid differential games with imperfect information, in which games are
ordered&lt;br/&gt;according to parameter confidence levels. The resulting
designs are validated experimentally in&lt;br/&gt;a driving simulator and in
large-scale computer simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research leverages
the potential of embedded control and communication technologies
to&lt;br/&gt;prevent crashes at traffic intersections, by enabling networks of
smart vehicles to cooperate with&lt;br/&gt;each other, with the surrounding
infrastructure, and with their drivers to make transportation&lt;br/&gt;safer,
more enjoyable, and more efficient. The work is based on a collaboration
among&lt;br/&gt;researchers in formal methods, autonomous control, and human
factors who are studying realistic and&lt;br/&gt;provably correct
warning/override algorithms that can be readily transitioned to
production&lt;br/&gt;vehicles.