* 1238797
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Biochemical Basis of Interaction between Keratin-Derived Materials and Schwann Cells
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Charles Ebert, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2015
* USD 199,518.00

The Research Initiation Award entitled -Biochemical Basis of Interaction between
Keratin-Derived Materials and Schwann Cells - seeks to explore the specific
mechanisms by which the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) keratin class of proteins
interacts with Schwann cells and induces intracellular changes.

This project has three goals. First, there is a need to refine the understanding
and classification of ECM proteins such as keratins. Long considered as only
structural in nature, recent research has shown numerous regulatory activities
for ECM proteins. While several classifications of keratins are known to exist,
there is a dearth of knowledge to their specific roles and their three-
dimensional structures. Second, this project will elucidate the cell surface
mechanism by which interaction with keratin leads to nuclear changes in Schwann
cells, particularly in regards to how Schwann cells react to chemical stimulants
in their microenvironments. Cellular signaling attributed to keratin is not
well-studied and could lead to a transformative understanding of the role of
these biomolecules in regulatory processes of an organism. Third, the project
will continue to study structure and function of Schwann cells in collaboration
with the Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine. The goal is to
investigate how the state of keratin impacts cellular response. This project has
a strong educational component, involving undergraduate students in a meaningful
way.