* 1238343
* I/UCRC:  Phase III Communication Circuits and Systems Research Center
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Sayfe Kiaei, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 263,761.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP 1238343
&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University &lt;br/&gt;Kiaei &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks funding for a third five-year term (Phase III) of the NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Connection One (C1) at the
Arizona State University. The research focus is to develop integrated circuits
and systems-on-a-chip. The research has systems-oriented activities in
collaborative, multidisciplinary and integrative research to support the
development of hardware, signal processing techniques and architectures. The
universities that are part of this Center include the Arizona State University
(lead), the University of Arizona, the University of Hawaii, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute and the Ohio State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
C1 center has played a major role in the advancement of knowledge and
technologies in the development of wireless and sensor systems-on-a-chip. The
Center has developed collaborative and large-scale multidisciplinary projects
with its partner universities and industrial members. The Center will
significantly increase this multidisciplinary collaborative activity with
industry and academia on the development of next-generation integrated wireless
and sensor systems-on-a-chip. During the Phase III period, the center will
continue its focus on: 1) integrated wireless transceiver systems, RFIC,
antennas, microwave; 2) integrated remote sensors, bio-sensors, environmental
sensors, and DOD applications; and 3) power management for mobile and portable
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Connection One Industrial Advisory Board
(IAB) has developed the research roadmap working with the C1 directors and
faculty. As results of this, the Center has over 10 patents, over 200
journal/conference publications, and has graduated over 100 MS and PhD students
who are today working in industry and academia. The Center has established an
active cooperative program to provide internship Opportunities for students and
faculty to work in the industry. This has enabled rapid technology transfer
between the Center and the industrial partners. The Center will focus on
training students, providing internships and an interdisciplinary arena for
research in integrated wireless and sensor systems. The ASU Connection One
faculty, graduate students, and undergraduates are from diverse backgrounds. The
diversity is evidenced in several aspects including gender, ethnicity,
nationality, stages of a tenure track career.