* 1238993
* Sustained-Petascale In Action: Blue Waters Enabling Transformative Science And Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2024
* Gregory Bauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Walker
* 12/31/2024
* USD 146,395,788.00

This a renewal award to the National Center for Supercomputing Applications
(NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) to operate Blue
Waters, which is a leadership class compute, network, and storage system, that
will deliver unprecedented large scale and highly usable computing capabilities
to the national research community. Blue Waters provides the capability for
researchers to tackle much larger and more complex research challenges across a
wide spectrum of domain than can be done now, and opens up entirely new
possibilities and frontiers in science and engineering. This system is located
at the newly constructed National Petascale Computing Facility at UIUC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award enables investigators across the country to
conduct innovative research in a number of areas including: using three-
dimensional, compressible, finite difference, magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) codes to
understand how internal solar magnetoconvection powers the Sun's activity, and
how that activity heats the chromosphere and corona and accelerates charged
particles to relativistic energies; applying adaptive mesh refinement (AMR)
technologies to study flows of partially ionized plasma in the outer
heliosphere; implementing multiscale methods to study protein induced membrane
remodeling key steps of the HIV viral replication cycle and clathrin coated pit
formation in endocytosis; testing of the hypothesis that transport fluxes and
other effects associated with cloud processes and ocean mesoscale eddy mixing
are significantly different from the theoretically derived averages embodied in
the parameterizations used in current-generation climate models; and, exploring
systems-of-systems engineering design challenges to discover optimal many-
objective satellite constellation design tradeoffs that include Earth science
applications. Large allocations of resources on the new system have been awarded
to scientists and engineers by NSF through a separate peer-reviewed competition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Blue Waters system and project are aligned with NSF's
Advanced Computing Infrastructure Strategy to promote next generation
computational and data intensive applications. These applications are being
developed by multiple teams of researchers who will revolutionize and transform
our knowledge of science and engineering across many disciplines. The system
supports new modalities of computation, new programming models, enhanced system
software, accelerator technologies and novel storage. The robust design and
configuration of Blue Waters ensures that it will meet the evolving needs of the
diverse science and engineering communities over the full lifetime of the
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this award include:
provisioning unique infrastructure for research and education; accelerating
education and training in the use of advanced computational science; training
new users on how to use petascale computing techniques; promoting an exchange of
information between academia and industry about the petascale applications; and
broadening participation and collaborations in computational science with other
research institutions and projects nationally and internationally.