* 1238963
* Foundation Soil Response to Wind Turbine Generator Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Dante Fratta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 51,150.00

A wind turbine generator (WTG) structure is typically supported on a large
octagonal (at the base) mass of concrete and steel rebar reinforcement that
supports overturning, rotational stiffness, and bearing capacity stability
requirements. The overturning stability and maximum bearing pressure of the
system vary as a function of wind speed and direction. The highly eccentric
loading conditions (i.e., large ratio of overturning moments to vertical gravity
loads) lead to an uneven pressure distribution that is assumed as a uniform soil
pressure distribution over an oval-shaped effective area offset from the center
of the foundation by the system eccentricity. However, this assumed distribution
is mechanically incorrect. Current WTG foundation theory relies on elastic
halfspace models that have been developed for other purposes, with little
physical evidence to support the model in a WTG foundation system. Because of
this, field verification of dynamic shear modulus values and pressure
distribution assumptions is very relevant to establishing mechanistically
correct WTG foundation responses, along with dynamic stress-strain relationships
versus depth correlations (relevant for stiffness and settlement analyses).

The University of Wisconsin-Madison is working with Heartland Community College
(Illinois) on instrumenting a WTG foundation that will shortly be put into
service, with emphasis on evaluating the dynamic forces and the foundation soil
response to in-service wind action. The monitoring will measure dynamic force
parameters (magnitudes and periods), monitor foundation soil responses, and
analyze and develop recommendations for a mechanically validated, dynamic
foundation response. The results of the proposed research program will be
leveraged across multiple educational environments through outreach and teaching
activities. The project will provide an opportunity to engage undergraduate and
graduate students with the construction, analysis, and operation of a renewable
energy system. Experimental results and analyses will be incorporated into the
PI?s nationally recognized and attended continuing engineering education short
courses in wind energy including Wind Turbine Foundation and Tower System Design
and Wind Energy Civil Balance-of-Plant Design. In addition, results will be
directly used in the PI's first of its kind, for-credit design course in the UW-
Madison College of Engineering - CEE639, Wind Energy Site Design and
Construction.