* 1238368
* Building Student Skills in Publication Ethics: Understanding and Implementing Professional Standards of Practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Marsha Matyas, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

This education project is developing, field-testing, and widely disseminating a
set of teaching modules&lt;br/&gt;for building graduate student skills in
publication ethics to address the need to provide relevant and current knowledge
of and appreciation for the facts and principles of the eight most common
publication ethics issues, as well as the tools needed to integrate and apply
the guidelines to actual situations using professional standards of practice.
These tools are for use by higher education institutions, laboratory groups,
individuals, and professional societies and incorporate proven materials and
methods, as well as novel approaches. They are effective for US and
international graduate students in science and engineering programs and
integrate easily into Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR) training. An online
Community of Practice (COP) is being designed to engage trainees and experienced
scientists and engineers in ongoing discussions about scientific publishing,
publication ethics, and professional standards of practice in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Physiological Society (APS) has
extensive experience in the development and implementation of professional
skills, training programs, and professional development programs in science,
including for women and minorities. The collaborating societies (Society for
Biological Engineers and Biomedical Engineering Society) and the Project
Advisory Board include exceptionally qualified researchers, editors, and
educators not only in physiology but also in engineering, research integrity,
and ethics education. The outcomes are therefore expected to be broadly
applicable in science and engineering across a variety of institution types
including those who serve under-represented groups, especially as the materials
and evaluation results are being disseminated via websites and digital libraries
as well as via education journal articles and presentations and ongoing courses
offered by the APS and other participating organizations.