* 1238676
* The Curiosity Machine - Badge-based portal for STEM exploration
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Tara Chklovski, Iridescent
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2015
* USD 499,576.00

Iridescent is a not-for-profit company that develops and implements informal
science and engineering experiences for students by facilitating the translation
of the work that scientists and engineers do in a way that makes that work
accessible to families. The proposal expands the Iridescent outreach activities
funded by the Office of Naval Research, to provide a blended combination of in-
person and online support to the families of underrepresented populations. The
project is producing twenty videos of scientists and engineers presenting their
research that are closely aligned with one hundred scientific inquiry and
engineering design-based experiments and lesson plans. These digital resources,
collectively called the Curiosity Machine, provide opportunities for parents and
children to engage in scientific inquiry and engineering design in multiple
face-to-face and online environments, including mobile technologies. The
evaluation findings from this project provide a model of how to engage STEM
education practitioners, teachers and online communities, to substantively
connect underserved communities, in both informal and more formal learning
environments to develop experiences with engineering design and to improve
students' perspectives about and motivations to prepare for STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Curiosity Machine portal is designed to
present scientists and engineers explaining the work that they do in a way that
makes it accessible to parents and students. Iridescent is working at three
sites across the country in South Los Angeles, the South Bronx in New York City,
and San Francisco. Students and their families have multiple access points to
the science and engineering videos and materials through after school
activities, Family Science Nights and summer camps. The project is piloting the
use of electronic badges, similar to those offered in the Boy and Girl Scouts as
a mechanism to enhance the engagement and persistence of students in the online
activities. The project is developing ways to evaluate student engagement and
performance through the analysis of the products that students submit online in
response to particular science and engineering challenges. Students can also
gain extra credit at school for their participation in the Curiosity Machine
activities. The materials that the Curiosity Machine activities and challenges
use are those that are commonly available to families, and the project provides
access to mobile technology to facilitate participation by families.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student access to out of school science and engineering
experiences is limited by the resources in terms of time and availability
science centers have available. This project develops the resources and tools to
bridge the in-school and out of school activities for students through the use
of videos and online participation in ways that expand the opportunity of
students from underserved populations to continue to engage in substantive
science and engineering experiences beyond what they might get during an
intermittent visit to a science center. The research and evaluation that is part
of this study provides information about how new forms of extrinsic motivation
might be used to support student engagement and persistence in learning about
science and engineering.