* 1238057
* Evolutionary Gain and Loss of Function in Parasitic Plant Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Claude dePamphilis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 3,406,833.00

PI: James Westwood (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Claude dePamphilis (Pennsylvania State
University), Michael Timko (University of Virginia), and John Yoder (University
of California - Davis) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: Eva Collakova and
Lenwood Heath (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University) and Aaron
Mackey (University of Virginia)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolutionary transition
from autotrophism to heterotrophism by parasitic plants is an extraordinary
example of adaptive plant biology. It is associated with striking morphological
adaptations, such as the development of a haustorium, and physiological changes
that enable the parasite to enter host tissue and redirect host nutrients to the
parasite. This project will build on a prior NSF-supported study that sequenced
expressed genes from key life stages of three species that span the spectrum of
plant parasitism: a facultative parasite (Triphysaria versicolor), a
photosynthetically-competent obligate parasite (Striga hermonthica), and an
obligate holoparasite [Phelipanche (=Orobanche) aegyptiaca]. Sequences were also
generated from the closest non-parasitic relative, Lindenbergia philippensis,
which provides a point of contrast to the parasitic species. These data will be
used, along with metabolite profiles from key stages of parasite and host
tissues, to identify gene and metabolic networks that function uniquely in
parasitic plants. The project aims to identify and characterize genes that are
essential for haustoria function in connecting to host tissues and extracting
host nutrients such as amino acid and sugar transporters and transcription
factors. Candidate genes will be characterized through a series of analyses
including detailed temporal and spatial expression, functional knockout by
trans-specific gene silencing, and direct gene knockout or overexpression in the
parasite species. Analysis of transgenic parasites with modified expression of
specific genes will reveal new patterns of gene and metabolic regulation that
will reveal how genes have evolved to enable parasitism in plants. The broader
impacts of this research derive from understanding how plant genes evolve under
the tight constraints of parasitic interactions and from the large impact that
certain parasitic species (e.g. Striga and Orobanche spp.) inflict on
agriculture in developing nations of Africa. The project will emphasize student
training that bridges diverse fields of bioinformatics and applied agriculture.
Project personnel will collaborate with colleagues in Morocco and Kenya to
translate basic research findings from the project into progress in control of
parasitic weeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parasitic weeds are devastating agronomic
pests worldwide and a significant constraint to agricultural productivity and
food security in developed and developing countries alike. In addition to
providing basic cellular and metabolic scale data on this group of related
plants that encompass an enormous breadth of morphological and physiological
diversity, the project will contribute directly to the design of novel
strategies for the control of these noxious pests. The potential positive and
lasting impact of such advancement on crop production, food security and human
health cannot be overemphasized. As the global threat from parasitic weeds
expands, the need for trained individuals who understand their biology will be
accentuated. Recognizing this need and the paucity of trained personnel at all
levels in the US, this project will train graduate and post-doctoral students
not only in the laboratory at their home institutions, but through participatory
field experiences internationally. These 9-day laboratory/field practicals in
International Parasitic Plant Research will be conducted in the 2nd and 3rd
years of this project and will take personnel from the four US institutions to
Morocco or Kenya to work with collaborators, observe Phelipanche, Orobanche and
Striga species in the field, conduct workshops, and gain first-hand knowledge of
the challenges faced by agriculturalists dealing with parasitic weeds. It will
also help disseminate project findings to African researchers to assist in their
research activities. Integrated with the science, students will engage in study
of cultural, socioeconomic, and geographical aspects of science and agriculture
in developing countries. All sequence data will be deposited at GenBank and data
and tools generated in the project will be accessible through the project
website and through the iPlant Collaborative. Metabolomic data will be deposited
through emerging public repositories such as MetabolomeExpress and DROP Met.
Striga and Phelipanche are on the Federal Registry of Noxious Weeds and current
regulations restrict the importation and handling of these seeds except by
laboratories holding valid USDA/APHIS PPQ 526 permits for quarantined plant
seeds. Parties interested in obtaining germplasm used or generated in this
project are encouraged to first contact USDA/APHIS regarding how to obtain
permission to work with these species.