* 1238514
* Broadening STEM Participation of African American Males
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Rosalie Boone, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine P. Easter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,888.00

The Howard University HBCU-UP Broadening Participation Research in STEM
Education project is entitled Broadening STEM Participation of African American
Males. The proposed project is designed to use the Engagement, Capacity and
Continuity (ECC) theory to address issues associated with the
underrepresentation of African American males in STEM. The objectives are to (1)
identify the relationship between mathematics achievement and race-by-gender,
engagement, capacity, and continuity variables and (2) develop, validate, and
administer a psychometrically sound instrument that describes the ECC
characteristics and experiences of African American males majoring in STEM
disciplines. The proposal responds to recent calls for research specifically
focused on African American males in STEM to help inform
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the ECC Trilogy for Student Success as the
theoretical framework, the study is designed to identify factors that facilitate
or serve as barriers to African American males' interest, experiences, and
success in STEM disciplines. It will employ a two-phased approach to test the
hypotheses: Phase 1 will examine relationships between race-by-gender
interactions and ECC-related factors on math achievement using data from the
Department of Education High School Longitudinal Study of 2009. Phase 2 will use
the results and findings of Phase 1 to develop, validate, and administer an
instrument to examine ECC characteristics and experiences of African American
males majoring in STEM disciplines to ascertain the relationship between the
instrument results and undergraduate STEM achievement. The project's potentially
transformative influence lies in its ability to disentangle the issues of race
and gender and their relationship to factors found to influence STEM interest
and success. The findings could be especially useful to major research
universities facing race/ethnicity and gender issues in their recruitment and
retention of underrepresented groups in STEM.