* 1238789
* Targeted Infusion: Strengthening Forensic Science Undergraduates Research and Instruction Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Melinda Davis, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 287,136.00

In order for the institution to continue to meet the needs of its students in
the Biology department, the targeted infusion project of Fort Valley State
University has as its goal to infuse undergraduate research and instruction into
the forensic science curriculum. Forensic science is a rapidly expanding and
interdisciplinary science that has already captured the attention of many
undergraduate STEM majors. The goal of this project is to foster that enthusiasm
while also strengthening the existing NSF-funded HBCU UP STEM program at FVSU. A
collection of strategies will be employed to achieve this goal. They include,
but are not limited to: the incorporation of inquiry based lectures and labs in
forensic sciences, establishment of a forensic science core research laboratory,
undergraduate research opportunities, high school teacher workshops and faculty
development. Ultimately, the activities proposed will not only expose students
to the breadth of concepts related to forensic science and its application to
real world problems, but will also improve their capacities to compete for
highly coveted graduate programs at major research intensive institutions.
Overall, the forensic science program at FVSU will impact over 200 students and
faculty each year, thereby significantly contributing to the potential pool of
qualified STEM graduates from diverse backgrounds.