* 1238803
* Implementation Project: Strategic Plan for the Integration of Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Programs (SPIN-UP)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2021
* John Reutter, J F Drake State Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,749,968.00

This project at J F Drake State Technical College builds on a very successful
previous implementation project and has the goals to expand the number and
diversity of STEM educational opportunities for students, to expand the number
of minority, female, and first-generation students entering and completing
postsecondary STEM education opportunities at Drake State, and to increase the
percentage of students retained in and completing postsecondary STEM education
programs at Drake State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes twelve
elements to further improve the college's STEM programs and to prepare students
for study at 4-year institutions and high-demand, high-wage careers in STEM.
They are: nanotechnology integrated across the curriculum, development of a
chemistry program, faculty professional development in nanotechnology and
chemistry, interactive, 3-D visualization learning objects and a 3-D classroom
for STEM courses, Summer Bridge activities emphasizing nanotechnology, summer
technology camps for middle school students, a Summer Technology Institute to
introduce nanotechnology to secondary school educators, a first-year student
coaching program shown to be effective in raising second-year and long-term
retention rates, supplemental instruction that places peer mentors and tutors in
classrooms to assist faculty and students, faculty and student research projects
that can be presented at conferences, virtual learning communities utilizing
interconnection between the College's Blackboard Learning Management System and
various social network systems, and research on the effectiveness of student
coaching, supplemental instruction, and interactive, 3-D learning objects on the
retention and learning outcomes of minority, female, first-generation, and
economically under-resourced students. This project will prepare veterans,
minorities, women, first-generation students, and economically under-resourced
students for a broad range of new and exciting, high-wage, high-demand STEM
careers.