* 1238568
* 2012 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) Annual Meeting in Atlanta, GA on October 24-27, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Hanjoong Jo, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

1238568 &lt;br/&gt;Jo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BMES Annual Fall Meeting is a
high quality, multidisciplinary scientific event conducted by the Biomedical
Engineering Society (BMES). This year's meeting is co-hosted by the Georgia
Institute of Technology and Emory University and will be held in Atlanta,
Georgia from October 24-27, 2012. This year's theme is "Integrating Academics,
Industry, and Translation: From Discovery to Implementation." The main program
consists of a total of 15 parallel technical Program Tracks providing over 800
oral presentations and an additional 1,600+ in poster presentations. The meeting
will also feature two one-day workshops, 9 plenary lectures by distinguished
academic, translational and industry leaders, two special symposia, numerous
research presentations and a variety of special sessions. This meeting also
offers career opportunities through its "Meet the Faculty" session and a career
fair where industry can meet with students. The two pre-conference workshops
will deal with important contemporary issues in BME: "Coulter College", which
focuses on technology transfer and commercialization; and COACH, which offers
professional development for post-doctorates. A record 3,500+ attendees are
anticipated for the 2012 meeting. The potential record attendance is based upon
the number of abstracts received for the 2011 meeting (i.e., 2,448, which is a
12% increase over that of 2010). A Program booklet will provide program details
to the participants of the conference. All technical presentations will be one-
page, peer-reviewed abstracts, which will be compiled in CD format and
distributed to all registrants. Copies of the CD will also be provided to all
co-sponsoring societies. Currently, the CD is envisioned to serve as the only
technical proceedings of the meeting due to the large number of high-quality
abstracts accepted. The 2012 meeting currently has sponsorship commitments from
three major sponsors, including the Georgia Institute of Technology, Clemson
University and Medtronic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This conference is an extremely high-quality scientific,
intellectually stimulating, and interdisciplinary meeting. It is the premiere
conference for the BME field and brings together different BME communities in
academics, translation and industry, including cell and molecular engineering,
tissue engineering, through a searchable CD containing the proceedings and
through the conference and society web sites. It also is co-sponsored by several
prestigious BME-related societies. In addition to more than 2,400 oral and
poster presentations, and two pre-conference workshops, at least nine
distinguished speakers of high intellectual merit with international reputations
for BME excellence are chosen by the BMES Awards Committee to give talks. These
plenary lectures and the intellectual content of the meeting will provide
important cross-fertilization of ideas, concepts, tools, and approaches, and
will highlight the importance of BME as the intersection of Biology, Medicine,
and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the direct impact this conference will have on the mainstream BME community, the
primary aim of this meeting is to serve as the facilitator of important cross-
fertilizations between the life sciences and engineering technologies and the
facilitator of this integration in the multi-disciplinary approach to the
practice of BME. This specific aim heavily targets the undergraduate and
graduate students, postdoctoral trainees and junior faculty communities for
their essential role in the future advancement of the BME sciences and practices
and it is expected that 60% of the attendees will be students. The funding from
the NSF will be useful to encourage and reward students, especially from
underrepresented groups, while a portion of it will also help to bring the
distinguished BME related leaders to the meeting. In order to successfully
accomplish this specific aim, participation from biomedical engineers, engineers
from other disciplines, cell and molecular biologists, biochemists,
biophysicists, and other scientists, including clinical researchers, physicians,
and members of the industrial communities, is actively promoted and encouraged.
In this manner, this conference will have a much broader impact than if it were
to be attended by only the BME community. This will also provide a broad impact
for the current state of the discipline as well as for the future, since
students will benefit by participation in the meeting and through the material
presented by the plenary speakers and workshops. Subsequently, another primary
aim of this meeting is to make the high-quality scientific information presented
at the meeting readily available to multiple societies and to the public at
large.