* 1238380
* Conference: Midwest Plant Cell Dynamics Meeting being held June 20-22, 2012 in Wisconsin, Madison
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Daniel Szymanski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2014
* USD 9,920.00

Intellectual Merit and Objectives&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit and
objectives of the meeting are to provide an open, inclusive, and interactive
forum that provides an effective learning environment for all participants,
especially undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows. NSF
funds are requested to increase the breadth of participation to include many
young researchers that have an interest in plant cell biology. The meeting will
include oral presentations, posters, workshop, and time for informal
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To provide an open and inclusive forum for oral
presentations that allow all labs to share research results. Lead PIs will
provide brief 5 minute overviews of each research area to define key knowns as
well as important knowledge gaps. Student and post-doc presentations will be
geared toward teaching all participants basic methodology as well as data
interpretation. Ample time will be devoted for discussion.&lt;br/&gt;2) To
provide an opportunity for all participants to present and discuss their results
in evening poster sessions.&lt;br/&gt;3) To conduct hands on workshop on
fundamentals of fluorescence microsopy, with an emphasis in colocalization
analysis. Kevin Eliceiri from the Madison Laboratory for Optical and
Computational Instrumentation (LOCI) will give a workshop on using ImageJ for
data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;4) To provide a forum for students and post docs to
publish interesting images in a web based cell image gallery.