* 1238643
* Systemic Transformation for Inquiry Learning Environments (STILE)  for Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Anne Degnan, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,619.00

The Center for Technology and School Change (CTSC) at Teachers College, Columbia
University and the Center for Environmental Research and Conservation (CERC) at
Columbia University's Earth Institute are working in partnership with three STEM
focused New York City schools (K-8) to develop a systemic, transformative
approach for interdisciplinary STEM teaching and learning. The planned model
prepares teachers to design innovative, authentic STEM projects, and supports
administrators in leading such efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CTSC has
identified key elements of a robust design process to help teachers move from
business- as-usual pedagogy to dramatically new practices in content, pedagogy,
and technology use. The program also identifies an interdisciplinary STEM
perspective, supported with experts from CERC who provide STEM fieldwork
expertise as part of the overall design. Moreover, the project creates research
and educational collaborations with diverse, community-based groups (e.g., urban
nature centers). The project uses a mobile learning platform to leverage social
networking among schools, teachers, students, STEM experts, parents and the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the grant is to establish a culture
of inquiry with all partners in order to develop interdiciplinary, authentic
STEM learning environments. Design-based research provides iterative cycles of
implementation to explore and refine the approach as a transformative model for
STEM programs. The model supports a sustainable approach by building the
capacity of schools to focus on design issues related to content, pedagogy, and
leadership.