* 1238809
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Innovative Learning Experiences in Astronomy for Undergraduate Students at NC A&amp;T
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Abebe Kebede, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 350,486.00

The Targeted Infusion Project entitled - Innovative Learning Experiences in
Astronomy for Undergraduate Students at NC A&amp;T - proposes a partnership with
the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill (UNC-CH). The goals of the
partnership are two-fold: (1) to incorporate UNC-CH's successful introductory
astronomy curriculum into North Carolina A&amp;T University's (NC A&amp;T)
existing space science curriculum, and to provide NC A&amp;T's space science
faculty with the training and the tools to deliver the lecture and laboratory
courses; and (2) to recruit talented NC A&amp;T undergraduate students as
research fellows, who will work with telescopes at professional observatories,
engage in astronomical research at both NC A&amp;T and UNC-CH, present their
work at conferences, publish their findings in observing reports, conference
proceedings, and journal articles, and in doing these things be inspired to
pursue graduate studies and/or careers in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNC-CH has recently developed a new introductory astronomy
curriculum that leverages access to the robotic telescopes in Chile and
Australia. Through this collaboration NC A&amp;T will adopt this curriculum, NC
A&amp;T faculty will receive training on how to deliver the curriculum and on
how to make effective classroom use of the tools that were developed such that
even first-year, non-majors can use remote telescopes and analyze the resulting
images. Furthermore, NC A&amp;T will gain permanent, guaranteed access to
observing time on the new PROMPT telescopes in Chile and Australia, and on the
20-meter diameter radio telescope in West Virginia.