* 1238095
* CAP: Support for Young Researchers to attend the International Intelligent Tutoring Systems Conference 2012
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Beverly Woolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 11/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

The International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) provides a
forum for interchange of ideas around the applications of computer science to
education and human learning. Presentations at the conference focus on
developments and rigorous research around the design and use of interactive and
adaptive learning technologies for learners of all ages, for subject matters
that span the school curriculum, and for professional applications in industry,
the military, and medicine. The conferences promotes cross-fertilization of
information and ideas from several cyberlearning related fields: artificial
intelligence, cognitive science, education, learning sciences, human-computer
interaction, educational technology, psychology, and STEM disciplines.

This project will support travel for advanced graduate students from US
universities to attend the 11th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring
Systems (ITS), to be held in Chania, Crete, in Greece, from June 15 to 18, 2012
(http://its2012.teicrete.gr). Those advanced graduate students will participate
in the Young Research Track at the conference. That track is designed to provide
young researchers with mentoring beyond what they get at their home institutions
that will help them transition from graduate school to a fruitful research
career. Young Researcher activities include structured poster sessions in which
students present their work and one-on-one mentoring throughout the conference
from a senior member of the ITS community who shares research interests with a
young researcher and who comes from a different university and has a different
approach than the young researcher experiences in his/her home institution. It
is expected that conversations between peers and between mentors and mentees
will continue throughout each young researcher's career.

This activity supports the mission of NSF to train more advanced professionals
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. This conference is unique
in its synthesis and cross-fertilization across three STEM capacities: building
cutting-edge learning technologies, investigating pedagogical methods that are
theoretically grounded in the cognitive, social, and learning sciences, and
rigorously testing the learning environments for their effectiveness at
promoting learning (in STEM disciplines and other disciplines) among K-12,
college, and workplace populations.