* 1238477
* Workshop:  Professional Development in Writing and Publication for Early-Stage Underrepresented Faculty at Pembroke, Virginia, August, 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Allen Moore, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 16,000.00

Intellectual merit: The attrition rate for biologists from underrepresented
groups is currently highest during the post-doctoral and assistant professor
years. Tenure and promotion success to reach senior faculty positions requires
sustained research productivity, even at small teaching-centered colleges. As
such, virtually all early-stage faculty face the challenge of developing into
consistent, creative and productive writers within their discipline. Common
barriers to effective scholarly writing include: lack of a supportive community;
poor mentorship and training in productive writing habits; and lack of guidance
on best strategies for disseminating work. An intensive writing workshop and
retreat for early stage faculty from underrepresented groups will develop models
for effective publication by drawing on the expertise of editors and reviewers,
highly productive senior scientists, and administrators knowledgeable about
tenure processes from a range of institutions. Participants will divide their
time between panel discussions and informal workshops led by the mentors, and
time to work on and receive feedback about a writing project of their own.
Additionally, the workshop organizers will collect and disseminate data on both
the pitfalls early-stage faculty encounter in effective writing and the most
effective strategies identified during the workshop for overcoming those
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Bringing together a diverse
group of participants and mentors who encompass the full range of scholarly
publication experience will build a more diverse community of biologists who may
support each other in attaining scholarly productivity commiserate with
promotion and tenure in a variety of institutional contexts.