* 1238472
* 2012 The Auditory System GRC/GRS; July 7-13, 2012, Bates College, Lewiston, ME
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Dan Sanes, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 06/30/2013
* USD 19,440.00

2012 Gordon Research Seminar and Conference on "The Auditory
System"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The auditory system is marvel of speed, accuracy
and versatility. Animals use sound to locate and communicate with one another
over great distances, to identify and avoid danger, and to derive pleasure in
the form of music. The 2012 Auditory System Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
will explore a set of interconnected themes that address how this system first
emerges during development, how it is shaped by experience, and how it
represents a complex acoustic environment. The conference will bring together a
diverse group of scientists and students who will share their most recent
findings, from the molecular mechanisms of hair cell transduction to auditory
perception. A key goal of this project involves mentorship of students and
junior investigators. Thus, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows are
encouraged to gather for a smaller Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) that
immediately precedes the GRC. Here, students will exchange ideas with one
another, and with a small number of senior investigators who will be available
for scientific feedback and career advice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
will take place in a rural and collegial setting, with a schedule designed to
stimulate facilitate discussion, both during and after the formal presentations.
There will be ample opportunity for informal conversations and brainstorming
sessions during the free afternoons and at shared meals. The specific sessions
will cover the maturation of function, the effect of environment noise exposure
or deprivation, multisensory integration, encoding and decoding acoustic
signals, and vocal communication. In addition to the invited speakers, several
short talks will be selected from amongst the submitted abstracts, and these are
specifically designed to include students and junior faculty. All participants
will also be able to share their results during highly interactive poster
sessions each afternoon and following the evening sessions. Together, the
Auditory System GRS and GRC will provide a superb environment for participants
to establish new collaborations and learn how their own work intersects with
contemporary research in the hearing sciences.