* 1238021
* REU Site: Materials and Systems Biology Research in Biotechnology and Biomedicine
* ENG,EEC
* 04/30/2012,02/28/2014
* Juergen Hahn, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 02/28/2014
* USD 226,756.00

This three year REU Site program at Texas A&M University (TAMU) will engage
undergraduate students in research focused on chemical engineering approaches to
materials science and systems biology research in biotechnology and biomedicine.
The objectives of the program are to: 1) Annually recruit ten undergraduates
from off-campus with an emphasis on recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups; 2) Open new research opportunities to students who have
had little or no previous research experience, providing insights into research
methodologies, self-discipline, team integration, reporting and exchanging new
knowledge; 3) Provide information on benefits of attending graduate school, the
application process, and encourage students to attend graduate school in
chemical engineering; 4) Enable interactions of the REU students with visiting
undergraduate researchers from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China and
Universidad de los Andes in Bogota, Columbia who participate in existing
departmental programs; 5) Provide community building opportunities among REU
students, TAMU graduate students, visiting international undergraduate
researchers, and faculty mentors; and 6) Provide opportunities for REU students
to present and publish with faculty mentors.

The REU students will participate in developing the next generation of products
and processes based on biological molecules and organisms. Recruitment efforts
will be targeted to those individuals who may not normally have such an
opportunity, particularly women, underrepresented minorities, and first-
generation college students, which will make a significant contribution toward
enhancing the diversity of the research and education infrastructure at Texas
A&M University and toward increasing the production of African American and
Hispanic engineers and scientists. This project creates a model program for
diverse populations that addresses the exposure to research by undergraduates as
well as awareness of the pathway to graduate school.

This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program.