* 1238738
* EAGER: Photo-Activated Currents and Magnetization in Au-Nanorings (PACMAN)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Florencio Hernandez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 80,000.00

The main goal of this program is to prove the feasibility of photo-activating
currents and photo-inducing magnetization in noble metal-nanorings using
polarization controlled laser radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of this investigation are: i) To couple the laser system with a
microscale Hall-effect magnetometer, ii) To find, theoretically, optimum
experimental configurations of two-dimensional Au-nanorings arrays to be tested,
iii) To fabricate the first series of samples on quartz and GaAs wafers based on
the theoretical predictions, iv) To demonstrate the generation of rotating
polaritons in Au-Nanorings through the optical characterization of samples
supported on quartz, v) To measure photo-induced magnetization in Au-nanorings
supported on GaAs-wafers with the integrated microscale Hall-Effect magnetometer
under perpendicular radiation geometry, using left and right circularly
polarized light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This EAGER is a
fundamental, high-risk, high-reward transformative research project that crosses
traditional boundaries between chemistry, physics, optics, material sciences,
engineering and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? This project is
transformative in that the current understanding of polariton propagation in
conductive nanostructures will be enriched by a valuable fundamental study of
the generation of controlled photo-induced transient rotating polaritons in
closed metal nanorings using circularly polarized radiation with specific
handedness. This exceptionally innovative research project offers the potential
to pave the road of a new generation of nanodevices that could be used as photo-
activated binary switchable nanomagnets, photo-activated nano-accelerators,
photo-activated magnetic nano-transmitters, and meta-materials for negative
refractive index, among others.&lt;br/&gt;? The high-reward aspect of this EAGER
resides in the deep understanding of an intriguing but fascinating effect that
could revolutionize the field of nanotechnology through the development and
design of novel nanodevices for computing and communication, nanoantennas and
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;? The high-risk facet of this study resides mainly on the
intrinsic uncertainty involved in a high-impact, cutting edge research on an
untested idea and, on the multidisciplinary experimental technical challenges
that it will present. The latter include to couple a laser system with a
microscale Hall-Effect magnetometer, to fabricate nanostructures with reduced
defects and increase the density of Au-nanorings on the substrates avoiding
surface Plasmon resonance coupling between neighbor nanorings, to detect the
anticipated small photo-induced currents and magnetization in Au-nanorings and,
to gain control on the sign of the magnetization using different handedness of
circularly polarized radiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project includes the interdisciplinary training of two graduate students of two
different disciplines (chemistry and physics) in a field that combines
chemistry, physics, optics, material sciences, engineering and nanotechnology.
The strong collaboration between USA and Taiwan, an Asian developing nation,
will contribute to the preparation of the new generation of PhDs by providing
them with global awareness. Results will be diseminated through publications in
peer-reviewed journals and conference presentations.