* 1238665
* 2012 Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits GRC
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* John Muntean, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Intellectual Merit. Mineral resources have always been an essential foundation
of human civilization.&lt;br/&gt;Despite uncertain economic times for much of
the world, prices for critical minerals continue to&lt;br/&gt;remain high as
they are depleted by mining and as discovery of new resources
becomes&lt;br/&gt;increasingly difficult. Even with greater recycling and
substitution, increasing demand requires&lt;br/&gt;that metals and other rare
elements will continue to be mined from ore deposits. Such
deposits&lt;br/&gt;can only be utilized in an environmentally responsible manner
if the ore elements are highly&lt;br/&gt;enriched by natural chemical and
physical processes. These processes operate over a great range&lt;br/&gt;of
spatial and temporal scales from the Earth?s interior to its surface, and from
the earliest&lt;br/&gt;geological records of the planet to the present day. The
2012 Gordon Research Conference&lt;br/&gt;(GRC) on the Geochemistry of Mineral
Deposits presents a forum to present and discuss new&lt;br/&gt;data and ideas on
processes that control the formation and location of a wide range of
mineral&lt;br/&gt;deposits, including precious metals, base metals, and other
critical elements. Sessions will&lt;br/&gt;include lithospheric controls on
mineral deposits, magmatic and hydrothermal processes that&lt;br/&gt;partition
metals among various mineral and fluid phases, active hydrothermal systems
as&lt;br/&gt;analogues to mineral deposits, and dynamic processes involved in
ore genesis, including&lt;br/&gt;variations the fluxes and chemistry of magma
and volatiles, tectonic triggers to regional ore&lt;br/&gt;formation, and the
physical hydrogeology of hydrothermal systems. Evening sessions will
focus&lt;br/&gt;on puzzling, controversial and commonly overlooked ore systems.
These systems include the&lt;br/&gt;African Copper Belt in Zambia and the
Democratic Republic of Congo, iron oxide-copper-gold&lt;br/&gt;systems, and
systems that form rare earth elements, which have critical high-technology
and&lt;br/&gt;environmental applications. Another evening session focuses on the
distal expressions of large&lt;br/&gt;ore systems, which is of interest to
private industry and government agencies involved in&lt;br/&gt;exploration and
mineral assessments, which are important to land use
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. GRCs provide a unique
opportunity for scientists from government, academia and&lt;br/&gt;industry from
all over the world to meet in an informal setting. GRCs provide a level of
intimacy&lt;br/&gt;not experienced in other conferences. Attendance is limited
to 160 participants, emphasis is on&lt;br/&gt;discussion, and there are no
concurrent sessions. Few conferences bring together such a wide&lt;br/&gt;range
of scientists of both experience and focus, which ranges from pure, process-
related&lt;br/&gt;research to applied research. Not all the participants
specialize in ore deposits. Researchers&lt;br/&gt;focused on igneous petrology,
aqueous and isotope geochemistry, fluid flow, and active&lt;br/&gt;hydrothermal
systems are speaking and leading sessions. With such an intimate setting,
the&lt;br/&gt;participants have little choice but to interact with each other
during the conference. Such&lt;br/&gt;interactions commonly lead to unforeseen
collaborations. Funds will be provided to students,&lt;br/&gt;post-docs, and
other young investigators to assist them in attending in the meeting, thus
affording&lt;br/&gt;them the opportunity to network with recognized experts in
both academia and industry and have&lt;br/&gt;a say in the future directions of
mineral deposit research.