* 1238905
* Targeted Infusion Project Grant: Integrating Interactive Bioinformatics Learning Modules into the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* E. Gloria Regisford, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2016
* USD 299,977.00

The targeted infusion project of Prairie View A&M University has as its primary
goal to enhance the Biology curriculum with the incorporation of bioinformatics
modules into existing traditional Biology courses. As such, this project is
particularly aligned with recent advances in the fields of molecular biology,
biotechnology and information technology. The project goal will be achieved
through the implementation of several objectives that include development of
e-learning software and modules designed to enhance student learning and assist
students in exploring and visualizing biological theories and concepts. In order
to ensure program success, a carefully developed set of faculty workshops is
also planned. These workshops, to be held during the summer breaks, will
familiarize faculty with learning modules and their proper implementation in the
classroom. Ultimately, the activities proposed will not only expose students to
the field of bioinformatics and its application to real world problems, but will
also improve their capacities to compete for highly coveted undergraduate
research opportunities at major research intensive institutions. As such, it is
expected that a significant percentage of PVAMU students will, subsequently,
matriculate into STEM graduate degree programs, thereby contributing to the
diversification of the US STEM enterprise.