* 1238120
* Technical Evaluation Assistance in Mathematics and Science (TEAMS)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* John Sutton, RMC Research Corporation, OR
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rebecca A. Kruse
* 04/30/2016
* USD 799,997.00

This Research, Evaluation and Technical Assistance project awarded to RMC
Research Corporation supports the needs of the evaluation community in the Math
and Science Partnership (MSP) program, improving the quality of the evaluations
of the MSP awards and building community capacity in evaluation design,
methodology, analysis and reporting. This project conducts on-going needs
assessments to ascertain barriers to high quality evaluations, provides
increased access to instruments to measure a wide variety of important STEM
education outcomes, and facilitates ongoing networking among MSP evaluators and
investigators to improve evaluation. Evaluation design and implementation
technical assistance includes direct help in determining how projects can best
utilize rigorous experimental and strong quasi-experimental designs, how
investigators and evaluators can best interact with schools and districts in
order to ensure their cooperation, and how the findings of evaluations can best
be communicated to a variety of audiences. The technical assistance will address
new methodology in evaluation that includes the use of large scale, longitudinal
databases of student outcomes, social network designs to examine collaboration
and capacity building, and other methodologies coming from NSF programs such as
Promoting Research and Innovation in Methodologies in Evaluation (PRIME).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-tiered technical assistance program provides
different levels of help to projects. A website, available to the general STEM
education public, provides information relevant to a wide range of topics for
MSP evaluation. An online Help Desk provides more detailed assistance for NSF
MSP projects. An on-going analysis of evaluation plans, reports and event
services that are provided through interactions with MSP projects provides
examples of ways that other projects have identified and addressed barriers to
robust evaluation. A series of webinars that are archived for anytime viewing
address common evaluation issues that have arisen in projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation of funded projects is an important issue that
goes well beyond the target population of the NSF and Title IIB (of the U.S.
Department of Education) MSP funded projects. Increasingly, research and
development projects in STEM education are being required to show evidence of
impact or effectiveness of their efforts. The tools and designs that are needed
to ensure that the information that is provided about those impacts is
distributed across a variety of reports, journal articles and publications. This
project, integrated with the ongoing MSP Learning Network, expands the support
that is available for STEM educators who engage in professional development and
research in STEM education.