* 1238786
* Broadening Participation Research Grant: Fostering Retention in STEM Disciplines at Historically Black Colleges and Universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 349,992.00

The Tuskegee University HBCU-UP Broadening Participation Research in STEM
Education project is entitled Fostering Retention in STEM Disciplines at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. The proposed study will examine
the interplay between psychosocial and academic structural factors that affect
retention of minority students at HBCUs. The objectives are to (1) determine the
most prominent psycho-social factors that affect student retention in STEM
programs; (2) identify the structural factors that lead to the successful
retention of students in STEM programs; (3) gain insight into the issues that
influence the effectiveness of those structural factors; and (4) develop a
manual describing suggestions for best practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal frames the study by presenting a synthesis of the literature in a model
of psychological and sociological influences on STEM retention at HBCUs. The PIs
intend to build upon this model to describe what HBCUs are doing to foster
student success. The study will employ a mixed methods approach to collect and
analyze data from students, faculty, administrators and other non-faculty
personnel, and successful graduates of STEM programs from HBCUs in order to
investigate three research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. What psycho-social factors
(emotional, motivational, and social factors) appear to affect the retention of
students in STEM disciplines at HBCUs? In what ways are these effects
manifested?&lt;br/&gt;2. How do structural factors (tangible resources,
availability of mentors, supportive programs, etc.) influence retention rates in
STEM disciplines at HBCUs?&lt;br/&gt;3. What influence, if any, do psycho-social
factors (emotional factors, motivational factors, social factors) appear to have
on the effectiveness of structural factors which are intended to support student
retention in STEM disciplines?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The study will be guided by
a multidisciplinary team of faculty specializing in education, social and
behavioral sciences, and mathematics, and it will be conducted in collaboration
with other HBCUs. Through the use of a community-based participatory research
methodology, the PIs expect to produce results that will have practical benefits
to the larger community. More specifically, the study may provide guidance that
will translate into a set of best practices for HBCUs and non-HBCUs seeking to
increase minority student retention in STEM, particularly at the freshman and
sophomore levels.