* 1239509
* CPS: Synergy: A Hybrid Detector Network for Nuclear and Radioactive Threat Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Er-Wei Bai, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

The most compelling problem confronting detection of nuclear material in a large
area is the level of manifest uncertainty. Furthermore, detection and
localization problems involve nontrivial and nonlinear non-convex optimization
often stuck at local minima. This project develops fundamentally new techniques
by using cheap detectors for rough detection and localization, placing detectors
to expunge local minima, achieving fast distributed localization with reduced
communication overheads, simultaneously localizing multiple sources and
optimally placing detectors and assisting in their autonomous self-
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing recognition of the
inadequacy of current capabilities with respect to nuclear material detection
and localization in public events and areas. This project develops an integrated
cyber-physical system for public protection against nuclear and radiological
threats. Clearly the project addresses a national security issue. If successful,
the contribution and results of the project likely open a new framework for
detection or monitoring in a large area using a wireless detector network. One
of the key aspects of this project is the inter-disciplinary training of our
graduate and undergraduate students including female and minority students in
the areas of signal processing, statistical methods, modeling and performance
analysis. K-12 students are also targeted through the First competition and
Project-Lead-The-Way that connects the College of Engineering at the University
of Iowa to almost all high school students in Iowa. It is expected that the
project will generate enthusiasm and interests in science, mathematics and
engineering for high school students.