* 1239053
* Summer Program at CETUP*
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Rabindra Mohapatra, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This award will provide participant support for early career scientists and
graduate students to participate in the second CETUP* program that is planned to
take place on July 10 - August1, 2012 in Lead, SD. The topics to be covered are
at the forefront of research topics in particle and nuclear physics and will
explore new physics beyond the Standard Model. The study of neutrino physics and
dark matter is of high interest to particle and nuclear physicists and
astrophysicists. The ongoing and proposed dark matter and neutrino experiments
are expected to unveil the answers to critical questions asked by scientists for
last few decades. Recent precise measurements of all the neutrino mixing angles
necessitate a theoretical roadmap for the future. Understanding the nature of
dark matter better would help to understand the composition of the cosmos
better.

The scope of the 2012 summer CETUP* program will include the "Dark Matter"
program followed by a three day interlude program (July 19-21) comprising of
"Dark Matter, Neutrino Physics and Unification." Following that, there will be a
week and a half long focused theory session on "Neutrino Physics and
Unification" and a 3-day long Physics Working Group workshop of Long Baseline
Neutrino Experiment (LBNE) (July 30 - August 1).

Among the Broader Impacts, understanding neutrino properties better could have
significant implications in astrophysics and cosmology, and may offer solutions
to the current puzzles such as the abundance of matter over antimatter in the
Universe. Outreach efforts will aim to share the excitement of this research
with K-12 students and general public. Selected CETUP* participants will give
three public lectures that outline the importance of dark matter and neutrino
research. Such presentations at a level comprehensible by the general public are
important for developing public support for national investment in basic
science. South Dakota Public Broadcasting will record and stream the lectures
state wide as well as post it on their website for those who couldn't
participate live. They also will be working with the Crazy Horse Memorial
Foundation to reach out to Native American students and include them in the
educational activities at the CETUP* as well as organize an informal get
together with the students and discuss their interests in science and possible
future STEM career opportunities.