* 1239334
* SHB:  Collaborative Research:Context-aware, dynamic, smart checklists:  key cyber-infrastructure for systems delivering quality health care
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Lori Clarke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,366,467.00

This project will develop and evaluate a prototype system to provide on-line
process monitoring and guidance to the performers of health care processes. An
Institute of Medicine report has estimated that nearly 100,000 people per year
die in US hospitals from preventable errors, and subsequent reports have
suggested that many of these errors arise due to the complexity of hospital
processes. The project will demonstrate how contextual information
(retrospective, current, and prospective) can be used to provide process
performers with timely information that could reduce errors, provide expedited
warnings of impending hazards, and improve outcomes. Techniques to accumulate
and represent historical data will be developed and will feed into profile-based
analysis techniques that will evaluate probabilities and support making fine-
grained process distinctions. These capabilities will provide a strong
technological foundation for evidence-based, continuous process
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project technologies will be evaluated first
using synthetic event streams generated by process model driven simulations,
then by human simulations with nursing students using patient mannequins, and
finally with medical professionals in simulated clinical settings. Processes to
be examined include blood transfusion, chemotherapy, medication administration,
and patient identification verification. Early community success in applying
medical checklists and recent experimental results with proactive process
guidance in a hospital emergency department are positive indications that the
approaches proposed here have an excellent chance of gaining acceptance and
improving medical outcomes. Moreover, the technologies developed here, although
evaluated specifically for health care, will also apply to human-intensive
systems increasingly employed in a wide range of domains in society. The
validated medical processes and the proposed prototype will be an effective
framework for educating medical professionals in current best practices. This
project will also educate computer science and engineering students about the
challenges posed by the medical domain, encouraging a new generation of
specialists in this emerging interdisciplinary field. Its societal appeal will
also help engage bright, energetic minority and female students thereby helping
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM generally and in
computer science and engineering particularly.