* 1239928
* Catawba College Noyce Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,07/31/2018
* John Zerger, Catawba College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,449,637.00

Abstract 1239928, Catawba College, PI Rogers-Lowery

The Catawba College Noyce Scholars project brings together Catawba College with
Rowan-Cabarrus Community College and the Rowan-Salisbury Schools to focus on the
recruitment, preparation, and retention of STEM majors in teaching careers by
blending academic preparation, professional community-building, and field
experiences. To achieve these goals, the Catawba College Noyce Scholarship
project has three phases: Exploratory Internships, Scholarships, and Collegial
Support Networks. The Exploratory Internship component provides paid internships
for up to 60 freshmen and sophomore students pursuing STEM majors at Rowan-
Cabarrus Community College to experience teaching and recruit them to pursue a
career in K-12 education. The project supports eighteen STEM majors with $18,000
scholarships in their junior and senior years of college to pursue a major in a
STEM discipline and licensure in teaching at Catawba College. The program
prepares STEM educators in a broad range of disciplines (biology, chemistry,
environmental science, or mathematics) that are capable of teaching at a variety
of grade levels by offering rigorous coursework in STEM disciplines and teacher
preparation, enriched by opportunities that build social and cultural capital in
the sciences and education. To supplement course work, the Scholars complete
mentored experiences within the local school system, Rowan-Salisbury Schools,
and in research laboratories to gain understanding of both STEM and education
fields.

In addition, Noyce Scholars engage in activities that build social and cultural
capital in the profession of education, providing a support network for
retention and success during their training and careers in teaching. These
activities include a cohort-building retreat and a Mentoring Program, where
Scholars engage in field experiences in the classroom of a highly-effective
teacher in Rowan-Salisbury Schools (RSS), the local public school system, to
familiarize the Scholar with culture of public education. The Mentoring
programming has the added benefit of developing a social network that supports
the Scholars during their induction years. Following graduation, Scholars are
required to work for four years in a high-need school district as a condition of
receiving the scholarship. To support the Scholars during their induction into
teaching, continued mentoring and financial support are provided. As classroom
teachers, Noyce Scholars receive funds to attend a state STEM education
conference and to purchase classroom supplies.