* 1239664
* 2012 Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Studies in Ceramics: New Insights &amp; New Paradigms for Fracture &amp; Deformation in Ceramics; South Hadley, MA; 12-17 August 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2012
* Martha Mecartney, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 10/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

This grant provides partial for support for participants at the 2012 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on Solid State Studies in Ceramics: New Insights and
New Paradigms for Fracture and Deformation in Ceramics, to be held August 12-17,
2012 at Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts, USA. The biennial
conference focuses on topics at the leading edge of ceramics research; in 2012,
this GRC will focus on research frontiers in ceramics with respect to fracture
and deformation of ceramics, including exploration of new theories and
computational and experimental approaches that push the boundaries of our
understanding mechanical behavior of ceramics and the behavior of technical and
structural ceramics under unique or extreme environments. Applications in which
such knowledge is critical include failure prevention in ceramics for energy
applications, such as in electrochemical cells for fuel cell and battery
applications, new designs to withstand high temperature environments such as
hypersonic flight, innovative methods to fabricate high strength ceramics for
structural applications using low cost materials or low energy-consuming routes,
novel approaches to using ultralight porous ceramics, and applications to
fracture of brittle material in biology, human health, and anthropology.
Technical ceramics are used in a wide range of everyday applications, from
oxygen sensors in our cars to bone replacements in our bodies to streetlights in
our neighborhood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this conference is to better
understand why and how fracture and deformation occur in technical ceramics so
that failure can be prevented. The Gordon Research Conferences are unique in
that they focus on work in progress, encouraging speculation and extensive
discussion of new concepts. By disseminating new insights from theory and
experiment, considering both basic materials and applications, it is hoped that
the understanding and evaluation of future directions for this field will be
enhanced. This GRC comingles eminent researchers, junior investigators, and
students and provides a unique forum for the exchange of ideas and the
development of new collaborations among all participants. This NSF grant will be
used to defray conference expenses for junior researchers who otherwise would be
unable to attend due to a lack of funds, with an emphasis on support of women
and underrepresented minorities.