* 1239632
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  Interoperability Testbed-Assessing a Layered Architecture for Integration of Existing Capabilities
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Jeffery Horsburgh, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2013
* USD 18,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award creates an interoperability test bed to
identify the components of an effective layered architecture for geoscience and
environmental science research. In a layered architecture, every layer consists
of different technologies, each of which uses different interaction protocols.
The proposed project will examine a wide variety of existing technologies in
terms of their effectiveness in working across present data silos. These
technologies include data grids, workflow systems, policy management systems,
web visualization services, and security protocols that work with various
repository catalogs. Project goals are focused on developing cyberinfrastructure
tools and approaches that allow geoscience data repositories to enable new
science and more effectively make their data holdings discoverable and available
to the public. Essential elements of the project include the collection and
comparision of various approaches and existing tools to check effectiveness in
handling and integrating geoscience data, and by automating processes needed to
integrate various databases and data types. The project is led by a team of
experts in cyberinfrastructure and geoscience data management and employs a
spiral softwar3ee development approach. Broader impacts of the work include
building infrastructure for science in order to facilitate data-enabled science
in the geosciences. It will also produce results that are likely to be
applicable to fields outside of the geosciences. The effort supports a larger
NSF effort to establish a new paradigm in the development of an integrative and
interoperable data and knowledge management system for the geosciences for a new
NSF initiative called EarthCube.