* 1239355
* CPS: Synergy: Integrated Modeling, Analysis and Synthesis of Miniature Medical Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Akos Ledeczi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,068,000.00

The objective of this project is to create a focused cyber-physical design
environment to accelerate the development of miniature medical devices in
general and swallowable systems in particular. The project develops new models
and tools including a web-based integrated simulation environment,capturing the
interacting dynamics of the computational and physical components of devices
designed to work inside the human body, to enable wider design space
exploration, and, ultimately, to lower the barriers which have thus far impeded
system engineering of miniature medical devices. Currently, a few select
individuals with deep domain expertise create these systems. The goal is to open
this field to a wider community and at the same time create better designs
through advanced tool support. The project defines a component model and
corresponding domain-specific modeling language to provide a common framework
for design capture, design space exploration, analysis and automated synthesis
of all hardware and software artifacts. The project also develops a rich and
extensible component and design template library that designers can reuse. The
online design environment will provide early feedback and hence, it will lower
the cost of experimentation with alternatives. The potential benefit is not just
incremental (in time and cost), but can lead to novel ideas by mitigating the
risk of trying unconventional solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trends in consumer
electronics such as miniaturization, low power operation, and wireless
technologies have enabled the design of miniature devices that hold the
potential to revolutionize medicine. Transformational societal public health
benefits (e.g., early diagnosis of colorectal cancer or prevention of heart
failure) are possible through less invasive and more accurate diagnostic and
interventional devices. By eliminating large incisions in favor of natural
orifices or small ports, these medical devices can increase diagnostic screening
effectiveness and reduce pain and recovery time. Furthermore, if successful, the
proposed scientific approach can be extended to any other application, wherever
size, power efficiency, and high confidence are stringent requirements. The
educational plan of the project is centered on the web-based design environment
that will also contain an interface for high school students to experiment with
medical cyber-physical devices in a virtual environment. Students will be able
to build medical devices from a library of components, program them using an
intuitive visual programming language and operate them in various simulated
environments. A Summer Camp organized in the framework of this project will
enhance students learning experience with real hands-on experimentation in a
lab. &lt;br/&gt;