* 1239607
* MEETING:  Keeping Time during Animal Evolution:  Conservation and Innovation of the Circadian Clock,  Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB); Jan. 3-7 2013, SF, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Ann Tarrant, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2013
* USD 14,471.00

Daily and seasonal cues, such as changing light levels, are important
environmental signals that help to regulate behavior, physiology and
reproduction in diverse organisms. Circadian clocks are internal molecular
pathways that allow organisms to respond to these environmental cues. This
proposal will support a symposium titled "Keeping Time during Animal Evolution:
Conservation and Innovation of the Circadian Clock" at the January 2013 Annual
Meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology to be held in San
Francisco, California. This symposium will highlight current research related to
the circadian clock from diverse animals, including sponges, cnidarians,
insects, and vertebrates. The overall aim of the symposium is to bring together
researchers utilizing a range of organismal models and approaches, to develop an
integrative understanding of the circadian clock in animal ecology, and
evolution and to foster discussions for collaborative projects to propel this
field into the future. This symposium will include oral presentations by 11
speakers who have committed to presenting novel, integrative research related to
the circadian clock. These speakers include 1 postdoc, 1 assistant professor, 3
associate professors, and 6 full professors. Additionally, this award will
provide partial funding for participation of 3 graduate students in a
complementary session. The student travel funds will be targeted aggressively
toward members of underrepresented groups. Three of the speakers are women and
two are international experts (England, Germany). For domestic speakers, the
institutions represented are located throughout the United States and represent
universities (6 speakers) and research institutions (3 speakers). The collection
of speakers represents the first major effort to bring together a diverse panel
of researchers in animal circadian biology, with a focus on the evolution and
ecology of this critical signaling network. This symposium will create a
synergism of leaders in this field with new researchers, both students and early
career faculty. The abstracts from this symposium will be published on the SICB
website with a dedicated page developed to highlight this symposium
(http://www.sicb.org/meetings/2013/symposia/index.php). All symposium
participants will submit manuscripts for publication in the society's journal,
Integrative and Comparative Biology (http://www.sicb.org/publications/icb.php3),
which is available electronically and indexed by many databases including
NCBI/Pubmed. This volume of publications will serve as a collection of novel
data as well as synthesized results and theory to propel the field of
comparative circadian biology into the future.