* 1239995
* Xavier University Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program 2012-2017
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Mary Stroud, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,195,559.00

Xavier University's Robert Noyce Scholarship Program is focusing on attracting
community service-oriented science, computer science, and mathematics students
to careers in high school teaching. Xavier is creating opportunities, including
tutoring and summer internships, for science, computer science, and mathematics
majors to teach science, technology and mathematics content to underserved,
urban students. It is also enhancing Xavier's education program by revising the
required introductory education course to incorporate theories related to asset-
based community development including experiential learning and neighborhood
tours. Xavier's Noyce program is providing three points of entry to accommodate
varying decision-making processes: the beginning of students' junior or senior
year or in their first year after graduation. Fifteen undergraduate science,
computer science, and mathematics majors are being awarded $20,000 scholarships
for two years and eight graduate students are receiving $20,000 stipends for one
full-time year of licensure courses. The project is investigating how service
experiences can encourage science, computer science, and mathematics majors to
consider teaching, and whether students who are attracted to teaching because of
a personal commitment to service are more likely to be successful in high-need
districts and stay in these school environments for longer periods. It is also
considering what curricular supports make education licensure courses and field
work relevant to students motivated by a commitment to community engagement, and
what supports enable new science, computer science, and mathematics teachers to
be successful in high needs districts. By 2017, the program will have increased
the number of Xavier students attaining science, computer science, and
mathematics teaching licensure by 52%, helping to address critical shortages of
teachers of these subjects in Ohio and Kentucky.