* 1239900
* Project SEED (STEM Educators Expansion Directive) for Candidates in Chemistry and Environmental Science
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Yuri Gorokhovich, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Standard Grant
* teri murphy
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,079.00

This capacity building project is a collaboration between a four year (Lehman
college, CUNY) and a two year (CUNY Hostos Community College) college, with the
community college as the lead institution. Other partners include the American
Museum of Natural History and the Black Forest Consortium, a mountainous area 50
miles north of New York City maintained as a resource for research and student
and teacher training by the institutions within the consortium. The project is
designed to provide a clear pathway to STEM teacher certification from the
community college to the four year school with an emphasis on providing
chemistry and earth science teachers well prepared to serve students in high
needs schools. The partners are: (a) aligning the curricula of Hostos STEM
courses and programs of study with those required for Lehman chemistry and
environmental science majors, with a minor in education, to create two joint-
degree/dual-admission programs to enable students to attend Hostos and then
transition seamlessly to Lehman to complete their bachelor's degree; (b)
leveraging existing partnerships with the American Museum of Natural History and
the Black Rock Forest station to design summer internships and semester
workshops to provide field experiences, teacher preparation, and other research
opportunities introducing Hostos students to chemistry and environmental
science; (c) creating a bridge program, incorporating an intensive screening
process to identify the students most likely to succeed in a Noyce Scholarship
program and offering extensive mentoring and advisement to ensure that the
selected Hostos students successfully transition to Lehman; (d) devising an
effective public relations and recruitment plan to inform potential students
about SEED at Hostos, so that STEM majors are made aware of the opportunities
for careers in education; (e) designing a set of activities to support teachers
during their induction years and (f) working with an evaluator who will design
and implement an evaluation plan that will measure the stated objectives and
outcomes of Project SEED.