* 1239849
* Symposium on Design and Applications of Organic and Metal-Organic Porous Materials, Fall ACS Meeting, August 19-23, 2012, Philadelphia PA
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Wei Zhang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Solid State and Materials Chemistry program supports the
travel costs of speakers and graduates students to participate in the symposium
titled "Design and Applications of Organic and Metal-Organic Porous Materials"
that will be held at the 244th ACS meeting in Philadelphia, PA from Aug. 19-23,
2012. The ACS meeting is held twice every year, and serves as an
interdisciplinary venue for members of the American Chemical Society to share
information and research progress in areas of common interest. This symposium is
scheduled for 2 full-day oral presentation sessions, which have been tentatively
assigned the following topics, based on the organizer?s survey of the newest
advances in porous materials: Session 1: Design and Concepts for Porous Polymers
Session 2: Design and Concepts for Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) Session 3:
Design and Concepts for Covalent Organic Frameworks (COFs) Session 4: Design and
Concepts for Covalent Organic Polyhedrons (COPs)

NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY This symposium will act as a leading vehicle for educating
U.S. researchers with interests in designing/making new porous materials, but
also the general scientific public about materials. The abstracts of this
symposium will be made accessible via the Internet to the general public as a
research and educational tool for this purpose. This symposium will also serve
as an important international platform for allowing young U.S. scientists (i.e.,
starting professors, graduate students, and postdoctoral materials chemistry (of
all forms) and engineering process.