* 1239311
* Roles of Membrane Trafficking and Receptor-Kinase Signaling during Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Sarah Liljegren, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 12/31/2014
* USD 300,701.00

Sarah Liljegren IOS-0957794 Title: Roles of Membrane Trafficking and Receptor-
Kinase Signaling in Plant Development

Plants rely on signaling pathways to coordinate their growth and development as
well as elaborate mechanisms to control the movements of proteins within their
cells. Key regulators of protein movement in plant and animal cells include
members of the ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase activating protein (ARF GAP)
family which promote efficient loading of protein cargo into membrane-bound
vesicles. Studies of an Arabidopsis ARF GAP, NEVERSHED (NEV), have revealed an
essential role for regulating protein movement during the programmed process of
cell separation that leads to flower abscission. A sensitized genetic screen has
led to the identification of a set of three receptor-like kinases, EVERSHED
(EVR), SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 (SERK1), and CAST AWAY (CST),
that function to prevent abscission. The primary focus of this project is to
characterize the roles of the EVR, SERK1, and CST receptor-like kinases as
temporal and spatial inhibitors of organ separation, and to determine whether
they control abscission by regulating the localization or activity of other
receptor-like kinases known to activate abscission. The secondary objective of
this project is to analyze the functions of NEV and another closely-related ARF
GAP during cell expansion and plant growth. A combination of molecular, genetic,
biochemical and cell biological approaches will be used to carry out these
research objectives. The expected results are that both the timing and extent of
the loss of cell adhesion in plants are tightly controlled by complex
interactions between receptor-like kinases. This research is likely to provide
novel insights into how abscission could be controlled in crop plants and has
the potential to enhance our understanding of fundamental questions in plant
biology such as how the availability of the transmembrane receptors that
activate diverse signaling pathways is regulated.

