* 1239606
* Novel Experiments in Biological Systems Symposium, August 12-17, 2012, Cancun, Mexico
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Norma Alcantar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Alcantar&lt;br/&gt;1239606&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding to
partially support the travel of 10 U.S. participants to attend technical
symposium Novel Characterization Methods for Biological Systems, in Cancun,
Mexico at the XXI International Materials Research Society Congress from August
12-17, 2012. The participation of U.S. researchers, students, and postdoctoral
fellows at this symposium demonstrates the nation's strong global standing in
the important field of biosystems. U.S. researchers and students will become
more knowledgeable through the exchange of ideas, creation and enhancement of
existing international collaborations, and continued participation at future
leading materials forums and symposia. This symposium convenes experts in
experimental and theoretical biophysics tools, who would not normally exchange
ideas, with the goal of interdisciplinary advances towards elucidating
biomaterial's structures and properties using novel characterization techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium will attract a large audience of students,
postdoctoral fellows, assistant professors, and professionals in the area of
materials science and engineering. Biosystems and their characterization
contributes significantly to current understanding on molecular and surface
behavior of biological, materials, micro- and nanoengineering and
physicochemical systems. Therefore, it is important to develop this
multidisciplinary area to resolve the structure and dynamic behavior in the
supramolecular and nanoscale systems that have a great technological relevance
in industries such as health, pharmaceutics, microelectronics, energy, food,
polymer, painting, construction, etc. In order to further the NSF priorities of
broadening participation and integration of research and education, the majority
of the funds will be used for supporting the attendance of U.S. assistant
professors, postdoctoral fellows, and students.