* 1239341
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: SensEye: An Architecture for Ubiquitous, Real-Time Visual Context Ssensing and Inference
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Deepak Ganesan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2015
* USD 732,000.00

Continuous real-time tracking of the eye and field-of-view of an individual is
profoundly important to understanding how humans perceive and interact with the
physical world. This work advances both the technology and engineering of cyber-
physical systems by designing an innovative paradigm involving next-generation
computational eyeglasses that interact with a user's mobile phone to provide the
capability for real-time visual context sensing and inference. This research
integrates novel research into low-power embedded systems, image representation,
image processing and machine learning, and mobile sensing and inference, to
advance the state-of-art in continuous sensing for CPS applications. The
activity addresses several fundamental research challenges including: 1) design
of novel, highly integrated, computational eyeglasses for tracking eye
movements, the visual field of a user, and head movement patterns, all in real-
time; 2) a unified compressive signal processing framework that optimizes
sensing and estimation, while enabling re-targeting of the device to perform a
broad range of tasks depending on the needs of an application; 3) design of a
novel real-time visual context sensing system that extracts high-level contexts
of interest from compressed data representations; and 4) a layer of intelligence
that combines contexts extracted from the computational eyeglass together with
contexts obtained from the mobile phone to improve energy-efficiency and sensing
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology can revolutionize a range of
disciplines including transportation, healthcare, behavioral science and market
research. Continuous monitoring of the eye and field-of-view of an individual
can enable detection of hazardous behaviors such as drowsiness while driving,
mental health issues such as schizophrenia, addictive behavior and substance
abuse, neurological disease progression, head injuries, and others. The research
provides the foundations for such applications through the design of a prototype
platform together with real-time sensor processing algorithms, and making these
systems available through open source venues for broader use. Outreach for this
project includes demonstrations of the device at science fairs for high-school
students, and integration of the platform into undergraduate and graduate
courses.