* 1239870
* EAGER: Development of Multi-Population 13C Isotopic Analyses for Elucidating Intra-Cellular Metabolic Responses within Mixed Populations of Nitrifying Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Luis Sayavedra-Soto, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 175,004.00

1239870/ Chaplen

This EAGER award funded by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass
Engineering Program at the National Science Foundation aims to develop tools to
examine nitrogen cycling in microbial communities containing nitrifying
bacteria.

Metabolic flux analysis models are used to postulate the distribution of
metabolic fluxes in cells based on experimental measurements of external fluxes.
These models have the potential for being highly useful because they can predict
biochemical production capabilities, and metabolic yields, including metabolic
carbon efficiency, metabolic energy efficiency, and the balance between biomass
production and metabolite overproduction. A key approach to increasing the
utility of MFA is the use of stable isotopic tracers, usually 13C labeled, to
provide information regarding intracellular flux distributions as additional
constraints in parameterizing the model. Recently, published studies have
demonstrated that isotopic tracer data from cellular peptides is homogeneous
within a single species. The researchers hypothesize that this work can be
extended such that species specific isotopic tracer MFA can be used to identify
nitrogen cycling within microbial communities of nitrofying bacteria.

The major goal of the proposed research to extend these advances to characterize
microbial communities using mixed cultures of two model chemolithoautotrophic
nitrifying bacteria: Nitrosomonas europaea and Nitrobacter hamburgensis.
Nitrifying bacteria are key elements of the N cycle for controlling movement of
inorganic N. As an ammonia-oxidizing bacterium, N. europaea extracts energy for
growth solely from the oxidation of ammonia (NH3) to nitrite (NO2-). The waste
product of N. europaea, NO2-, is the growth substrate of the nitrite-oxidizing
bacterium N. hamburgensis, which extracts energy for growth from the oxidation
of NO2- to NO3-. The overall system dynamics of coupled microbiological/
physical/chemical systems in the soil and elsewhere may be an important factor
in elucidating the biogeochemical impact of global environmental change
engendered by humankind. Understanding nitrogen transformation in unmanaged
ecosystems, in wastewater treatment, and control of nitrification rates in soils
amended with ammonia-based fertilizers, requires a thorough knowledge of the
interaction of these organisms with each other and the environment.

This research is highly integrative drawing on engineering and scientific
knowledge and expertise from biological engineering, metabolic modeling,
microbiology, and systems biology and will provide excellent training
opportunities for the undergraduates and high-school students and K-12 teachers
involved through outreach activities. The outreach activities proposed as part
of this research will increase the awareness of the K-12, general public and
scientific communities in systems biology, microbiology and the metabolic
modeling. Finally, the Co-PIs have a demonstrated commitment to recruiting and
mentoring minorities and underrepresented groups and will continue to make this
a high priority for this project.