* 1239182
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Formal Design of Semi-Autonomous Cyberphysical Transportation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 10/31/2016
* USD 750,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop fundamental theory, efficient
algorithms, and realistic experiments for the analysis and design of safety-
critical cyber-physical transportation systems with human operators. The
research focuses on preventing crashes between automobiles at road
intersections, since these account for about 40% of overall vehicle crashes.
Specifically, the main objective of this work is to design provably safe driver-
assist systems that understand driver?s intentions and provide
warnings/overrides to prevent collisions. In order to pursue this goal, hybrid
automata models for the driver-vehicles-intersection system, incorporating
driver behavior and performance as an integral part, are derived from human-
factors experiments. A partial order of these hybrid automata models is
constructed, according to confidence levels on the model parameters. The driver-
assist design problem is then formulated as a set of partially ordered hybrid
differential games with imperfect information, in which games are ordered
according to parameter confidence levels. The resulting designs are validated
experimentally in a driving simulator and in large-scale computer simulations.

This research leverages the potential of embedded control and communication
technologies to prevent crashes at traffic intersections, by enabling networks
of smart vehicles to cooperate with each other, with the surrounding
infrastructure, and with their drivers to make transportation safer, more
enjoyable, and more efficient. The work is based on a collaboration among
researchers in formal methods, autonomous control, and human factors who are
studying realistic and provably correct warning/override algorithms that can be
readily transitioned to production vehicles.

http://ares.lids.mit.edu/intersections