* 1239319
* CPS: Breakthrough: Distributed Computing Under Uncertainty: A New Paradigm for Cooperative Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Nicola Elia, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 595,011.00

This project is to develop a dynamical systems model of distributed computation
motivated from recent work on the distributed computation of averages. The key
idea is that static optimization problems (particularly convex optimization
problems) can be solved by designing a dynamic system that stabilizes around the
optimal solution of the problem. Moreover, when the optimization problem is
separable, then the designed dynamic system decomposes into a set of locally-
interacting dynamic systems. This is expected to open a door to a host of new
computational approaches that take advantage of recent developments in control
engineering including robust control (providing a mechanism for errors
introduced by discretization), Markovian Jump Linear Systems (providing a
mechanism for random discretization time), event-driven control (providing a
mechanism for assured asynchronous execution), control over networks (providing
a mechanism for improved performance of distributed computational systems in
general). The new approach is essential in emerging applications, where the
optimization runs on physically separated agents, operating in a noisy
environment and communicating over unreliable channels. As a test bed, the
project will make use of a two-vehicle robotic system developed by the PI
designed to monitor a crop of corn plants, where the dynamic systems perspective
of this grant will, for example, allow for distributed optimal estimation toward
the goal of optimal station-keeping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By studying how
natural systems can collectively compute and optimize, this research has
potential to impact many disciplines involving networked systems, from
controlling the electric power grid, to modeling the behavior of social,
biological or economic systems. It is directly applicable to cooperative
networked multi-agent systems like robotic search and rescue missions and
disaster-relief operations, distributed machine learning problems, and
intelligent systems. An intriguing mix of motivating applications and
theoretical problems offer a unique multidisciplinary educational opportunity to
students who will be involved in the project, and provide exciting innovative
material for courses and labs. Software developed will be distributed as open
source via the CPS Virtual Organization.