* 1239212
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Cyborg Insect Networks for Exploration and Mapping (CINEMa)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Tyson Hedrick, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 120,000.00

Autonomous navigation in unknown and dynamic environments has been a major
challenge for synthetic mobile robotic agents. On the other hand, insects can
easily solve such complex navigational problems and demonstrate remarkably
stable and optimized locomotion skills in almost any environment. This project
aims to develop a mobile sensor network where insects are used as mobile
biological-robotic (biobotic) nodes. Insects, in fact, build a "natural" sensor
network through the use of their biological sensing organs and release of
chemical, mechanical and optical cues to communicate the information to the rest
of the group. In the scope of this project, a novel cyber-physical communication
network will be established among the individual insect in addition to the
aforementioned natural one. For this, insects will be equipped with synthetic
electronic sensors to sense additional cues, neuromuscular stimulation systems
to direct the control of the insect and microcontrollers with radios to
establish an RF link between the insects. This novel network will enable
operation of insect biobots in complicated and uncertain dynamic environments
for applications such as environmental sensing and search-and-rescue operations
after natural disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique interdisciplinary
nature of this project will help engineers to reach to younger generations and
train them to be able to look at engineering problems from a cyberphysical
systems point of view. Planned activities include development of lab modules and
demos by undergraduate and graduate students to teach K-12 students and their
teachers through our on-going collaborations with educational partners. These
demos will also be instrumental during nation level efforts to promote graduate
education to underrepresented minority students.