* 1239134
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Hybrid Continuous-Discrete Computers for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Yannis Tsividis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 890,000.00

This research aims at hybrid (discrete-continuous) computation for cyber-
physical systems. The research augments the today-ubiquitous discrete (digital)
model of computation with continuous (analog) computing, which is well-suited to
the continuous natural variables involved in cyber-physical systems, and to the
error-tolerant nature of computation in such systems. The result is a computing
platform on a single silicon chip, with higher energy efficiency, higher speed,
and better numerical convergence than is possible with purely discrete
computation. The research has several thrusts: (1) Hardware: modern silicon chip
technology is used to merge analog computing hardware on the same chip with
digital hardware, the latter used for control and co-computation, (2)
Architecture: methods are devised for making hybrid computing functionality
accessible to the software, (3) Microarchitecture: Choices are made on the
granularity, type and organization of analog and hybrid analog-digital
functional units, and (4) Concrete application to a realistic cyber-physical
system consisting of a team of robots.

The research extends modern computer architecture techniques, and advances in
mixed analog/digital chip technology mainly developed in the context of
communications, to hybrid computing for cyber-physical systems. It brings higher
levels of energy efficiency to error-tolerant workloads that future computers
will have to handle. The techniques developed can be extended to other systems
in which efficient computation is a must, such as weather forecasting and high-
energy physics. The work integrates research with education and includes plans
for broad dissemination of the results obtained.