* 1239824
* EAGER: Research and Education Networking in the Pacific Islands and Beyond:  Exploring and Developing Approaches
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* David Lassner, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 177,819.00

Research and Education (R&E) Networks are a foundational element of
cyberinfrastructure for research and education. This exploratory project will
engage the Pacific R&E community, scientists, service providers and other
stakeholders to develop concepts and approaches for R&E networking in the
Pacific Islands. While focusing on the Pacific, this work will study the O3b
(www.o3bnetworks.com) satellite network, which will have broad applicability for
R&E networking in other regions, particularly addressing locations in Africa and
Latin America, as well as for ship-based research around the world. An
intermediate report will focus on locations and technologies and be sufficient
to support specific actions focused on connecting specific locations. A more
complex roadmap for R&E Networking in the Pacific, which will require greater
socialization, will be produced as a final report.

This project will provide the first systemic study of the challenges and
opportunities of R&E networking in the Pacific region. However, the greater
intellectual merit of this project will lie in the advancement of some of the
most compelling research activities in earth, atmospheric and environmental
sciences. These include: work at the Coral Reef LTER and CREON programs at the
Gump Station on Moorea; work on biodiversity and ecology, the terrestrial/marine
Interface, and marine biology, climate change, and biogeochemical structure at
Palmyra Atoll; support for 30 active NSF programs at the Charles Darwin Research
Station in the Galapagos Archipelago; and AfricaArray's network of geophysical
observatories across southern Africa. Broader impacts will result from the
introduction of R&E networking as a key tool to engage Pacific Islanders, who
are highly under-represented in STEM fields The networks being planned will
support collaborative education, research and training that will help
communities chart culturally appropriate paths to an environmentally and
economically sustainable future that bridges modern science and technology with
their own cultures, values, goals, challenges and opportunities.