* 1239277
* EAGER: Expanding Our Understanding of Seismic Sources via Investigations of Icequakes on an Alpine Glacier
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Deborah Kilb, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 100,000.00

Given technological advances, seismologists/glaciologists are obtaining ever-
increasingly larger and higher quality datasets of continuous and semi-
continuous seismic waveform streams. These data undoubtedly contain important,
but not readily recognized, signals that require additional user-interaction to
properly identify. Carefully distilling these data, particularly to identify the
more exotic signals, could potentially answer key questions about the physics of
glaciers (e.g., how does a glacier couple to the bedrock; are icequakes similar
to earthquakes). This is exemplified by observations of ~250,000 "icequakes"
recorded during the four summer seasons 2004-2007 on the Gorner Glacier in
Switzerland. This work will provide a broader understanding of the range of
modes of stress relaxation by failure and slip across sliding bi-material
surfaces, which is relevant to natural systems ranging from small alpine
glaciers to major plate-boundary faults.

The complete Gorner Glacier dataset has a volume of ~1 terabyte of which only
~10% has been explored. We propose to exploit the remaining ~90% of data to: (1)
identify correlations and thus causal connections between the behavior of
icequakes (temporal/spatial and waveform frequency content) and strain within
the glacier system as inferred from GPS and theodolite measurements; and (2)
search for tremor-like signals and study their sources. These efforts will allow
us to identify what aspects in the data are repeatable season to season, to
assess the extent to which slip on glacial/bedrock interfaces is analogous to
that inferred on tectonic faults (i.e., earthquakes), and how to efficiently
monitor glaciers with seismic techniques. The culmination of this unprecedented
amount of data, the interdisciplinary aspect of the work (seismology and
glaciology), and the novel detection methods make this a potentially
transformative research project.