* 1239857
* Conference: Sustainable Nanotechnology Conference, November 11-13, 2012, Arlington, Virginia
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Omowunmi Sadik, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2013
* USD 45,000.00

1239857&lt;br/&gt;Sadik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has as its main
objective the support of a conference to bring together scientific experts from
academia, industry, and government from around the world to present and discuss
current research findings in sustainable nanotechnology. While there are some
sessions in professional organizations that address some aspects of sustainable
nanotechnology, there is no one organization that is specifically aimed at this
discipline that allows cross talk from the many disciplines involved. This
conference and organization will serve such an interdisciplinary role for
professionals and young scholars to pursue research in sustainable
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will serve a role to promote discussion and
collaboration focused on research and education in sustainable nanotechnology.
This conference will address the critical aspects of sustainable nanotechnology
such as life cycle assessment, green synthesis, green energy, industrial
partnership, environmental and biological fate, transport, persistence,
transformation, exposure assessment, recyclability, and the overall
sustainability of engineered nanomaterials. Plenary lectures and keynotes will
address issues such as the development of nanomaterials that, through their life
cycle, properties and material efficiency, provide a framework for achieving
more sustainable technologies, while optimizing performance. In principle, this
involves the fundamental/applied research on the chemistry of producing new
green nanomaterials; eco-manufacturing processing of nanomaterials and products.
Other aspects include, life-cycle performance; modeling and theoretical analyses
of materials and their structures in nanomedicine, energy and industrial
applications, and life-cycle cost and economic impacts in real life practice.
The use of nanomaterials to alleviate adverse consequences from green house
effect, exhaustion or abundance of natural resources, and environmental impacts
due to the use of nondecomposable materials/composites are also considered
appropriate. Special focus will be given to toxicity, transformation and the
interactions with the biological system. Hence the conference objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Bring together scientific experts from academia, industries,
and government agencies from around the world to present and discuss current
research findings on the subject of sustainability of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Foster new collaboration between academic and
industrial participants for a better understanding of the challenges associated
with the sustainability of nanotechnology and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Initiate the
formation of a non-profit, worldwide professional society known as Sustainable
Nanotechnology Organization(SNO) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainable nanotechnology conference will draw
attention to the use of nanomaterials to alleviate adverse consequences from
green house effect, exhaustion or abundance of natural resources, and
environmental impacts due to the use of non-decomposable materials/composites.
It is anticipated that 250 industrial partners, materials scientists, government
stakeholders, physical and social scientists, engineers, and toxicologists, will
present recent research. The relatively small group of participants will be
ideal to promote vigorous discussion and close interchange of ideas. The
conference will attract between up to 25 participants who are junior scholars
(doctoral and postdoctoral students).Thus the conference will provide networking
opportunities for scientists at different career stages. The two and half day
schedule will foster interactions between young investigators and more
established researchers. There are few if any similar conferences in the broad
topic of Sustainable Nanotechnology, enhancing the importance of this event to
new investigators. In addition, several scientists from underrepresented groups
in science will play key roles in the conference. Participants of the
Sustainable Nanotechnology conference will come from not only the US but around
the globe, ensuring a diverse and expert group to facilitate stimulating
discussions.