* 1239895
* Progress and Challenges in Crystal Growth, Design and Characterization of Materials Symposium at the 2012 Fall National American Chemical Society Meeting; Philadelphia, PA; August
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Julia Chan, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2013
* USD 8,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The "Progress and Challenges in Crystal Growth
Design and Characterization Symposium" at the 2012 fall National American
Chemical Society meeting in Philadelphia PA, partly funded by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program, will bring together scientists from the fields
of inorganic chemistry, solid-state chemistry, condensed matter physics and
electrical engineering to examine important topics of research. Discovery of new
crystalline materials and the growth of high-quality single crystals have
potential impact on many sectors, including energy production, energy storage,
national security and information technology. However, the National Research
Council of the National Academies, Committee for the Assessment of and Outlook
for New Materials Synthesis and Crystal Growth, have identified crystal growth
and discovery of new materials as areas where the United States is rapidly
losing its footing. The committee also pointed out that the United States can
only excel in this area if there is a critical mass of young scientists who have
the interdisciplinary knowledge and training necessary to succeed in this field
of research. Yet they also discovered that there is a marked decline in
educational and training opportunities in this country in the areas of crystal
growth and preparation of new materials, while these opportunities are
increasing in other parts of the world, for example Europe and Asia. This
symposium helps to call attention to this problem and also to meet this need by
serving to educate young researchers on the research activities of others in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This symposium will
provide younger scientists, including undergraduate students, graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows the opportunity to present their work in crystal growth
and new materials synthesis. It will also allow younger scientists a chance to
interact with established researchers in the field. Gathering people with
different approaches to similar research problems will spark collaboration and
the sharing of ideas. Approximately 35% of the invited speakers are from
primarily undergraduate institutions and about 40% of the invited speakers are
women. Faculty at all levels (assistant, associate and full professor) will
participate in the symposium, as well as individuals from industry and national
laboratories.