* 1239820
* US-Jordan Advanced Studies Institute: Water in an Arid Land, the Engineered Water Cycle in Jordan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Heidi Gough, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,798.00

1239820 &lt;br/&gt;Gough&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports an Advance
Study Institute by Dr. Heidi Gough, Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering at the University of Washington, Seattle and Dr. Muna Abu-Dalo,
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan. They plan to
organize a three-week workshop and course on Water in Arid Land, The Engineered
Cycle in Jordan. It is scheduled for August-September 2012 and will include US
and Jordanian students. The ASI will provide opportunity for study of
sustainability and water in an arid country within the context of civil and
environmental engineering disciplines; link the specialties of water resource,
drinking water, desalination, and wastewater treatment within a single program,
and focus on students early in their education path with the expectation that
the program experience will influence their future career
development.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Water is a scarce commodity, and many
parts of the world receive very little annual rainfall, including much of the
developing world. Water is predicted to become increasingly more difficult to
obtain, and providing access to clean water is listed among the engineering
grand challenges. Water collection, drinking water treatment, and wastewater
treatment are inherently different in arid regions than in water-rich regions.
This project will help future engineers be equipped with knowledge related to
these differences. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan will serve as the backdrop
for an Advanced Studies Institute exploring the engineered water cycle in an
arid region. The institute will examine the engineered water cycle in Jordan by
studying (1) the current and historic water resources in Jordan, (2) drinking
water treatment and distribution in Jordan including the use of cisterns and
desalination, (3) treatment of concentrated wastewater including efforts for
safe reuse, and (4) plans in Jordan for meeting future challenges. The program
will partner this Advanced Studies Institute with a University of Washington
Study Abroad Exploration Seminar Program. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
targeted participants for the program are engineering and hydrology
undergraduate and early graduate students from US (predominately University of
Washington) and Jordanian universities. Because this young generation of
scientists and engineers are expected to be at the fore-front of technological
solutions and decisions that are anticipated to impact society in the next 30 to
50 years,&lt;br/&gt;targeting this population now will provide cross-
disciplinary training to provide a greater breadth to
their&lt;br/&gt;educational and future professional experiences. Two members of
the organizing committee are from an underrepresented group (women in science),
and underrepresented groups will be encouraged to apply. A webpage developed as
part of the institute will serve to increase recognition of the institute, and
it is planned that this first year will serve as a pilot project for a self-
sustaining program that will continue in future years. It is further anticipated
that the program will increase teaching and research collaboration between the
two sponsoring universities.