* 1239552
* CPS: Synergy: Software Defined Buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Francesco Borrelli, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems project designs and evaluates a foundational
information substrate for efficient, agile, model-driven, human-centered
building systems. The approach is to develop software-defined buildings, to
shatter existing stovepipe architectures, dramatically reduce the effort to add
new functions and applications without ?forklift upgrades,? and expand
communications and control capabilities beyond a single stand-alone building to
enable groups of buildings to behave cooperatively and in cooperation with the
energy grid. We investigate how such Software-Defined Buildings can be founded
on a flexible, multi-service and open Building Integrated Operating System
(BIOS) that allows applications to run reliably in safe, sandboxed environments.
It supports sensor and actuator access, access management, metadata, archiving,
and discovery, as well as multiple simultaneously executing programs. Building
operators retain supervisory management, controlling application separation
physically (access different controls), temporally (change controls at different
times), informationally (what information leaves the building), and logically
(what actions or sequences thereof are allowable). We construct, deploy, and
demonstrate the capabilities of a prototype BIOS in the context of university,
residential buildings and closely related industrial
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making buildings more efficient, while keeping
occupants comfortable, productive, and healthy, is critical to our economy and
health. Transforming buildings into agile, human centered cyber-physical systems
eliminates waste, while allowing them to be a proactive resource on the electric
grid with zero emission renewable supplies. And by providing greater value from
the same physical plant, the SDB approach can move beyond cost-to-build and
cost-to-operate metrics to broader return-on-investment for new extendable
?future-proof? technologies.