* 1239078
* CAREER:  Multi-Scale Structured Solid Carriers Enabling Algae Biofuel Manufacturing in the Ocean
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Wenqiao Yuan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 06/30/2018
* USD 361,870.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to test the hypothesis that micro- and meso-scale structures of solid
carriers enhance attachment of algae. Such structures (for example, dimples or
channels) will be fabricated on the surface of solid carriers -- the major
equipment proposed for manufacturing algae biofuels in the ocean. The approach
includes an experimental study of cell attachment to structured carriers,
physics-based modeling of cell-carrier interactions, and prediction of the
effect of carrier structures on algae attachment using the surface element
integration technique. The educational objective of this proposal is to impart a
system-level integration of a manufacturing-education-enhancement based theme at
high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. This will be accomplished
through exposure of undergraduate and graduate students to interdisciplinary
research projects, K-12 outreach through existing outreach programs, course and
curriculum development in energy manufacturing, and involvement of women and
minorities through mentoring programs at Kansas State University.

Knowledge obtained from this research will foster design and manufacturing of
solid carriers to help realize the vision of affordable bio-based energy
manufacturing. Economically viable manufacturing of algae biofuels will greatly
benefit the economy and energy security, as well as society and the environment
of the United States. Success of the proposed activities will help expand the
role of the manufacturing research community to create a new, trillion dollar
energy manufacturing industry in the United States. The interdisciplinary
research will benefit engineering education at Kansas State University. Students
will be exposed to two very distinct research fields -- algae molecular biology
and manufacturing processes. Research results will be disseminated through
journal articles, conferences, workshops, and summer programs.