* 1239965
* Teaching Pathways Opening Doors to STEM (TPOD STEM)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Darrin Campen, Montgomery College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The project "Teaching Pathways Opening Doors to STEM (TPOD STEM)" at Montgomery
College is a project to build the college's capacity for preparing highly
qualified secondary teachers in STEM disciplines. Collaborating with the
Montgomery County (Maryland) Public Schools and the major universities to which
these community-college students transfer, the departments of mathematics,
science, engineering, and education are engaged in a two-year planning process
to recruit, prepare, and support students, both undergraduates in the Associate
of Arts in Teaching program and career-changing STEM professionals seeking
alternative certification. The capacity of the existing secondary school
alternative certification program is being expanded. A new middle-school
mathematics/science alternative certification program is being designed and
approved by the state. A recruiting model for both levels of future teachers is
under development, along with support networks (both physical and virtual) to
ensure their success, an important feature of this three-campus institution.
With the solid grounding in STEM courses provided by the AAT program, students
are well positioned to transfer to STEM majors at baccalaureate institutions
while continuing their teacher preparation. Mechanisms for their ongoing support
as Noyce Scholars are planned. It is expected that this model can be emulated by
other community colleges across the country.