* 1239123
* 10th International conference on Nanochannles, Microchannels and Minichannels 2012, Rio Grande, PR, July 8-12, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Yoav Peles, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2014
* USD 8,170.00

Peles &lt;br/&gt;1239123&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This travel/conference proposal seeks support for twenty-
six U.S. participants (including six keynote speakers and twenty students) to
attend the ASME 2012 International Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and
Minichannels (ICNMM) that will take place on July 8-11, 2012 in Puerto Rico.
This conference provides a unique forum for interdisciplinary researchers to
exchange ideas about fundamental heat transfer and fluid flow processes at the
microscale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous conferences have focused on
nanochannels for the first time in response to the applications in the area of
optics and processes occurring at molecular levels, and there were conflicting
reports. These issues are expected to become even more relevant and important
than in previous conferences. The key focus area of this year's conference is on
nanostructures. The 10th ICNMM is expected to address challenges in the
following topics: effect of nanoparticles on transport processes, surface
tension effect at microscale, two-phase flows at microscale, new medical
diagnostic devices utilizing specific fluid properties, novel drug delivery
systems, micro-heat exchangers, digital microfluidics, and water management in
PEM fuel cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new emerging areas of microscale and nanoscale transport are expected to
fundamentally transform many applications for which current solutions do not
exist or are too expensive. These areas have practical applications to
biological sciences (DNA detection), microprocessor chip cooling, pharmaceutical
sciences (micromixers and micro-reactors), optics (switching devices), fuel
cells (gas diffusion channels and gas diffusion layer), micropower generation,
microturbines, etc. Therefore, it is crucial for U.S. scientists and engineers
to participate in activities that foster collaboration and exchanging of new
ideas in these important areas. This NSF grant will provide support for post-
doctoral researchers and recent tenure-track professors. Special emphasis will
be placed on soliciting participation from minority and underrepresented groups.
The special symposium on Micro and Nanoengineered Surfaces: Transport Phenomena
and Thermal Fluid Applications sponsored by the Thermal Transport Processes
program at NSF will include a panel discussion, in which a position paper will
be written afterwards to help researchers set their research directions.