* 1239896
* The Phase I Robert Noyce Scholarship Program at CCNY: Expanding  the Teacher Academy Program for STEM Education in Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Issa Salame, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,196,723.00

The Robert Noyce Teacher Academy Scholars Program at The City College of New
York (CCNY Noyce TA Scholars Program) in partnership with the New York City
Department of Education is preparing forty-two (42) talented individuals
pursuing undergraduate degrees in science, mathematics, and/or engineering for
careers as certified secondary teachers (7-12) in urban schools. This project
builds upon the Teacher Academy at The City College of New York. Program
elements include: Pre-Scholars Intern Program for sophomores, Undergraduate
Noyce Teacher Academy Scholars for junior and senior STEM majors, Summer
Internship Program for Noyce Scholars, Support for Noyce Early Career Teachers
Program, and a Noyce Alumni component. Sophomore students are invited to
participate as Pre-Scholars in an urban internship as a mechanism for
identifying highly talented STEM students and recruiting them to teaching. STEM
majors from the City College campus as well as the Community Colleges in the
CUNY system are recruited and prepared for teaching through a successful and
recognized program that emphasizes teaching in urban high-needs schools via
clinical immersion in schools. In addition to field experiences in schools
during the academic year, these Noyce scholars participate in a summer
internship program where they work in summer STEM camps for secondary school
children and participate in existing education research projects at CCNY or
within the broader CUNY system. Finally, Scholars are supported in their early
career (up to two years of teaching) as practicing professionals in the urban
high-needs district through professional development and a support network which
establishes professional learning communities among Noyce scholars and their
mentors. The program targets multiple populations in recruiting candidates with
a focus on a diversity of Noyce Scholars who return to their home communities in
the city as excellent teachers and role models.