* 1239622
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Value and Depositional History of Middle Preclassic Pottery in the Peten Lakes Region of Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Prudence Rice, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 16,381.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Prudence Rice, Katherine South will examine the
emergence of status differentiation during the Middle Preclassic period
(1000-350 BC) in the Maya lowlands through the study of pottery and its
depositional contexts. Throughout Mesoamerica, the Middle Preclassic was a time
of transition in social, economic, and political development, with emerging
status differentiation evident in rare, exotic materials such as jade and shell.
This study instead investigates abundant, locally made pottery and how it was
used, manipulated, and valued as part of these societal transitions. The Middle
Preclassic pottery analyzed was previously excavated from four communities
(sites) in the Petén lakes region of Guatemala, where Maya had begun building
substantial constructions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important in a
context which extends beyond Mayan archaeology for two reasons. First, it will
provide insight into how social complexity and status hierarchies emerge.
Secondly it will help to develop an analytic technique which archaeologists may
apply in many contexts and in many regions of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the ways value was encoded in
this pottery. Unlike painted polychromes of the Classic period, Middle
Preclassic pottery displayed little overt status-marking decoration, suggesting
that its value was based on its function and use ("use-value") rather than
attributes related to the labor of production ("production-value") such as
surface decoration. Thus the study examines the role of use-value in Middle
Preclassic pottery through an integrated analysis that includes: visual
classification based on vessel shape and typological designation; contextual
information based on where it was excavated; and compositional study that
focuses on the clay recipes used by the potters in production. These analyses
will provide information not only about production choices, but also about
differences among sites and depositional contexts, thereby emphasizing the
importance of contextual information when considering the role of object-value
in the archaeological record. This comprehensiveness permits not only study of
how pottery was valued by the early Maya in the Petén lakes region, but connects
to larger anthropological questions of how emerging status differentiation in
communities impacted the notion of value in material culture in general and the
processes underlying development of prestigious goods in complex
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond investigating how early Maya pottery was
valued, this study seeks to demonstrate the importance of an integrated approach
to artifact analysis that takes into account both contextual and physical
attributes. This project will provide graduate student training while also
extending the opportunity for collaboration among researchers who study early
pottery in the Maya lowlands. Additionally, the project will create a type
collection and catalog of early Maya pottery in the lakes region, which will
enable Guatemalan and foreign researchers to study representative samples of
this material. Results of the study will be made available through a doctoral
dissertation and, in English and Spanish, in peer-reviewed journals and at
professional meetings in the United States and Guatemala. Data will also be made
available online through the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR).