* 1239590
* I-Corps: A Transformative National Research Commercialization Network
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Chris Downing, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,843,069.00

Project Description

This project is establishing a founding network node at Georgia Tech (GT) to
successfully replicate the I-Corps curriculum at geographically distributed
regions throughout the nation and further study how innovation permeates the
academic culture. Although the current NSF I-Corps program trains the nation's
researchers in cutting-edge customer development methods, it does not offer
additional support for start-ups once the go/no-go decision is made. Providing
support to local teams is offering great benefit, since most researchers are
unlikely to relocate to the most active geographical regions of entrepreneurial
activity. Building a robust network of innovation nodes across the country is
critical to help support potential start-ups; therefore, this project is
leveraging a connected group of knowledgeable and highly experienced groups to
help mitigate the issues and risks associated with creating new enterprises.

The GT node is delivering the I-Corps hypothesis/validation-based (Lean
LaunchPad LLP) curriculum that focuses on customer development methodology to
cohorts of NSF-designated teams on a semi-annual basis. This allows for training
and development of I-Corps teams in multiple locations, while additionally
increasing the breadth/depth of training and helping to scale the overall impact
of the I-Corps program. GT organized a team of trainers to present the I-Corps
curriculum to I-Corps teams and help expand the pool of prospective I-Corps
faculty who are able to teach the I-Corps curriculum, work with the selected
teams and help to further inform the national innovation network.

Broader Significance

The establishment of an I-Corps node at Georgia Tech is fostering the pursuit of
both short-term and long-term research and development projects to help achieve
the goals of the NSF I-Corps program. The GT node is researching, analyzing, and
leveraging data from the I-Corps education, training, and opportunity
development efforts to: 1) develop an understanding of how institutions can
improve support for innovation ecosystems; 2) create and share methods for
successfully scaling effective practices and models that foster innovation; 3)
explore how the network can enable new collaborations among geographic regions
to support commercialization opportunity development, independent of geographic
locations; 4) examine and track the I-Corps teams' dynamics, activities and
outcomes; and 5) identify and propose improvements to the I-Corps curriculum
materials, training practices, and national innovation network utilization. The
GT node is expanding the I-Corps cadre of innovation experts that are
disseminating effective practices, fostering a change in culture (particularly
in academia) and helping to mentor others in their business development efforts
on a national scale.