* 1239690
* 2012 RESNA Student Design Competition
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Nell Bailey, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2013
* USD 20,002.00

This is funding to support the Student Design Competition (SDC), which will be
part of the 2012 annual RESNA conference to be held June 28-July 3 in Baltimore.
Today, between 40 and 56 million people in the United States report some type of
disability, and this number will likely grow in the coming years as the baby
boom generation enters late life. RESNA, the Rehabilitation Engineering and
assistive technology Society of North America, is the one organization with an
international focus that is devoted solely to technology for individuals with
disabilities. RESNA's membership consists of individuals and institutions
covering a range of disciplines (including researchers, clinicians, suppliers,
manufacturers, consumers and educators who work in non-profit and for-profit
settings), all of whom are dedicated to promoting the exchange of ideas and
information for the advancement of assistive technology. In addition to its
annual conference, RESNA conducts a credentialing program for assistive
technology practitioners, rehabilitation engineering technologists and
suppliers, as well as sponsored projects. RESNA's Technical Standards Board is
the U.S. Technical Advisory Group to ANSI, the official United States
representative to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), for
the development of ISO standards pertaining to assistive technology and other
products for persons with disabilities. More information about RESNA and its
annual conference is available online at http://www.resna.org.

The RESNA Student Design Competition fosters innovation and creativity with the
ultimate goal of producing technology that can contribute to the independence of
individuals with disabilities. The first SDC was held in 1980 as part of the
inaugural RESNA conference; since then over 225 designs have been identified as
winning entries from among over 730 submitted by students from over 117
different universities and institutes of higher learning. SDC entries are
required to represent the work of students ONLY, including the design
documentation; both undergraduates and graduates are eligible to take part. Many
past participants in the event are now leaders in service, research, and
educational areas related to technology for people with disabilities. Some past
student designs have been patented and are now available commercially. NSF has
been a supporter since 2005. This year's funding will enable the SDC to be
further expanded and enhanced, so as to include more entries and support for
more design teams, especially from minorities, women, and individuals with
disabilities. A call for participation has been posted on the conference
website, and also distributed electronically to a large number of colleges and
universities with engineering and design schools. A team of 5 judges will pre-
select entries from up to 10 teams, from which two members each will be invited
to attend the conference supported with travel and hotel funds as well as
complimentary registration. During a half-day session in which the teams will
make presentations before the judges and public audience at the conference, 5
teams will ultimately be selected as the final winners. Judges will have an
opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions and recommendations to the
design teams. A platform session will be held in which the 5 finalists will make
presentations to the general conference attendees. All SDC teams invited to the
conference will have an opportunity to present their projects in a poster
session during the general conference time. More information about the SDC is
available online at http://aac-rerc.psu.edu/wordpressmu/RESNA-SDC.

Broader Impacts: The annual RESNA Conference and the Student Design Competition
combine to create a forum for interaction between working and experienced
rehabilitation engineers and students who are about to enter the field. Unique
in its primary focus on undergraduates, the event provides participants with
experience and skills that help them succeed in their engineering and design
careers. It further encourages and mentors students in various disciplines to
become involved in the assistive technology and rehabilitation engineering
fields, and also provides an opportunity for the students to network with their
peers and rehabilitation engineers, many of whom participated in previous SDC
competitions. To further increase the diversity of submissions to the SDC in
future years, participants will build web pages to illustrate their design and
design process. The content of all submissions, not just the finalists, will be
captured and accessible through the RESNA website, and the information will be
searchable through the National Public Internet Site on assistivetech.net and
the ATWiki. Not only will young scientists benefit from this medium of
dissemination, but professors and those who teach will also be able to share
this information with their students as examples of projects that others have
done, while service providers and people with disabilities will be able to
search for unique solutions to barriers they may face.