* 1239498
* CPS: Synergy: Physically-Informed Assertions for CPS Development and Debugging
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Miryung Kim, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 891,804.00

This project's objective is to enable assertion-driven development and debugging
of cyber-physical systems (CPS), in which required conditions are formalized as
part of the design. In contrast with traditional uses of assertions in software
engineering, CPS demand a tight coupling of the cyber with the physical,
including in system validation. This project uses mathematical models of key
physical attributes to guide creation of assertions, to identify inconsistent or
infeasible assertions, and to localize potential causes for CPS failures. The
goal is to produce methods and tools that use physical models to guide
assertion-based verification of cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
assertion language is being developed that is founded in mathematical logic
while providing the familiarity of commonly used programming languages. This
foundation enables new automated debugging techniques for CPS. By leveraging
models that encode laws of physics and an automated decision procedure, the
techniques being developed help identify causes of CPS failures by
distinguishing inconsistent or infeasible physical states from valid ones. This
model-based approach incorporates means to assess these physical states using
both probabilistic and non-probabilistic measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
safety-critical applications guide the research and demonstrate the impact on
the development of CPS: coordinated control of autonomous vehicles and
monitoring and control of left-ventricular assist devices (LVADs). The focus on
these safety-critical applications are motivational for recruiting and educating
engineering students who have high expectations for how their lives should be
enabled by computing advances. Further, this research advances methods needed to
validate safe and effective CPS, promoting the public's confidence in their
application to safety-critical systems.