* 1239722
* Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference (28th) on May 4-6, 2012 at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Anshu Mathur, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 03/31/2013
* USD 16,000.00

1239722&lt;br/&gt;Mathur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits. This proposal
to the National Science Foundation (NSF) requests partial support of the 28th
Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference (SBEC), to be held May 4-May 6, 2012,
at The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center and co-hosted by Rice
University and Methodist Research Hospital Institute. Funds from the NSF will be
used to provide partial support for student awards, keynote speakers, publicity
and supplies, and conference publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
themes of this conference series is "Translational and Basic Science Research in
Bioengineering and Medicine." The broad impact of this conference falls within
the various areas of Biomedical Engineering such as Computational Modeling,
Bioinformatics, Imaging, Cell and Tissue Engineering, Nanotechnology, Clinical
Applications of Technology, and Medical Devices. Since this meeting is being
held at MD Anderson this year it will particularly highlight researchers who are
not only conducting basic science research but also translational research. The
field of biomedical engineering is rapidly evolving. Meetings and conferences
provide the means for individuals to promote and disseminate advances they have
made, subject to peer and professional critique. These gatherings are most
valuable venues for discussing new directions, ideas and approaches for research
and education. They also aid both in reinforcing contacts and collaborations and
establishing new ones. The Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference draws
heavily from institutions and organizations in the South, Southwest, and
Southeast regions of the US; but from the beginning, many from outside of the
region and even other countries have actively participated in this regional
conference. In the past conferences many distinguished scientists, biomedical
engineers, and physicians have participated, which included even a Nobel
Laureate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Board Impact. The abstracts will be
disseminated by publishing in the Program Abstract Book. The Proceedings from
the conference will be published in a CD format and provided to the conference
attendees. It is planned to encourage a selected set of high-impact publications
for subsequent publication in a book or journal format. The SBEC program
committee will identify these authors through the abstract review and
presentation process. Invitations and announcement posters has been mailed to
the chairpersons of all bioengineering and biomedical engineering departments
and programs located throughout the United States. Conference flyers have been
mailed to all faculty and graduate students in appropriate programs at US
institutions. Posters and flyers will also be mailed to members of appropriate
technical Societies and other bioengineering mailing lists available to us.
Announcements will be posted and distributed on the internet via e-mail and list
serve groups and through linking the Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference
homepage to other biomedical engineering sites such as Biomedical Engineering
Society (BMES). The conference has been announced at the BMES website.
Recognizing the importance of diversity is a priority and we plan to support
students and faculty from diverse backgrounds by giving them an opportunity to
present at the meeting with award support. The SBEC serves a special purpose by
emphasizing student participation. Unlike national meetings, the participation
of students (undergraduate, graduate, and professional) is strongly encouraged.
Work presented by student authors, while their mentors observe, helps them
develop public speaking skills and establish self-confidence in their
presentations. Established investigators will present papers in the same
sessions with the students, thus encouraging a high level of professionalism as
a standard for the students and allowing students to hear well-known authorities
in the field as well. In keeping with the emphasis on student participation, the
SBEC presents best paper awards to undergraduate, graduate, and professional
students based on both their written papers and presentations at the conference.
At large national and international meetings, many students are either
overwhelmed or lost in the crowd. The Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference
strives to create a more relaxed and more personal environment. This is
beneficial to all attendees but particularly important for students and young
investigators. Indeed, the conference's emphasis on students encourages them to
be actively involved, not just by attending, but by participating and
contributing to the conference through their individual presentations. It is
important to note that some of the organizers of recent SBEC conferences did
their very first conference presentation at SBEC when they were doctoral
students or young assistant professors. Despite being primarily a regional
conference, attendees in the past have come from all over the US as well as
foreign countries. The audience size of the Southern Biomedical Engineering
Conference allows interactions between students and prominent biomedical
engineers and researchers are both possible and likely. These interactions are
key to the continued development and advancement of biomedical engineering.