* 1239821
* Doctoral Consortium at 2012 ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL 2012)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Michael Nelson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,930.00

This award supports participation of doctoral students for 12 Ph.D. students in
the disciplines of computer science and library and information science in the
Doctoral Consortium, June 10, 2012 and the 2012 ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries (JCDL 2012), to be held at The George Washington University,
June 11-14, 2012 (http://www.jcdl2012.info). Twelve selected students are in the
early stages of their dissertation work and include several international
students in order to provide breadth in exchanging ideas. The goal of the
consortium is to help these students develop their dissertation proposals and
research plans through feedback and guidance from prominent professors and
experienced practitioners from the field of digital library research and
development. The JCDL Doctoral Consortium provides a forum for Ph.D. students to
interact with major figures in the digital library community. These leaders, who
come from all over the world, exemplify a broad set of expertise, diversity of
perspectives, and wealth of knowledge. The consortium provides students with an
opportunity to have broad audience and interact intellectually with
professionals who would otherwise be difficult to meet with and discuss their
ideas. Participating students will be selected on the basis of a paper
describing their research and broaden participation and those selected for the
consortium will have approximately 40 minutes to present their research plans
and receive feedback from the panel. After the consortium the students will
revise their papers based on the consortium's feedback and then they will be
published in the IEEE Technical Committee on Digital Libraries publication "TCDL
Bulletin" (http://www.ieee-tcdl.org/mediawiki/TCDL/index.php/IEEE-TCDL).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JCDL 2012 Doctoral Consortium will expose promising
Ph.D. students to a larger community, extend their opportunities for
intellectual engagement, and encourage scholarly discourse and networking among
new entrants into the field. An intended outcome of the workshop is to help
shape ongoing and future teaching, research, and development projects in the
field of digital libraries by providing wider exposure for the students to
innovative ideas which may generate new research questions in the future, and to
foster a sense of community among these young researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. The organizers will also take special steps to
solicit participation from institutions with underrepresented groups to extend
the potential benefits and broaden the horizon of expertise in the field.