* 1239605
* CAP: Collaborative Research: Building a Network to Advance Collaborative Research on Young Children's Learning through Public Media Assets
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Brigid Barron, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 12/31/2015
* USD 49,982.00

This Cyberlearning Capacity-Building project brings together learning
scientists, experts in media creation, experts in child development, producers
of public media assets, parent, and educators in an effort to build social
infrastructure that will support bringing what is known about how people learn
to the design of public media that can effectively connect school learning and
out-of-school learning for young children. The team's theoretical framing and
working hypothesis highlights the importance of media as a catalyst for
collaboration and learning conversations; according to the theoretical base,
these collaborations and learning conversations, when carried out across peers
and in families, can play a powerful role in connecting children's school and
outside-of-school experiences. Two workshops are being convened for the purpose
of shedding light on the pragmatics of doing this -- the R&amp;D partnerships
needed, the methods that might be used, and the issues that need to be addressed
for success. Through partnerships with children's educational media producers,
the team is building capacity for interdisciplinary teams that include learning
scientists and media producers to engage in research around how to use public
media assets to promote the kinds of learning conversations in and out of school
that will connect home and school settings into a distributed learning
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is laying the groundwork for new
interdisciplinary research efforts addressing issues in early learning. The
team's theoretical framework points to media as a catalyst for the kinds of
collaborations and conversations that might promote learning and connect
children's school and out-of-school experiences. Thus, this project is bringing
together learning scientists and children's educational media producers (PBS,
Sesame Workshop, the Joan Ganz Cooney Center) to seed future collaborations. The
goals of this initial collaboration are to work together to establish new
methods for studying learning with media and advance understanding of how public
media assets can be leveraged to support the learning and interest development
of young children and their families.