* 1239628
* Evaluating Seawater Contamination and Assimilation in Mid-Ocean Ridge Magmatic Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Virginia Dorsey Wanless, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,499.00

The geochemical alteration of ocean crust, as it ages and moves from mid-ocean
ridge spreading centers across the surface of the earth due to plate tectonics,
and then subducts down back into the mantle, helps determine the geochemical
mass balance of the crust and overlying ocean. This research is potentially
transformative in that it will work to establish boron isotopes in melt
inclusions in seafloor basalts as a geochemical proxy that can indicate the
extent and depth at which hydrothermally altered ocean crust interacts with new
rising lavas erupting on the seafloor. Melt inclusions from volcanic rocks taken
from the seafloor near the East Pacific Rise in the eastern Pacific Ocean will
be examined and the isotopes of boron and oxygen in them will be analyzed by the
ion microprobe at the Woods Hole Institution of Oceanography. These data will be
combined other geochemical analyses of the major and trace elements and volatile
species in the melt inclusions and their associated volcanic glasses. Project
goals will include determination of whether assimilation of seawater-altered
ocean crust in shallow crustal magma chambers is a common process in mid-ocean
ridge volcanic processes and whether more evolved, silicic, volcanic rocks have
higher boron isotope ratios that can be unequivocally tied to increasing
assimilation processes. An additional goal is to determine to what depth
hydrothermal circulation penetrates down into ocean crust at fast spreading
centers. Broader impacts of the work include support of two early career
researchers with no prior NSF support, one who is of a gender under-represented
in the sciences, and undergraduate student training.