* 1239642
* Indo-US Advanced Workshop and Colloquium on Modeling and Data Assimilation for Tropical Cyclone Predictions; Odisha, India; July 9-14, 2012
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* T. Krishnamurti, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2013
* USD 17,500.00

This award provides support for graduate students and early-career scientists to
attend a workshop on data assimilation and numerical modeling for tropical
cyclone (TC) predictions, held at the Indian Institute of Technology
Bhubaneshwar in Odisha, India, 9-14 July 2012. The workshop is organized through
the Indo-US Science and Technology Forum and is part of an ongoing collaboration
between the US and Indian operational research communities, formed through a
Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian Ministry of Earth Sciences and
the US National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration. The workshop has a
lecture format, intended to educate a joint US-Indian workforce of researchers
and operational TC forecasters, with an agenda that begins with fundamental
observations and theory and proceeds through advanced modeling concepts,
principles and applications of data assimilation, forecasting technologies, and
societal impacts and needs. Additional hands-on activities permit active
learning through case studies that can become active research topics for
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the workshop has broader impacts
in three ways: first, by bringing together an international group of researchers
and forecasters to advance international cooperation in an important scientific
area; second, by contributing to the education of students and early-career
scientists to develop the next generation of the scientific workforce in this
area; and third, by helping to advance the state of the science in an area that
has tremendous societal relevance, given the large segment of the population
living in areas that are at risk from landfalling hurricanes.