* 1239723
* RAPID:The Percy Julian Project: STEM Opportunities for African-American Boys
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Bryan Brown, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 03/31/2014
* USD 198,145.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to conduct research on a new
school for African-American boys under a charter to 100 Black Men in Oakland,
California. The PI from Stanford University investigates how leaders of the
school plan and design instruction to meet the needs of African-American boys
where 75% are eligible for free and/or reduced lunch. The leadership serves as
the primary target for this study. The PI chronicles the implementation process
to provide the STEM education community with first-hand information about
effective school development and implementation for African-American boys in
STEM fields. During the first year, the school operates grades 3, 6, and 7. Each
successive year, school leaders add kindergarten and/or one or more of the
remaining grades until the school reaches the entire K-12 level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods approach uses interviews, observations,
and content analysis to gather data about the design, implementation, and
leadership of the school. The PI examines how the leadership understands the
needs of students, develop standards, plan curricula, select pedagogy, and
provide scaffolds for teachers and students. The PI also explores how the
leadership selects teachers and supports their professional development as well
as summarizes many aspects of the organization and programming. The PI reviews
planning documents through retrospective analysis to obtain a more accurate
account of efforts taken from the initiation of ideas about the school to
implementation for the first year. Regarding proposed outcomes, the project
offers a vision of what works in science STEM classroom for African American
boys and tracks the impact of instructional approaches on the interest of
students in science, attitudes about belonging, and science achievement. A RAPID
is the most appropriate funding avenue for this timely and worthy effort of
national importance.