* 1239912
* EAGER Collaborative Research: Towards Wireless Nano-Electrostimulation of Ion Channels in  Mammalian Cells.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Leszek Malkinski, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 46,889.00

The goal of this exploratory research is to develop a technique for remote
stimulation of mammalian cells using nanoscale electric fields. This new concept
takes advantage of magnetoelectric properties of multiferroic nanoparticles
which can generate local electric fields in the proximity of cell membranes when
subjected to external magnetic field pulses. These fields are expected to
control functions of voltage-gated ion channels, which are voltage-sensitive
macromolecules, responsible for transport of Na+, K+ ions across cell membranes.
To elucidate feasibility of this new approach PI will use computer simulations
and thin film technology at the Advanced Materials Research Institute of the
University of New Orleans to design and fabricate nanoelectrodes and patterned
arrays of multiferroic particles to generate nanoscale electric fields. The
response of the ion channels to the nano-electrostimulation will be measured by
Co-PI in his Biophysics Laboratory at Loyola University New Orleans using
modified patch-clamp technique. Since future in-vivo applications of the new
method will involve use of multiferroic nanocomposites of magnetic and
ferroelectric nanoparticles, The Co-PI will also devise methods of delivery of
the ferroelectric nanoparticles and will determine their toxicity and binding to
mammalian cells. This collaborative research will efficiently use resources and
expertise in physics, materials science and biophysics available at the
University of New Orleans and Loyola University New Orleans.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is an attempt to
utilize magnetoelectric properties of multiferroic nanoparticles as wireless
probes to electrostimulate mammalian cells. The effects of external nanoscale
electric fields on ion transport in mammalian cells have not been studied and
this research will provide better understanding of fundamental functions of the
cells. Although there have been extensive studies on applications of magnetic
nanoparticles in biological systems, little is known about the interactions of
ferroelectric nanoparticles with mammalian cells and proposed research will shed
light on feasibility of biomedical applications of ferroelectric materials and
their composites. New methods will be developed for intracellular and
extracellular delivery of the nanoparticles, and patch-clamp technique will be
modified to test responses of the ion-channels in living cells to applied
magnetic fields with the frequency up to 5 kHz. The sequences of the pulses, as
well as properties of the nanoparticles will be tuned to detetermine control of
ion currents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The outcome of
this research on is expected to have profound effect on several disciplines,
such as biology, medicine, biotechnology and bionics. Successful control of ion
transport using magnetic field pulses offers alternative noninvasive method to
treat ion-channel related diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, diabetes, cardiac
arrhythmias, neurologic and psychiatric diseases, gastrointestinal disorders,
cardiovascular diseases and hypertension. Since voltage-gated ion channels are
responsible for triggering and propagation of action potentials in neurons the
new mechanism of stimulation of ion channels can be used to treat pain and
psychiatric diseases. Ultimately, electric fields from magnetoelectric
nanoparticles can be used to interface neurons with bionic devices which can
remotely control their action potentials. &lt;br/&gt;This project will greatly
benefit undergraduate and graduate students participating in this research
through extensive training in modern technologies, hands on experiment
experience and communication skills gained through participation in meetings and
conferences that will impact their future professional careers in academia or
industry.