* 1239667
* OPERATION OF A NATIONAL OCEAN SCIENCES ACCELERATOR MASS SPECTROMETRY FACILITY AT THE WOODS HOLE OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTITUTION
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Mark Roberts, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2019
* USD 7,846,733.00

The Division of Ocean Sciences at NSF provides base support for the operation
and maintenance of the National Ocean Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometer
(NOSAMS) facility. The facility will provide natural level radiocarbon dating
services to the oceanographic community. Radiocarbon is an important tool in
climate, carbon cycle, and biogeochemical science. It is useful as a chronometer
covering the past ~50,000 years, it is a diagnostic of past changes in the
carbon cycle, it serves as a tracer of ocean circulation, and it is a probe for
carbon flow in the environment. Thus radiocarbon measurements are used in many
sectors of ocean science research ranging from paleoceanography, physical
oceanography, biogeochemistry, and climate change science. Current environmental
level radiocarbon measurements require careful sample processing that minimizes
contamination risk and other experimental artifacts, and the use of Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry (AMS) systems. Consequently, it is advantageous to have and
maintain a central facility that serves the broader ocean sciences community by
making such measurements and acting as a center of expertise, as well as
sustaining and advancing the state-of-the-art in such
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade and more, there has been
a steady growth in sample submissions to NOSAMS. Presently the facility analyzes
about 7,900 samples per year, 1,000 for the Climate Variability and
Predictability (CLIVAR) program and 6,900 for other clients (550-600 batch
submissions annually from ~270 different investigators). Sample submission
information is entered through a web portal, samples are tracked through all
stages of processing and analysis using a robust, scalable, and secure database
management system, and clients have secure and convenient access to sample
processing status and analytical results through the web. The PI?s propose to
continue operations for another five years, while gradually increasing the
numbers of samples analyzed each year, improving the accuracy and precision of
measurements, and expanding the methodology in new
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s propose to continue to improve and
develop new radiocarbon measurement capabilities and propose to expand the
portfolio of services offered to the community. Recent advances include high
precision radiocarbon measurements on carbonates, and the development of a
unique gas-accepting ion source for continuous flow AMS (GIS-CFAMS) which can be
coupled to a variety of different interfaces, leading to new measurement
capabilities. Proposed research includes new inroads into compound specific and
compound class radiocarbon analysis, as well as extending analyses to smaller
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research enabled by the
NOSAMS measurements addresses questions that are important to society: among
them issues of past and future global climate change, local and regional
environmental impacts, and the development of natural resources. In addition to
supporting socially relevant research, NOSAMS will play an important role in
training and mentorship of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
NOSAMS promotes general public understanding of radiocarbon and related
scientific issues through web sites and in hosting tours for the visiting
public.