* 1239759
* EAGER:  Photoresponsive Polymers based on Photo-induced Proton Transfer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Yi Liao, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 230,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this EAGER project is
to investigate a new and potentially general approach of using light to alter
the properties of various photoresponsive polymers. This approach is based on
photo-induced proton transfer. The photo-induced proton transfer will be
realized using novel photoacids recently developed by the PI. He will attempt to
demonstrate polymers that reversibly alter their mechanical, geometrical,
electronic, optical, and/or magnetic properties, and release functional
molecules upon photo-irradiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photo-induced proton
transfer in polymers can alter electronic structures, induce ionic interactions,
catalyze chemical reactions, and thus alter the properties of the resulting
materials. The proposed project utilizes a new type of photoacid that works as
as a bridge between photon and proton so that many polymer properties can be
controlled with light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will attempt to provide a
general approach to develop various polymers that respond to light in a variety
of different ways. If successful, the resulting polymers could have useful
mechanical, electronic, optical and biomedical properties. Therefore, successful
implementation of this project could have a broader impact in both scientific
and industrial communities. Graduate students involved in this project will
receive interdisciplinary training in polymer science, photochemistry, and
materials science.