* 1239848
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Developing a Community Computational Infrastructure for Earth System Model Research and Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* James Famiglietti, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2013
* USD 63,813.00

This EAGER award focuses on exploring the feasibility of the implementation of a
new paradigm in the development of an integrative and interoperable data and
knowledge management system for the geosciences for a new NSF initiative called
EarthCube. Led by a team of expert Earth system modelers, this project focuses
on developing new approaches for integrating and coupling model components so
that holistic geoscience scenarios that involve the interaction of large scale
climate and atmospheric circulation models and smaller, more heterogeneous
component models of surface earth processes can be explored and more effectively
used by a broader range of users. The project engages participants from a number
of major NSF-funded geoscience modeling investments (CSDMS, NCAR, CUHAUSI). A
main goal of the of the work is to bridge the gaps between present modeling
frameworks, data standards, and computational architectures. The approach
includes collection of all relevant approaches and then comparing their pros and
cons and linking existing different "plug and play" modeling components together
and assessing the accuracy and robustness of model results. Major project goals
are to see if more standard modeling protocols can be developed and to develop a
general roadmap for improving the interoperability and meshing of model
components that address phenomena at wildly different spatial and temporal
scales. Broader impacts of the work include building new modeling infrastructure
for science and leveraging prior NSF investments in cyberinfrastructure. It also
improves the utility of, ease of use, and broader access of scientists and other
potential users to more fully integrated and powerful earth systems models.