* 1239152
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Multiple-Level Predictive Control of Mobile Cyber Physical Systems with Correlated Context
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* George Pappas, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 317,000.00

Cyber physical systems (CPSs) are merging into major mobile systems of our
society, such as public transportation, supply chains, and taxi networks. Past
researchers have accumulated significant knowledge for designing cyber physical
systems, such as for military surveillance, infrastructure protection,
scientific exploration, and smart environments, but primarily in relatively
stationary settings, i.e., where spatial and mobility diversity is limited.
Differently, mobile CPSs interact with phenomena of interest at different
locations and environments, and where the context information (e.g., network
availability and connectivity) about these physical locations might not be
available. This unique feature calls for new solutions to seamlessly integrate
mobile computing with the physical world, including dynamic access to multiple
wireless technologies. The required solutions are addressed by (i) creating a
network control architecture based on novel predictive hierarchical control and
that accounts for characteristics of wireless communication, (ii) developing
formal network control models based on in-situ network system identification and
cross-layer optimization, and (iii) designing and implementing a reference
implementation on a small scale wireless and vehicular test-bed based on law
enforcement vehicles.

The results can improve all mobile transportation systems such as future taxi
control and dispatch systems. In this application advantages are: (i) reducing
time for drivers to find customers; (ii) reducing time for passengers to wait;
(iii) avoiding and preventing traffic congestion; (iv) reducing gas consumption
and operating cost; (v) improving driver and vehicle safety, and (vi) enforcing
municipal regulation. Class modules developed on mobile computing and CPS will
be used at the four participating Universities and then be made available via
the Web.