* 1239323
* CPS:  Synergy:  Provably Safe Automotive Cyber-Physical Systems with Humans-in-the-Loop
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* John Hedrick, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,100,000.00

This project focuses on the formal design of semi-autonomous automotive Cyber
Physical Systems (CPS). Rather than disconnecting the driver from the vehicle,
the goal is to obtain a vehicle where the degree of autonomy is continuously
changed in real-time as a function of certified uncertainty ranges for driver
behavior and environment reconstruction. The highly integrated research plan
will advance the science and engineering for CPS by developing methods for (1)
reconstructing 3D scenes which incorporate high-level topological and low-level
metric information, (2) extracting driver behavioral models from large datasets
using geometry, reasoning and inferences, (3) designing provably-safe control
schemes which trade-off real-time feasibility and conservatism by using the
evidence collected during actual driving.

Assisting humans in controlling complex and safety-critical systems is a global
challenge. In order to improve the safety of human-operated CPS we need to
provide guarantees in the reconstruction of the environment where the humans and
the CPS operate, and to develop control systems that use predictive cognitive
models of the human when interacting with the CPS. A successful and integrated
research in both areas will impact not only the automotive sector but many other
human-operated systems. These include telesurgery, homeland security, assisted
rehabilitation, power networks, environmental monitoring, and all transportation
CPS. Graduate, undergraduate and underrepresented engineering students will
benefit through classroom instruction, involvement in the research and a
continuous interaction with industrial partners who are leaders in the field of
assisted driving.

