* 1239812
* NSF EPSCoR Workshop in Bioinformatics to Foster Collaborative Research, March 3-5, 2013.
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Gail McClure, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 01/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

This award will facilitate a two-and-a-half day workshop on Bioinformatics which
will be held in Little Rock, Arkansas during March 3-5, 2013. This workshop will
bring life scientists and computational scientists together and address the need
for cross-fertilization among different domains of bioinformatics. The workshop
will also enable forming effective collaborations among EPSCoR jurisdictions in
bioinformatics research and education. The workshop will also inform the
participants of the interdisciplinary, computational and data- enabled science,
cyberinfrastructure resources, and EPSCoR-related opportunities at the National
Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Bioinformatics is
becoming increasingly data and computationally intensive. Biologists and
computer scientists face computational as well as large data-related challenges.
This workshop will focus on four thematic research areas: (1) Next Generation
Sequencing and Data Analysis; (2) Protein Structure Prediction and Applications;
(3) Systems Biology; and (4) Molecular Ecology. The workshop will provide
opportunities for cross-disciplinary interactions and collaborations among life
and computer scientists and to bridge the complementary knowledge gap.
Participants will discuss and better understand the biological background of the
computational challenges and computational tools available to biologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop will enable and foster
exchange of information and potential collaborations among bioinformatics
researchers and educators in different EPSCoR jurisdictions. The workshop agenda
includes cross-disciplinary training and tutorials for participants at different
levels, including disciplinary researchers, technicians, junior scientists, and
students. A compilation of bioinformatics research and education activities in
EPSCoR jurisdictions and available resources will be prepared and broadly
disseminated through the workshop website. Workshop activities and outcomes will
be assessed through participant surveys on workshop experience and follow-up on
the progress of interdisciplinary collaborations of the bioinformatics network
initiated at the workshop.