* 1239041
* Program on Topology and Field Theories
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Stephan Stolz, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Noel Brady
* 04/30/2013
* USD 45,000.00

The Center for Mathematics at Notre Dame will run a program on topology from May
21 to June 9 of 2009, including an undergraduate summer school on "Topological
invariants in low dimensions" and a graduate summer school and conference on
"Topology and field theories". The program will begin with a one week
undergraduate summer school from May 21 to May 26th, which will consist of
lectures and group problem solving sessions led by Margaret Doig, Matthew
Hedden, and Joshua Greene. We plan to have approximately 20 students from a
range of undergraduate institutions. The program will continue with a second
week, which will be a graduate student level summer school in "Topology and
Field Theories", which will consist of lectures given by Sergei Gukov, Andre
Henriques, Jacob Lurie, and Chris Schommer-Pries. We expect to bring 40 or 50
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers for the graduate summer school.
The final week of the program will be an international conference on "Topology
and Field Theories", with speakers including David Ayala, Ulrich Bunke, Kevin
Costello, Sergei Gukov, Andre Henriques, Jacob Lurie, Chris Schommer-Priess,
Dennis Sullivan, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this program is to
help students learn about research in exciting and important areas of topology.
For undergraduates, we aim to give students an introduction to knot theory and
its variants, which combines different areas of mathematics, but also has close
connections to physics and to biology, through folding properties of DNA
molecules. The program will help the undergraduates make choices about graduate
study. The speakers are strong young mathematicians, and have been chosen for
their ability in teaching. For graduate students, the program will provide many
opportunities to interact with leading researchers in an area of topology with
close interactions with physics. This area has been important in a number of
major advances in mathematics. The program will help graduate students
transition into research, and advance their research program. The conference
will provide further opportunities in a less structured environment. The
speakers are all strong researchers, and excellent lecturers. For all levels, we
plan to bring in students from a wide variety of
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information on the programs is available at
the following website: http://centerformath.nd.edu/scientific-events-and-
programs/