* 1239783
* CCEP-II: Polar Learning and Responding: PoLAR Climate Change Education Partnership
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,655,000.00

The Polar Learning And Responding (PoLAR) Climate Change Partnership is using
fascination with the changing polar regions and novel educational approaches to
engage adult learners and inform public understanding and response to climate
change. Learning research and activities implemented during the Phase I
demonstration project show that games and game-like approaches motivate
exploration and learning of complex material. Focus has been placed on the poles
because climate change is rapid in these regions and has global consequences.
Images of the changing Arctic and Antarctic have become emblematic of
environmental change for the public at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PoLAR
partners include expertise in: 1) Climate Science, both in Natural Science and
Social Science; 2) Learning and Decision Science, including Learning Theory and
Practice and Decision Science; and 3) Practitioners in Formal education,
Informal education, and Gaming. The intellectual merit of the PoLAR Partnership
is the combination of learning, decision, and climate science applied to
educational approaches for adult learners. Adults, be they community leaders,
the general public, pre- and in-service teachers, or college students, are
today's decision-makers. Informed decisions are more likely if individuals are
aware of the scientific evidence of climate change and potential economic and
social consequences. Research is being conducted in this Phase II project to
evaluate the impact of different platforms and tools in raising awareness and
improving understanding. The project seeks to: 1) Deepen adult learner awareness
and understanding of climate change; 2) Inform responses to climate change
impacts through engaged problem-solving; and 3) Advance knowledge on more
effective modes of climate change education and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will transform education policies and
practices by catalyzing new ways of learning about climate change at the poles
based on scientific evidence, learning theory, and education practice, including
current and emerging technology. Activities to achieve this goal include: 1)
Providing transformative educational approaches that are easy to disseminate and
exciting to use in homes, museums, classrooms, and communities; and 2) Inspiring
change in practices and policies by seeding game-like approaches in informal and
formal educational environments in collaboration with catalytic associates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase II CCEP project is serving as a hub of
communication and dissemination of information on polar climate change through
the Polar Home website, which leverages existing resources, including the
Climate Change Education Program Alliance (CCEPA). Diverse communities are being
engaged through professional development of and public outreach to key
stakeholder communities: AMNH teachers, Alaskan leaders through culturally
responsive camps, and radio dispatches in multiple languages. The project has
the potential to reach millions of adults through partners and associates
including the Alaskan Association of Interior Native Educators, Games for
Change, Isla Earth, Arctic Portal, AMNH, Association of Arctic Expedition Cruise
Operators, American Geophysical Union and WWF Global Arctic
Programme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is one of six Phase II projects
being funded through the Climate Change Education Partnership (CCEP) program.
The CCEP program was developed as part of the NSF Climate Change Education
program, established through Congressional appropriations in FY 2009. The CCEP
program is a one-time, dedicated NSF effort to establish a coordinated national
network of regionally- or thematically-based partnerships devoted to increasing
the adoption of effective, high quality educational programs and resources
related to the science of climate change and its impacts. The CCEP portfolio
encompasses a major interdisciplinary research and development effort designed
to promote deeper understanding of, and engagement with, climate system science
and the impacts of climate change on natural and human systems. The vision of
this program is a scientifically literate society that can effectively weigh the
evidence regarding global climate change as it confronts the challenges ahead,
while preparing the innovative scientific and technical workforce to advance our
knowledge of human-climate interactions and develop approaches for a
sustainable, prosperous future. Each CCEP is required to incorporate innovative
collaborations among expertise of climate scientists, learning scientists, and
education practitioners in either formal or informal learning environments to
research, design, and test new models and strategies for effective teaching and
learning about climate science. With its focus on interdisciplinary approaches
and transformative scales of impact, the CCEP program occupies a unique and
complementary niche in the portfolio of Federal investments related to climate
science education and workforce development.