* 1239073
* EAGER: Continuous, Catalyzed Thermopower Wave Generators Powered by Renewable Biofuels: A New Fuel Cell Concept
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Michael Strano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2013
* USD 81,457.00

Abstract

#1239073 Strano, Michael S.

Technical Basis

Portable energy storage and delivery is the cornerstone of modern transportation
systems and the of the proliferation of portable electronic devices and is a
rapidly growing field. Additionally, the development of the newest autonomous
and mobile sensors, robots, and off-grid wireless networks, particularly at the
micro- and nanoscale, is often hampered today by the lack of high power density
energy systems of similar size. Each of todays portable energy technologies has
its distinct shortcomings. Batteries are the most familiar form of electrical
energy storage, but electrochemical energy density is fundamentally limited
compared to storing energy in the chemical bonds of fuels. In addition,
batteries slowly lose their charge over years, making them less desirable for
long-term energy storage. Supercapacitors offer substantially higher power
density (in weight and volume terms), but at the expense of energy density.
Moreover, they cannot hold their charge even as long as batteries. Fuel cells
and engines can use the large energy density of chemical fuels but are more
complicated to fabricate at the small scale, so their power density has been
limited so far. Professor Michael Strano of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology has performed some initial studies on an alternative energy device
that offers the possibility of supplanting these existing devices.Thermopower
wave based energy devices may dramatically increase the energy density of
portable power devices more than a factor of 10, with other advantages such as
zero storage losses and charge decay.

High-conductivity scaffolds, like carbon nanotubes (CNTs), direct a hot chemical
reaction wave along their length; the wave also pushes charge carriers to create
a high-power pulse of electricity. This fast wave means that thermopower waves
can often outperform conventional thermoelectrics using static thermal gradients
in terms of power density and may not have the same limits on efficiency
(usually about 1-5%)according to Strano. The concept to be tested is whether
thermopower fuel cells can be created, which could be operated to generate power
continuously; previous devices could only make electrical pulses shorter than a
second. This project introduces the new aspect of the addition of metal catalyst
nanoparticles to the CNT thermoelectric conduits. By focusing on fuels like
formic acid and methanol that can be biologically derived, these generators can
use renewable energy sources.

This is an ideal EAGER project in that several high risk aspects must be
successfully demonstrated. First, wave propagation using formic acid and
alternatively methanol must be demonstrated using low- to medium-activity
catalytic materials for their decomposition along the length of thermal conduit
materials, including carbon nanotube fibers, inorganic nanowires, or grapheme
films. Advances in theoretical understanding of these waves will accompany this
effort. The choice of catalyst(s) must optimize the activation energy; too low
and the fuel will react spontaneously without being controlled by the nanotubes,
too high and the required initiation energy will be too large, sapping the
efficiency. For liquid-fueled-TWGs to be practical, more common metals like Au,
Fe, or Cu must be the active catalyst metal. Beyond this, a target would be to
fabricate a working device and demonstrate extended operating life. This is
clearly the high risk-high potential return project envisioned for EAGER awards.



Broader Impacts

For this project, the PI intends to utilize undergraduate and graduate
researchers, as a means of fostering diversity in Engineering. The PI notes that
the experiments that make up this project seem to be well suited for
undergraduates, who adapt and learn quickly how to prepare thermopower wave
substrates, and learn how to use the instrumentation. The PI has extensively
worked with a large body of undergraduate students in the past, many of whom are
gender and racial minorities. It is difficult to develop these aspects in a
short EAGER project, so the PI is to be commended for making this effort.