* 1239560
* NSF/FDA SIR: Surface-Induced Self-Assembly of Fibrinogen Fibers: Designing Non- thrombogenic Materials and Understanding the Link Between Cholesterol and Thrombosis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Miriam Rafailovich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,982.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1239560&lt;br/&gt;Rafailovich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
propose to test whether spontaneous nucleation of fibrinogen fibers occurs in
these hydrophobic areas, possibly explaining this link. They propose to simulate
the arterial wall by producing lipid bilayers, where cholesterol and other fatty
acids are added. They will then use SPM, in conjunction with Raman and FTIR to
determine the role of the rafts on fibrinogen adsorption, fibrilogenesis , and
thrombosis. They will also experiment with different types of fats, and the
findings will be used to screen different therapies to prevent their
accumulation. The work proposed will be conducted mostly at the FDA, White Oak
Facility, in collaboration with Drs. Katherine Vorvolakos and Dinesh Patwardhan.
Human fibrinogen will be isolated and purified at Stony Brook University, as
part of a collaboration with Dennis Gallanakis, MD, Director of the SBU Hospital
Blood Bank and recognized expert on fibrinogen. Dr. Gallanakis keeps an
inventory of different fibrinogen fractions and antibodies specific to different
segments of the molecule. Functionalized polymers will be synthesized at Stony
Brook, brought to White Oak where the spun cast substrates will be prepared and
the adsorption experiments conducted. Lipid bilayer films with incorporated fat
rafts will be prepared at SBU, and subsequent analysis which will be conducted
at White Oak.