* 1239247
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: SMARTER - Smart Manager for Adaptive and Real-Time Decisions in Building ClustERs
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jin Wen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

1239257 (Wu). Traditionally, buildings have been viewed as mere energy
consumers; however, with the new power grid infrastructure and distributed
energy resources, buildings can not only consume energy, but they can also
output energy. As a result, this project removes traditional boundaries between
buildings in the same cluster or between the cluster and power grids,
transforming individual smart buildings into NetZero building clusters enabled
by cyber-support tools. In this research, a synergistic decision framework is
established for temporally, spatially distributed building clusters to work as
an adaptive and robust system within a smart grid. The framework includes
innovative algorithms and tools for building energy modeling, intelligent data
fusion, decentralized decisions and adaptive decisions to address theoretical
and practical challenges in next-generation building systems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research develops cyber-physical engineering tools for demand
side load management which has been identified as a major challenge by energy
industries. It fundamentally transforms the current centralized and uni-
directional power distribution business model to a decentralized and multi-
directional power sharing and distribution business model, reducing overall
energy consumption and allowing for optimal decisions in changing operation
environments. Education and outreach efforts include developing novel
educational modules disseminated at the K-12 levels and through the ASEE eGFI
repository. Further educational impact occurs through integration with multiple
undergraduate and graduate courses at each institution, and with community
service groups. Impact is also expanded to the broader energy industry and the
operation of healthcare delivery and urban transportation systems through our
industry collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;http://swag.engineering.asu.edu/&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1239247 (Wen). Traditionally, buildings have been viewed as mere
energy consumers; however, with the new power grid infrastructure and
distributed energy resources, buildings can not only consume energy, but they
can also output energy. As a result, this project removes traditional boundaries
between buildings in the same cluster or between the cluster and power grids,
transforming individual smart buildings into NetZero building clusters enabled
by cyber-support tools. In this research, a synergistic decision framework is
established for temporally, spatially distributed building clusters to work as
an adaptive and robust system within a smart grid. The framework includes
innovative algorithms and tools for building energy modeling, intelligent data
fusion, decentralized decisions and adaptive decisions to address theoretical
and practical challenges in next-generation building systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research develops cyber-physical engineering tools for demand
side load management which has been identified as a major challenge by energy
industries. It fundamentally transforms the current centralized and uni-
directional power distribution business model to a decentralized and multi-
directional power sharing and distribution business model, reducing overall
energy consumption and allowing for optimal decisions in changing operation
environments. Education and outreach efforts include developing novel
educational modules disseminated at the K-12 levels and through the ASEE eGFI
repository. Further educational impact occurs through integration with multiple
undergraduate and graduate courses at each institution, and with community
service groups. Impact is also expanded to the broader energy industry and the
operation of healthcare delivery and urban transportation systems through our
industry collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;http://swag.engineering.asu.edu/&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1239093 (Lewis). Traditionally, buildings have been viewed as mere
energy consumers; however, with the new power grid infrastructure and
distributed energy resources, buildings can not only consume energy, but they
can also output energy. As a result, this project removes traditional boundaries
between buildings in the same cluster or between the cluster and power grids,
transforming individual smart buildings into NetZero building clusters enabled
by cyber-support tools. In this research, a synergistic decision framework is
established for temporally, spatially distributed building clusters to work as
an adaptive and robust system within a smart grid. The framework includes
innovative algorithms and tools for building energy modeling, intelligent data
fusion, decentralized decisions and adaptive decisions to address theoretical
and practical challenges in next-generation building systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research develops cyber-physical engineering tools for demand
side load management which has been identified as a major challenge by energy
industries. It fundamentally transforms the current centralized and uni-
directional power distribution business model to a decentralized and multi-
directional power sharing and distribution business model, reducing overall
energy consumption and allowing for optimal decisions in changing operation
environments. Education and outreach efforts include developing novel
educational modules disseminated at the K-12 levels and through the ASEE eGFI
repository. Further educational impact occurs through integration with multiple
undergraduate and graduate courses at each institution, and with community
service groups. Impact is also expanded to the broader energy industry and the
operation of healthcare delivery and urban transportation systems through our
industry collaborations.