* 1239787
* Sources and Growth of Initial Condition Errors in Convection-resolving Forecasts in the Mesoscale Predictability Experiment (MPEX)
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Ryan Torn, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2017
* USD 326,288.00

This research focuses on understanding how errors associated with particular
features prior to convective initiation can influence forecasts of convection
over the Great Plains region of the United States within the Mesoscale
Predictability Experiment (MPEX). In particular, this study will evaluate the
hypothesis that errors associated with upper-level synoptic features,
midtropospheric moisture, midtropospheric lapse rate, and boundary layer
moisture and shear at 18-24 h and 1 h prior to convective initiation are
responsible for the lack of predictability in convection forecasts. These
hypotheses will be validated by running a series of experiments whereby
different sets of observations are assimilated within the most sensitive regions
and compared to the control where these observations are withheld. In addition,
the ensemble-based sensitivity technique will be applied to 3 km Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) model ensemble forecasts that use initial
conditions from a cycling ensemble Kalman filter. The sensitivities that are
obtained from this method will also be evaluated by producing perturbed initial
conditions that are consistent with adjusting a feature of interest (i.e.,
midtropospheric moisture) and comparing the resulting forecasts against the
control where no perturbation is applied. The results from several cases will be
compared to each other to evaluate whether convective forecasts are consistently
sensitive to particular fields and features and the degree to which each case is
characterized by unique sensitivities.

Intellectual Merit: This project will enhance our understanding of the dynamical
processes that limit the predictability of convective systems over a range of
cases using an ensemble of convection-resolving forecasts. Moreover, this study
will also demonstrate whether sensitivity analysis, which has typically been
applied to phenomena characterized by linear error growth over longer time
scales can be applicable to convection, which is characterized by non-linear
dynamics and error growth over short time scales.

Broader Impacts: The results from this study could provide guidance of where to
take observations during future convective events that could be assimilated into
numerical prediction models, which will hopefully produce better forecasts,
greater lead time for warnings, and reduced loss of life. The results will be
communicated with operational forecasters and others in the research communities
to design better ways to observe the atmosphere and evaluate numerical models.
Moreover, this study will also allow for the training of a graduate student in
predictability, convective dynamics and data assimilation.