* 1239708
* Workshop: Pan-American Plant Membrane Biology Workshop - Asilomar, CA (May 16-20, 2012)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Erin Connolly, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 04/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

The 4th Pan American Plant Membrane Biology Workshop will be held at Asilomar
Conference Center, Pacific Grove, CA, USA from May 16-20, 2012. The workshop
will include sessions that cover the most important recent breakthroughs in
understanding both basic and applied aspects of plant membrane biology. The
workshop will focus largely on membrane transport, signaling and trafficking, as
these fields are experiencing rapid progress. In addition, the workshop will
focus on the membrane transport process of secretion for cell wall synthesis,
given current intense focus and interest in biofuels and the development of
sustainable energy sources. Another specific focus is the regulation of membrane
transport processes in response to abiotic stresses; thus, the workshop should
facilitate interactions that accelerate progress in the development of plant
varieties that have improved properties for biofuel production and/or that show
enhanced ability to tolerate stresses (such as those predicted to increase as a
result of global climate change).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A small meeting like
PAPMBW provides an outstanding opportunity for interaction of attendees. This
meeting is heavily focused on PhD students, postdocs and early-career
scientists. Each session is anchored by 1-2 invited speakers and includes talks
from 1-2 early-career scientists and 2 PhD students. NSF funds will be used
specifically to help defray the travel and registration costs of 20 outstanding
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows or early career investigators. Every
effort will be made to include women, participants from under-represented groups
and scientists from predominantly undergraduate and minority-serving
institutions Thus, support from NSF will contribute directly to the career
development and educational goals of the next generation of scientists.