* 1239281
* Boulder Creek CZO Renewal:  Weathered Profile Development in a Rocky Environment and Its Influence on Watershed Hydrology and Biogeochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Boulder Creek Critical Zone Observatory was established to explore the
evolution and function of the critical zone under differing erosion histories.
Monitoring infrastructure has been established in three sub-catchments of
Boulder Creek that differ significantly in their erosional regime. Time series
of meteorological forcing, and the hydrologic, geomorphic and ecological
response of the catchment are now being collected. Research focuses on
interactions among these processes. Under this award, the team will deepen their
research on interconnected topics of hydrologic interactions and partitioning,
weathering and mobile regolith production, trees as agents of regolith
development, landscape-level biogeochemical and microbial dynamics, fire and
landscape disturbance, and landscape evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research at Boulder Creek Critical Zone Observatory (BcCZO) examines the
evolution and function of Earth?s Critical Zone?the thin veneer of Earth between
the top of the vegetation and the base of weathered bedrock. The team will
examine hydrologic processes, the roles of trees in developing regolith, and the
role of infrequent events such as fires in landscape development. Over the
coming year, the BcCZO will continue to expose researchers and students to
critical zone science and generate datasets for the broader scientific
community. The process of science and the discoveries made are taken directly to
the public through several avenues. These include research-based curriculum at
middle-school level offered through student-teacher workshops and a summer day
camp, run in partnership with the CU Science Discovery program; summer research
experience for high school students, also with CU Science Discovery; the Keck
Geology Program research experience for undergraduates during the summer; the
Critical Zone Cyber-seminar series, hosted by CUAHSI; and a website.&lt;br/&gt;