* 1239324
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Trustworthy Composition of Dynamic App-Centric Architectures for Medical Application Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2015
* USD 120,000.00

This project aims to achieve key technology, infrastructure,
and&lt;br/&gt;regulatory science advances for next generation medical systems
based&lt;br/&gt;on the concept of medical application platforms (MAPs). A MAP is
a&lt;br/&gt;safety/security-critical real-time computing platform for:
(a)&lt;br/&gt;integrating heterogeneous devices and medical IT systems, (b)
hosting&lt;br/&gt;application programs ("apps") that provide medical utility
through the&lt;br/&gt;ability to both acquire information and update/control
integrated&lt;br/&gt;devices, IT systems, and displays. The project will develop
formal&lt;br/&gt;architectural and behavioral specification languages for
defining&lt;br/&gt;MAPs, with a focus on techniques that enable compositional
reasoning&lt;br/&gt;about MAP component interoperability and safety. These
formal&lt;br/&gt;languages will include an extensible property language to
enable the&lt;br/&gt;specification of real-time, quality-of-service, and
attributes&lt;br/&gt;specific to medical contexts that can be leveraged by code
generation,&lt;br/&gt;testing, and verification tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will work closely with a synergistic team of
clinicians,&lt;br/&gt;device industry partners, regulators, and medical
device&lt;br/&gt;interoperability and safety standard organizations to develop
an open&lt;br/&gt;source MAP innovation platform to enable key stakeholders
within the&lt;br/&gt;nation's health care ecosphere to identify, prototype, and
evaluate&lt;br/&gt;solutions to key technology and regulatory challenges that
must be&lt;br/&gt;overcome to develop a commodity market of regulated MAP
components.&lt;br/&gt;Because MAPs provide pre-built certified infrastructure
and building&lt;br/&gt;blocks for rapidly developing multi-device medical
applications, this&lt;br/&gt;research has the potential to usher in a new
paradigm of medical&lt;br/&gt;system that significantly increases the pace of
innovation, lowers&lt;br/&gt;development costs, enables new functionality by
aggregating multiple&lt;br/&gt;devices into a system of systems, and achieves
greater system safety.