* 1239148
* CAREER: An Integrative Approach to Understanding and Communicating Evolution in Action
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Erica Rosenblum, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2015
* USD 482,874.00

How quickly can new species form, and how predictable is evolution in nature?
This project will address these questions in an ideal setting to study evolution
in action. Multiple lizard species have evolved white coloration for camouflage
in the gypsum dunes of White Sands, New Mexico. These species are undergoing the
process of speciation on an extraordinarily rapid timescale. This project will
illuminate the factors that accelerate the process of speciation in White Sands
lizards. Field studies in nature and genetics studies in the lab will be used to
understand how natural selection can lead so quickly to adaptation and
speciation.

The white lizards at White Sands provide a compelling, accessible example of
evolution and represent a tremendous opportunity for research and public
outreach. From an educational perspective this grant will increase scientific
literacy and demystify evolutionary concepts for the public. The research will
be integrated with educational outreach activities that use the dramatic
landscape of White Sands to teach evolutionary biology to the general public.
Outreach activities include offering a short "lizard camp" for elementary school
children, developing a bilingual English-Spanish museum exhibit about evolution,
and disseminating research results in textbooks, magazines and in the popular
press.