* 1239768
* Analyzing Pathways to STEM Success
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Jeffrey Hooker, Chief Dull Knife Memorial College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2015
* USD 323,668.00

Through efforts of TCUP I and II, the foundation is now in place at Chief Dull
Knife&lt;br/&gt;College for taking the next steps in conducting more
sophisticated and nuanced research that will&lt;br/&gt;assess the impact of the
expanded and improved learning opportunities offered to CDKC&lt;br/&gt;students
in math and science. This research proposal responds to the call by Trowler
(2005) for&lt;br/&gt;improved research on higher education reforms that reveal
how specific innovations relate to&lt;br/&gt;particular teaching and learning
contexts. The development of data sources and instruments
for&lt;br/&gt;documenting student progress and for TCUP project assessments has
created a unique&lt;br/&gt;opportunity now to conduct research that has not been
possible before. The research capability&lt;br/&gt;development will include the
creation of a database that incorporates and coordinates all
the&lt;br/&gt;existing data sources and the establishment of procedures for
accessing relevant data to address&lt;br/&gt;research questions about STEM
programs and their impacts on students. Database development&lt;br/&gt;will draw
on multiple data sources and will allow a wide range of questions to be
addressed with a&lt;br/&gt;variety of statistical techniques. The approach used
for developing and addressing research&lt;br/&gt;questions will incorporate the
central principles of the Indigenous Evaluation framework, an&lt;br/&gt;approach
to research on and evaluation of American Indian education and other
programs&lt;br/&gt;developed by the American Indian Higher Education Consortium
(AIHEC) with support from the&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation (LaFrance
and Nichols 2010). For this project, the research&lt;br/&gt;approach makes
central the values and interests of groups most concerned with the
academic&lt;br/&gt;achievement of CDKC students and relationship to the Northern
Cheyenne community. It also&lt;br/&gt;builds on prior sociological research on
Northern Cheyenne secondary school completion (Ward&lt;br/&gt;2005) that
identified individual, family, school and community as particularly relevant
influences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research program
represents important questions related to American Indian tribal
college&lt;br/&gt;student retention and completion in relation to STEM that
moves well beyond any analyses to&lt;br/&gt;date on Northern Cheyenne college
students. It also fills gaps in understandings about the&lt;br/&gt;processes
that contribute to student outcomes in a tribal college setting that is both
unique and&lt;br/&gt;relevant to other higher education settings. It will create
the basis for addressing how&lt;br/&gt;relationships with local and regional
institutions and the research opportunities they offer impact&lt;br/&gt;students
and faculty. Additionally, the capabilities resulting from this project provide
for sharing&lt;br/&gt;and disseminating research results to educators at other
tribal colleges and higher education&lt;br/&gt;institutions who have similar
concerns about and interests in creating more effective STEM&lt;br/&gt;learning
opportunities for American Indian and other minority students.