* 1239169
* Workshop on Next-Generation High-Efficiency Organic Solar Cells: Opportunities and Challenges. To be Held on September 6-7, 2012 at a Hotel (TBD) in Arlington, Virginia.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Bin Hu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,999.00

The specific topics of this workshop will include (i) materials design and
synthesis: optical and electronic tuning in materials design and synthesis, (ii)
device physics: characterization and control of internal charge dissociation,
transport, and collection in device physics, and (iii) device fabrication:
interface engineering issues, new electrode materials, and printing techniques.
The goal of this workshop is to review recent research progress and prepare a
strategic report that can address key issues and five-year research plan for the
development of next-generation organic solar cells with device efficiencies
greater than 15 %. The specific intellectual merit includes (i)
interdisciplinary participants from academic universities, government labs, and
industries, (ii) comprehensive discussions on critical issues in molecular
structure (light harvesting versus photovoltaic loss), morphological structure
(charge dissociation versus charge recombination), and device interface (charge
collection versus charge trapping) and (iii) interdisciplinary effort from
materials synthesis, device fabrication, and fundamental studies. The
educational impact will include the following aspects. First, this workshop
plans to establish a website to publish the workshop presentations and reports
to public to enhance student learning and training at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. Second, this workshop will summarize the recent research
progress for the use in future materials summer camp organized annually at the
University of Tennessee. Third, the experimental results reported by this
workshop will become public domain through designed website, which can be used
by various universities to enhance class teaching.