* 1239994
* RIT/NazEd Tech2Teach: Developing Institutional Commitment to STEM Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Craig Hill, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,393.00

This capacity building project is laying the foundation for a Learning Assistant
(LA) program to attract talented STEM undergraduates to careers in secondary
education. The LA program, developed at the University of Colorado-Boulder,
combines classroom teaching experience, directed faculty mentorship, and formal
instruction on the science of how people learn to dramatically increase student
interest in secondary teaching careers. This project is taking a comprehensive
approach: attracting undergraduate STEM majors at Rochester Institute of
Technology (RIT), providing a path, Tech2Teach, through Nazareth College of
Rochester to certification in secondary education, and developing connections
with existing high school teacher groups to provide continuing support. The
project has three specific goals&lt;br/&gt;1. to educate and facilitate faculty
development through peer group targeted workshops,&lt;br/&gt;2. to develop
critical infrastructure, including online resources and a new course on
pedagogy, and implement an LA program, and&lt;br/&gt;3. to extend and enhance
existing collaborations with Nazareth College's School of Education (Tech2Teach)
and the local Rochester Area Physics Teacher Out-Reach
(RAPTOR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact of this project lies in the
large number of faculty and students directly affected by the proposed
activities. The physics, biology, chemistry, and mathematics departments at RIT
currently include 136 faculty and 853 undergraduate majors. Through an
innovative social network analysis approach that identifies teaching peer
groups, the project is involving more than 70 faculty in development workshops
and seminars to prepare them to mentor students in the LA program. Deep support
from all involved departments is enabling the project to reach more than 400
students, educating them about the possibilities of a career in secondary
education. In the second year, an LA program will be initiated that will pair 16
students with faculty mentors in classes that affect up to 500 students in STEM
classes.