* 1239758
* CCEP-II: MADE-CLEAR - Maryland-Delaware Climate Change Education, Assessment, and Research
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Nancy Targett, University System of Maryland
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,630,000.00

The Maryland-Delaware Climate Change Education, Assessment, and Research
partnership (MADE CLEAR) is building a sustainable infrastructure for effective
and relevant climate change education within a two-state region. While MADE
CLEAR focuses on formal education in grades 8-12, the partnership also reaches a
broad spectrum of learners by educating teachers at universities and students of
all ages through additional venues such as museums, aquaria, and nature centers.
Through ongoing evaluation, the partnership is continuously improving how
climate change education is delivered to students in Maryland and Delaware, and
the lessons learned from this partnership are helping to craft education models
that can be applied in other locations across the country. MADE CLEAR is led by
faculty members at core institutions in Delaware and the University System of
Maryland, including the University of Delaware, Delaware State University, the
University of Maryland, College Park, the University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Science, and Towson University; as well as the Maryland and
Delaware Departments of Education and Maryland Public Television. MADE CLEAR is
an outgrowth of the states' similar natural environments and climates, and their
active approaches to education reform and climate change responsiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MADE CLEAR approaches specific goals and objectives
through the structured engagement of educational researchers and practitioners,
regional scientists and scientific institutions, and state and federal
government agencies. The projects' four primary goals are: (1) infuse climate
change concepts in all aspects of education by engaging the scientific community
in collaboration with educators; (2) build sustainable infrastructure for
climate change education through teacher education and professional development;
(3) draw broader lessons about research and assessment to create climate
education models that can be applied in other regions based on the local socio-
cultural diversity; and (4) advance effective practice of climate change
education in the Maryland-Delaware region and beyond. MADE CLEAR is supporting
the development and distribution of teaching strategies, resources, and
materials that integrate climate change science with classroom and out-of-school
teaching and learning opportunities. The partnership is also promoting research
on climate-related teaching and learning formats, ultimately helping to craft
evidence-based educational approaches and instructional practices that deepen
teacher knowledge and student understanding of climate science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MADE CLEAR is connecting Maryland and Delaware citizens
with the world in which they live by fostering greater awareness of climate
change in the local environment. The partnership empowers residents to consider
the impacts of their individual and collective choices that can limit the
magnitude of climate change and adapt to its consequences. Through the four
overarching goals outlined above, MADE CLEAR is building an enduring capacity
for climate-relevant education in Maryland and Delaware, and serves as a
national model for comprehensive climate change education that is adaptable and
responsive to the socio-cultural diversity of different teaching settings. The
partnership is developing new models of professional development that account
for climate learning progressions, contributing to a greater understanding of
how evidence-based practices improve the efficacy of climate change teaching and
learning practices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is one of six Phase II
projects being funded through the Climate Change Education Partnership (CCEP)
program. The CCEP program was developed as part of the NSF Climate Change
Education program, established through Congressional appropriations in FY 2009.
The CCEP program is a one-time, dedicated NSF effort to establish a coordinated
national network of regionally- or thematically-based partnerships devoted to
increasing the adoption of effective, high quality educational programs and
resources related to the science of climate change and its impacts. The CCEP
portfolio encompasses a major interdisciplinary research and development effort
designed to promote deeper understanding of, and engagement with, climate system
science and the impacts of climate change on natural and human systems. The
vision of this program is a scientifically literate society that can effectively
weigh the evidence regarding global climate change as it confronts the
challenges ahead, while preparing the innovative scientific and technical
workforce to advance our knowledge of human-climate interactions and develop
approaches for a sustainable, prosperous future. Each CCEP is required to
incorporate innovative collaborations among expertise of climate scientists,
learning scientists, and education practitioners in either formal or informal
learning environments to research, design, and test new models and strategies
for effective teaching and learning about climate science. With its focus on
interdisciplinary approaches and transformative scales of impact, the CCEP
program occupies a unique and complementary niche in the portfolio of Federal
investments related to climate science education and workforce development.