* 1239770
* International Neutron Scattering Instrumentation School
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Roger Pynn, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 23,800.00

This award to Indiana University is from the Division of Biological
Infrastructure in Directorate of Biological Sciences, and the Chemistry Division
and the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate of Mathematical
Sciences. The award provides partial support to an International Neutron
Scattering Instrumentation Schools (INSIS. INSIS will provide a basic education
in the design and optimization of neutron scattering instrumentation as well as,
for a subset of the students, a more profound understanding of an essential
component of all neutron scattering instruments, the neutron detector. The
school will be held in Rome in July 2012 and is described on the following
website: http://neutrons.ornl.gov/conf/insis2012/. Lectures will be streamed on
the internet during the school and will be archived so that they are available
for individuals who are unable to attend the school. Neutron scattering is a
tool that allows researchers to conduct structural studies and provides unique
information in fields as diverse as biology, materials science, chemistry and
geology. For this reason, both the U.S. and Japan have recently completed the
construction of major neutron scattering facilities and Europe is beginning
construction of a facility which may be even more powerful. To make optimum use
of these facilities, advanced instrumentation is required. Unfortunately, the
number of individuals worldwide who are qualified to build such equipment is
severely limited. NSF funding will be used to support the travel and
accommodation of one U.S. Lecturer and up to 8 students at the school. The
students will either be following a graduate course currently or they will be
qualified young scientists at the beginning of their research careers. Special
attention will be paid to ensuring a diverse student body, including members of
groups which are currently under-represented in the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to Indiana University is from the
Division of Biological Infrastructure in Directorate of Biological Sciences, and
the Chemistry Division and the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate
of Mathematical Sciences. The award provides partial support to an International
Neutron Scattering Instrumentation Schools (INSIS. INSIS will provide a basic
education in the design and optimization of neutron scattering instrumentation
as well as, for a subset of the students, a more profound understanding of an
essential component of all neutron scattering instruments, the neutron detector.
The school will be held in Rome in July 2012 and is described on the following
website: http://neutrons.ornl.gov/conf/insis2012/. Lectures will be streamed on
the internet during the school and will be archived so that they are available
for individuals who are unable to attend the school. Neutron scattering is a
tool that allows researchers to conduct structural studies and provides unique
information in fields as diverse as biology, materials science, chemistry and
geology. For this reason, both the U.S. and Japan have recently completed the
construction of major neutron scattering facilities and Europe is beginning
construction of a facility which may be even more powerful. To make optimum use
of these facilities, advanced instrumentation is required. Unfortunately, the
number of individuals worldwide who are qualified to build such equipment is
severely limited. NSF funding will be used to support the travel and
accommodation of one U.S. Lecturer and up to 8 students at the school. The
students will either be following a graduate course currently or they will be
qualified young scientists at the beginning of their research careers. Special
attention will be paid to ensuring a diverse student body, including members of
groups which are currently under-represented in the scientific community.