* 1239478
* CPS: Synergy: Achieving High-Resolution Situational Awareness in Ultra-Wide-Area Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Yilu Liu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

Energy infrastructure is a critical underpinning of modern society. To ensure
its reliable operation, a nation-wide or continent-wide situational awareness
system is essential to provide high-resolution understanding of the system
dynamics such that proper actions can be taken in real-time in response to power
system disturbances and to avoid cascading blackouts. The power grid represents
a typical highly dynamic cyber-physical system (CPS). The ever-increasing
complexity and scale in sensing and actuation, compounded by the limited
knowledge of the accurate system state have resulted in major system failures,
such as the massive power blackout of August 2003 and the most recent
Arizona/California blackout of September 2011. Therefore, methods and tools for
monitoring and control of these and other such dynamic systems at high
resolution are vital to an emergent generation of tightly coupled, physically
distributed CPS. This project employs the power grid as a target application and
develops a high-resolution, ultra-wide-area situational awareness system that
synergistically integrates sensing, processing, and actuation. First, from the
sensing perspective, high resolution is reflected in both measurement accuracy
and potential for dense spatial coverage. Wide area, precise, synchronized, and
affordable sensing in voltage angle and frequency measurements for large-scale
observation is sorely needed to observe system disturbances and capture critical
changes in the power grid. The crucial innovation of this work is to make
accurate frequency measurement from low voltage distribution systems through the
wide deployment of Frequency Disturbance Recorders (FDRs). Second, from a data
processing perspective, high resolution is reflected in finer-scale data
analysis to reveal hidden information. In practical CPS, events seldom occur in
an isolated fashion; cascading events are more common and realistic. A new
conceptual framework is presented in the study of event analysis, referred to as
event unmixing, where real-world events are considered a mixture of more than
one constituent root event. This concept is a key enabler for the analysis of
events to go beyond what are immediately detectable in the system. The event
formation process is interpreted from a linear mixing perspective and innovative
sparsity-constrained unmixing algorithms are presented for multiple event
separation and spatial-temporal localization. Third, to discover the high-level
spatial-temporal correlation among root events in real time, a descriptive
language is developed to discover patterns on the spatial and temporal
information of root events. This descriptive language allows embedding pattern
descriptions on the desirable and undesirable interactions between events in the
system, which will then be compiled into distributed runtime constructs to be
executed in deployed systems. Fourth, from the actuation perspective, the system
pushes the intelligence toward the lower level of the power grid allowing local
devices to make decisions and to react quickly to contingencies based on the
high-resolution understanding of the system state, enabling a more direct
reconfiguration of the physical makeup of the grid. Finally, the methods and
tools are implemented and validated on an existing wide-area power grid
monitoring system, the North American frequency monitoring network
(FNET).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Escalating demands for electricity coupled with an
outdated power transmission grid pose a serious threat to the US economy. The
transformative nature of this research is to turn a large volume of real-time
data into actionable information and help prevent potential outages from
happening. The power grid is a typical example of dynamic cyber physical system.
Providing high-resolution situational awareness for the power grid has a direct
and immediate impact on this and other CPS. The research is coupled with a
strong educational component including active recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups supported by existing programs and broad dissemination
of research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;