* 1239919
* Claremont Colleges Collaborative for Mathematics and Science Education:  Phase II Noyce Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Darryl Yong, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 798,750.00

In this Phase II project the PI team is recruiting forty new Noyce Scholars into
its current program. As with its Phase I effort, this follow-on program is
drawing from the pool of recent STEM graduates. Successful Scholars earn both a
teaching credential and an MA in Education or Mathematics. To meet its
recruitment goals the project is expanding its recruiting base throughout the
Claremont Colleges by increasing STEM faculty participation in the Claremont
College Collaborative for Mathematics and Science Education (C3MSE) and
increasing fellowship support. A partnership with Texas Southern University has
been established to help recruit African-American students to the program. This
would complement the already strong record the project has demonstrated in
attracting Latino students to the program. Programmatically, the Phase II effort
is introducing a Lesson Study professional development component for the Noyce
Scholars. At the same time revisions to the existing teacher education
curriculum are also bringing in Lesson Study practices and new strategies to
strengthen the development of pedagogical content knowledge. The project retains
its interest in producing new teachers for both middle and secondary schools in
mathematics, biology, chemistry, and physics. Finally, the investigating team is
conducting a longitudinal study to examine the following questions regarding the
earlier Phase I and new Phase II cohorts: 1) What factors contribute to
attracting high quality STEM graduates into teaching? 2) What factors contribute
to retaining high quality STEM graduates in teaching? and 3) What factors
contribute to the teaching success of fellows, as measured through career
success and supervisor evaluation? Institutions collaborating with Claremont
Graduate University are the five Claremont Colleges: Harvey Mudd College,
Claremont McKenna College, Pitzer College, Scripps College, and Pomona College.