* 1239797
* CCEP II- Making Global Climate Science Local: Implementing an Effective Model to Educate Key Influentials and Community Leaders
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2019
* Michel Boudrias, University of San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,952,346.00

This Phase II Climate Change Education Partnership project is developing a new
model for educating Key Influentials (high profile, decision-makers and leaders)
and the general public in the San Diego, California region about climate
science. The project builds on a Phase I strategic planning effort to
empirically assess the depth and gaps of knowledge about climate science in the
San Diego general public and among Key Influentials (KI). These findings have
informed the 5-year implementation plan for Phase II and have provided the
evidence basis for the development of a multidisciplinary climate literacy model
for regional KI community leaders. A robust suite of integrated activities is
being implemented that will (1) develop climate science education resources
applicable to adult audiences in informal settings, (2) educate Key Influentials
and their communities using these resources, (3) assess the effectiveness of
these resources and the application of innovative educational methods for
learning, and (4) facilitate replication of the process for use in other
regions. In particular, Phase II activities are investigating three different
educational roles for KIs: (1) Key Influentials being served as the target
audience of climate science education; (2) Key Influentials being trained as
knowledgeable messengers to deliver locally-relevant information about climate
science and potential impacts to other KIs and their communities; and, (3) Key
Influentials serving as the educational portal to their constituents and
stakeholders. Each set of activities reflects relevant learning science theory
and contemporary methods of dissemination to effectively communicate regional
climate observations, models and impacts. Both the process of working with KIs
and the whole suite of activities form the core of a replicable model that can
be exported to other regions across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is expected to significantly advance our knowledge and understanding of
how to educate community leaders and non-K-16 community members about locally
relevant, cutting-edge climate science. The suite of educational activities will
have broad impacts by working with Key Influentials as the intended audience of
activities, as educators themselves, and as portals to much larger audiences,
including Native American tribes in San Diego County, regional planners, elected
officials, and the local utility. Climate scientists, environmental educators
and energy analysts are working together with learning scientists and
communications specialists to develop educational resources for use in non-
traditional venues, such as small and medium sized forums, climate tours,
personal homes, and through social media. Learning science specialists are using
rigorous research designs to assess the impacts of the educational activities
and test hypothesized relationships between education and a variety of latent
and observable outcomes. The results are expected to provide implementation
guidelines and assessment tools that can be disseminated to other communities
seeking to replicate this approach by the end of the 5th year. This is a
catalytic project that will significantly increase scientific, technological and
educational understanding and provide relevant science knowledge and evidence-
based approaches for responding to climate change, thereby contributing to
informed decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is one of six Phase
II projects being funded through the Climate Change Education Partnership (CCEP)
program. The CCEP program was developed as part of the NSF Climate Change
Education program, established through Congressional appropriations in FY 2009.
The CCEP program is a one-time, dedicated NSF effort to establish a coordinated
national network of regionally- or thematically-based partnerships devoted to
increasing the adoption of effective, high quality educational programs and
resources related to the science of climate change and its impacts. The CCEP
portfolio encompasses a major interdisciplinary research and development effort
designed to promote deeper understanding of, and engagement with, climate system
science and the impacts of climate change on natural and human systems. The
vision of this program is a scientifically literate society that can effectively
weigh the evidence regarding global climate change as it confronts the
challenges ahead, while preparing the innovative scientific and technical
workforce to advance our knowledge of human-climate interactions and develop
approaches for a sustainable, prosperous future. Each CCEP is required to
incorporate innovative collaborations among expertise of climate scientists,
learning scientists, and education practitioners in either formal or informal
learning environments to research, design, and test new models and strategies
for effective teaching and learning about climate science. With its focus on
interdisciplinary approaches and transformative scales of impact, the CCEP
program occupies a unique and complementary niche in the portfolio of Federal
investments related to climate science education and workforce development.