* 1239374
* Metabolic Engineering IX Conference, June 3-7, 2012, Biarritz, France
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Gregg Whited, Engineering Conferences International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funds from the National Science
Foundation to support the conference "Metabolic Engineering IX: Metabolic
Engineering and Synthetic Biology" to be held from June 3-7, 2012 in Biarritz,
France. The Metabolic Engineering conference serves as the premier meeting for
the metabolic engineering community. The 9th Metabolic Engineering conference
will continue to be a leading conference for sharing the state-of-the-art
developments and achievements made in the field over the last two years. The
field of Metabolic Engineering has driven the interface between engineering and
biological sciences the integration of synthetic biology into metabolic
engineering has made huge impact. This growth has helped enable a new field of
commercial opportunity in established and new start up industries to
commercialize green technologies born out of this cross fertilization of
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;1239374/ Whited&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Metabolic
Engineering Conference is one of the first among several conference series
related to biotechnology sponsored by Engineering Conferences International
(formerly United Engineering Foundation Conferences program) and started 20
years ago with the original title "recombinant DNA technology". It was the first
conference with the explicit focus on the application of recombinant DNA
technology to the engineering of microorganisms for industrial processes. The
other conferences in related areas sponsored by ECI have focused on biocatalysis
and bioprocess (Enzyme Engineering, Biochemical Engineering, Cell Culture
Engineering). These conferences have been instrumental in addressing issues
contemporary to technological advancements, engineering research and to
education of up and coming players, both in academia and industry. The format is
designed to maximize interactions and to stimulate discussion among attendees.
Because of the reputation of past conferences, scientists and engineers from
industry and academia from many countries oversubscribe the conference. The last
meeting in 2010, the first Metabolic Engineering meeting hosted in Asia, showed
a marked upswing in interest in the academic community with almost 75% attending
from non industrial institutions with a total attendance of 274 attendees from
23 countries. This proposal is seeking financial support to continue this
quality of excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolic Engineering IX will have
sessions in the fields of systems biology, synthetic biology, biochemical
engineering, tools and methods, and emerging techniques, healthcare, biofuel,
biorefinery, environmental biotechnology, microbial system, mammalian system,
plant system, and other disciplines and applications. Many of these disciplines
have seen rapid growth in technology in the recent years and the focus of this
conference is to integrate the recent achievements to realize the potential
synergy that this interdisciplinary conference
stimulates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this
international conference is to bring together influential established
researchers, young investigators, industrial researchers and practitioners, and
graduate students to assess the contributions and future opportunities of
metabolic engineering in the global areas of health and sustainability. In
addition to plenary presentations, oral sessions, and poster sessions, ME IX
will also employ workshops/tutorials that will aim to identify the needs of
industry and how metabolic engineering research can better address these needs.
Attendance by graduate students and industrial researchers is highly encouraged.
Special consideration will be given to underrepresented groups. In the absence
of this support, fewer US academic scientists and graduate students may attend
and benefit from interactions with the international community of biotechnology
researchers.