* 1239009
* Framework Program for US-China Collaboration in Scientific Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Donald Riley, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2016
* USD 461,464.00

This three-year, multi-path collaboration program between U.S. and Chinese
researchers, scientists, educators, and leaders in higher education focuses on
key issues regarding network deployment, global cyberinfrastructure, and
interoperability. The project builds on engagement between Internet2, CERNET,
CTSNET, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences, ongoing collaborations and remote
campus deployments between US universities and China, scientific interaction
between the two countries, and findings derived from prior annual meetings of
the Chinese-American Network Symposium (CANS) group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this work is based on the international exchange of ideas
it will foster. By bringing together network experts and leading researchers,
and by building on the momentum established by campuses and the continuum of
CANS events, these activities lead to sustainable and ongoing linkages and
interactions to foster global cyberinfrastructure. As research and education
increasingly acquire more globalparameters, interactions like this are critical.
The broader impact results from the global interactions and ongoing
collaborations to be translated to multiple scientific disciplines and the
continued deployment of US satellite campuses to promote&lt;br/&gt;global
exchange of educational findings and methodology.