* 1239092
* Workshop: A roadmap for developing and implementing minimum nonomaterial characterization reporting requirements within regulatory ..., Summer/Fall 2012, Research Triangle Park, NC
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Andrew Maynard, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 05/31/2013
* USD 29,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1239092&lt;br/&gt;Maynard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
is to provide participant travel support for a workshop to initiate the
development and implementation of minimum nanomaterial characterization
reporting requirements within regulatory and development communities. The
workshop is part of a project (NanoCharacter)developed and led by the Center for
Risk Science Innovation and Application (RSIA) at the&lt;br/&gt;International
Life sciences Institute (ILSI) Research Foundation. Despite increasing research
on the environmental and health impacts of engineered nanomaterials, progress in
ensuring the safety of emerging materials and products remains limited by
poor&lt;br/&gt;material characterization in published studies and minimal
adoption of characterization standards and guidelines within the research
community. The NanoCharacter project is developing a framework and roadmap
detailing what needs to be done to improve the quality and utility of
nanomaterial impact research through encouraging the adoption of
characterization consistency within particular&lt;br/&gt;study domains; building
consensus on the roadmap internationally, across stovepipes, and across
stakeholders, and establishing a multi-stakeholder panel to monitor and report
out the implementation of the roadmap and to adapt the roadmap as necessary to
facilitate adoption of consistent characterization and
reporting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned workshop will be held between August
and October 2012 at the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences in
Research Triangle Park, NC (the precise dates are dependent on facility and
participant availability). It will provide the NanoCharacter project?s Steering
Committee and Expert Panel with a forum to engage with leaders from academia,
government and regulatory agencies, standard setting bodies and editors of the
key publishing houses in order to solicit and consider input from those who are
most likely to affect the successful implementation of any such
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outputs of the workshop will include a framework
and roadmap for developing and implementing minimum nanomaterial
characterization reporting requirements. This will be a standalone document for
publication and will be developed by project teams over the subsequent
months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity:
Rigorous, reproducible research into nanomaterial-
biological&lt;br/&gt;interactions is critically dependent on relevant and
consistent materials physicochemical characterization. Likewise, the value of a
growing body of research in this area depends on accepted characterization
approaches and procedures. The proposed activity will strengthen significantly
the quality and value of research undertaken in this
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity: Sustainable and responsible commercialization of products that utilize
engineered nanomaterials depends on sound risk evaluation. This activity will
further strengthen the basis for such evaluations, nationally and
internationally.