* 1239156
* Europtrode XI Conference, Barcelona, Spain, April 1-4, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Tuan Vo-Dinh, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 09/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Tuan Vo-Dinh&lt;br/&gt;1239156&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the
organization of the conference EUROPT(R)ODE XI, which is part of&lt;br/&gt;the
Europt(r)ode Conference series, which encompasses all aspects related to the
research,&lt;br/&gt;development and applications of optical chemical sensors and
biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The EUROPT(R)ODE XI
Conference, to be held in Barcelona, Spain, April 1-4, 2012,
will&lt;br/&gt;discuss the latest advances in this competitive and evolving
field of optical sensors. The&lt;br/&gt;Conference is the premier worldwide
forum for the presentation of innovations in optical&lt;br/&gt;sensing, showing
both cutting-edge integration concepts and key emerging trends in a
highly&lt;br/&gt;multi-disciplinary atmosphere. This biannual Conference
presents an exceptional opportunity,&lt;br/&gt;of interest to both academic and
industrial researchers, to discuss and exchange the
latest&lt;br/&gt;developments in this extremely challenging field. There is no
other Conference specifically&lt;br/&gt;devoted to optical (bio)sensing, thus
making this meeting unique at the international level.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The Europt(r)ode conference series has become a major
scientific meeting on optical chemical&lt;br/&gt;sensors and biosensors
attracting scientists and educators from across the globe. Because of
the&lt;br/&gt;multidisciplinary nature of the field, Europt(r)ode has always
brought together a diverse&lt;br/&gt;audience including scientists and engineers
in physics, chemistry and biology all over the world.&lt;br/&gt;Their engaging
discussions have stimulated interdisciplinary and international
collaborations&lt;br/&gt;and helped shape scientific and academic institutions
from which several generations of PhD&lt;br/&gt;students have graduated. The
Conference has also fostered increasing collaborations
between&lt;br/&gt;academia and industry and stimulated countless new commercial
spin-offs in the field.&lt;br/&gt;Companies participate regularly not only at
the level of exhibitors but though invited and oral or&lt;br/&gt;poster
presentations. The Conference in 2012 will have, as a main novelty, an
exclusive&lt;br/&gt;Industrial Session by invitation, where the main industrial
players in the field will highlight&lt;br/&gt;scientific innovations and
technological transfer in the optical sensing field.