* 1239222
* CPS: Synergy: Resilient Wireless Sensor-Actuator Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Hai Lin, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

Wireless sensor-actuator networks (WSAN) are systems consisting of numerous
sensing and actuation devices that interact with the environment and coordinate
their activities over a wireless communication network. This project studies
"resilience" in WSANs. A resilient system is one that maintains an active
awareness of surrounding threats and reacts to those threats in a manner that
returns the system to operational normalcy in finite time. This project's
approach to resilient WSANs rests on two fundamental trends. One trend uses
machine-to-machine (M2M) communication networks that promise wireless networking
with greater peak bit-rates and reliability than previously possible. The other
trend comes from recent ideas that use quantization and event-triggered feedback
in a unified manner to reduce bit rates required by real-time control systems.
This project will evaluate and demonstrate this integrated control/communication
approach to resilience on a multi-robotic testbed consisting of unmanned ground
vehicles. The testbed will integrate M2M communication hardware/software with a
multi-robot control architecture addressing task coordination and platform
stabilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project broadens its impact through
organizations and programs on and around the Notre Dame campus that facilitate
industrial engagement and technology transfer. The project will engage
undergraduate and graduate students to support the project's testbed and
algorithm development. The project will augment and re-organize Notre Dame's
Cyber-Physical System (CPS) curriculum by integrating the results of this
project into courses.