* 1239081
* 2012 Granular and Granular-Fluid Flow GRC to be held July 22 - 27, 2012 at Davidson College in Davidson, NC
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,709.00

NSF funds will be used to support the registration and travel costs for junior
and early career scientists and engineers at the 2012 Gordon Research Conference
on Granular and Granular-Fluid Flows. We will also use these funds to support
participation by members of underrepresented groups. Such support will fill a
crucial, national need to continue to train the future work force in the science
of particle technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular flows are prevalent in a
range of natural and industrial systems, and research in the field is conducted
within multiple scientific and engineering, each of which has its own goals and
techniques. This year's conference will have sessions on Geophysics, Wet
Granular Materials, Charged Granular Materials, Granular Gases, Continuum Models
of Granular Flow, Vibration &amp; Acoustics, Sheared Granular Materials, and
Friction &amp; Drag. Speakers were selected to highlight connections to
geophysics and geotechnical granular materials by inviting speakers with
interests spanning from oil recovery to environmental dynamics to civil
engineering to earthquakes. In selecting invited speakers, we have taken care to
include members of under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC
provides a unique forum for the exchange of fresh scientific ideas between
disciplines, as well as between junior and senior researchers. The guiding
principles of the conference include the presentation of new, unpublished work
followed by free, unhampered discussion among participants from disciplines that
normally do not intersect. The structure GRC accomplishes this by providing
formal discussion periods after every talk (guided by a discussion leader), time
for small-group discussions, daily poster sessions, and shared meals with on-
site housing. Each discussion leader will prepare a short presentation to
provide context and provoke good discussions. This format provides an
environment in which new collaborations can be forged to help tackle
longstanding problems.