* 1239366
* CPS: Synergy: A Cyber Physical Framework for Remedial Action Schemes in Large Power Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Kevin Tomsovic, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 750,000.00

This project develops an integrated framework of communications, computation and
control for understanding wide-area power system performance in the face of
unpredictable disturbances. The power system is chosen as a particularly
challenging cyber physical system (CPS) due to its extreme dimension, geographic
reach and high reliability requirements. The following tasks are studied in the
proposed research: (a) a Partial Difference Equation (PdE) framework to model
the impact of network topology on the power system stability; (b) the design of
a communication network for CPS, based on the PdE modeling;(c) the design of a
control system, which addresses the challenges such as fast response and
resource constraints; (d) the design of a computing infrastructure, which
addresses the computation for controlling the power network, in particular, the
communication complexity for controlling the power network in both cases of one-
snapshot computation and iterative computations; and (e) the test and evaluation
for both small scale system models of several hundred buses and very large
system models of ~50,000 buses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work contributes to
the broader understanding of CPS with high reliability requirements,
particularly, critical infrastructures such as the power grid. Modern
infrastructures are complex systems of communications and computation tied to
the controls of the physical system. The proposed research contributes to
improved reliability by addressing the propagation of disturbances and advancing
the understanding of geographically distributed CPS. The PIs plan to open
multiple courses on CPS related to the proposed research.