* 1239114
* Environmental Engineering Chairs and Directors Conference: Preparing the Future Stewards of our Planet, July 29-31,2012, Columbus, OH
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Joel Burken, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

CBET-1239114 Burken

Funds are requested to create an Environmental Engineering Chairs and Directors
Conference. This conference and continuing effort will focus at establishing a
continuing communications platform to address the needs of educating and
training those entering the environmental engineering profession. Coordinating
efforts through AEESP and AAEE, we strive to pull together the current
environmental engineering department chairs and program directors from across
the country for a two-day conference that will serve as the seminal event in
coordinating a concerted national effort to improve and aid these programs is
identifying areas of continued need and assist in the challenges of growing new
programs in times of difficult university funding. This conference is organized
jointly by Association of Environmental Engineering and Science Professors and
the American Academy of Environmental Engineers. The proposed conference will
have broad and profound impacts on the field of environmental engineering, and
specifically the educational process that trains the fastest growing and most
diverse field of engineering. The environmental challenges that face our nation
and planet are of a grand scale, and the training of engineers to handle a field
with such extensive impact on human health and prosperity is of great need. This
training and education will also translate into a better understanding in the
field of environmental engineering of the linkages to public health and societal
well being.