* 1239733
* CCEP - II: Pacific Islands Climate Change Education Partnership
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Charles Fletcher, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Cooperative Agreement
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,852,000.00

The Pacific islands Climate Education Partnership (PCEP) is a collaborative
network of Pacific Island communities and organizations responding to the
impacts of climate change and committed to enhancing climate education in the
Pacific Island region. The core team includes PREL, WestEd, the University of
Hawai'i, the College of the Marshall Islands, entity-based Curriculum and
Instruction Chiefs, and other researchers. About 40 other organizations,
including all U.S. Affiliated Pacific Islands (USAPI) school systems and
institutions of higher education, as well as governmental agencies and a broad
range of non-profit groups and local communities, comprise the cadre of
supporting partners. The PCEP strategic plan is founded on a K-14 Climate
Education Framework (CEF) that is based on the Next Generation Science Standards
and Pacific Island Indigenous knowledge and practices. The CEF guides the PCEP
work throughout the USAPI in professional development, curriculum
contextualization and dissemination, and assistance to community-school
partnerships. The regional implementation and dissemination strategies are
informed by deep understanding of the differences and similarities among the
region's islands, cultures, and governments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PCEP
vision is to empower the region's students and citizens through education that
exemplifies modern science and indigenous environmental knowledge, addresses the
urgency of climate change impacts, and honors indigenous cultures so that
students and citizens within the region will have the knowledge and skills to
improve understandings of climate change and adapt to its impacts. A strategy of
connecting community adaptation and K-14 education to advance climate science
education is particularly appropriate for this highly vulnerable and currently
impacted region. This aspect of the PCEP work can serve as a beacon for climate
education strategies that may become equally appropriate and desired if
projected increases in climate change occur in other regions of the USA and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is one of six Phase II
projects being funded through the Climate Change Education Partnership (CCEP)
program. The CCEP program was developed as part of the NSF Climate Change
Education program, established through Congressional appropriations in FY 2009.
The CCEP program is a one-time, dedicated NSF effort to establish a coordinated
national network of regionally- or thematically-based partnerships devoted to
increasing the adoption of effective, high quality educational programs and
resources related to the science of climate change and its impacts. The CCEP
portfolio encompasses a major interdisciplinary research and development effort
designed to promote deeper understanding of, and engagement with, climate system
science and the impacts of climate change on natural and human systems. The
vision of this program is a scientifically literate society that can effectively
weigh the evidence regarding global climate change as it confronts the
challenges ahead, while preparing the innovative scientific and technical
workforce to advance our knowledge of human-climate interactions and develop
approaches for a sustainable, prosperous future. Each CCEP is required to
incorporate innovative collaborations among expertise of climate scientists,
learning scientists, and education practitioners in either formal or informal
learning environments to research, design, and test new models and strategies
for effective teaching and learning about climate science. With its focus on
interdisciplinary approaches and transformative scales of impact, the CCEP
program occupies a unique and complementary niche in the portfolio of Federal
investments related to climate science education and workforce development.