* 1239105
* Collaborative Research: Echogenic Lipid Nanoparticle for Concurrent Untrasound Imaging and Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Kausik Sarkar, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2015
* USD 259,743.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1005011 PI: Mallik, Sanku ORG: North Dakota State
University&lt;br/&gt;ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1005238 PI: Sarkar, Kausik ORG:
University of Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research:
Echogenic Lipid Nanoparticles for Concurrent Ultrasound Imaging and Drug
Delivery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goal of this proposal is
to develop and investigate echogenic liposomes that will be recognized by and
attach to a specific enzyme. The attached liposomes will act as contrast agents
for ultrasound assay of the extent of expression of the enzyme. The enzyme will
destabilize the liposome releasing encapsulated drugs as well as inhibitors for
the enzyme, and the release of inhibitors will self-regulate the drug release.
The investigation is directed towards optimizing ultrasound contrast and drug
release. Specifically, the objectives of this proposal are to: (1) synthesize
lipid-peptide conjugates containing the cleavage site for gelatinase enzymes
that are over expressed in atherosclerotic plaque, (2) prepare echogenic
liposomes incorporating the synthesized lipopeptides and investigate the release
of liposome-encapsulated contents by gelatinases, (3) investigate stability and
contrast enhancing properties of echogenic liposomes, and (4) investigate the
release of liposome-encapsulated inhibitors by gelatinases in the absence and
presence of ultrasonic pulses and the resultant inhibition of the
enzyme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed methodology, when
fully developed, will find applications in the areas of diagnostics and targeted
drug delivery. The area of the enzyme-triggered content release from liposomes
has enormous potential to grow in the near future. The research will initiate a
multi-university cross-disciplinary initiative where students will be trained in
an environment where chemistry, biology and engineering will be brought together
to solve an important problem. Both PIs are dedicated to teaching and training
the next generation of scientists and engineers. The project will involve
training undergraduate and graduate students in a cross-disciplinary
environment. The proposed research will involve two Native American
undergraduate students in the Mallik lab at North Dakota State. Sarkar has
established a link with a collaborator in Morgan State University (an HBCU) to
identify talented undergraduate research interns and to groom them for graduate
study at the University of Delaware.