* 1239827
* Cal Poly Noyce Scholars Program, Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Elsa Medina, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 798,097.00

In this Phase II project the PI team and partners at several local school
districts: Lucia Mar Unified School District (LMUSD), Santa Maria Bonita School
District (SMBSD), and Santa Maria Joint Union High School District (SMJUHSD) are
working together to attract high quality Cal Poly mathematics majors into
teaching careers and preparing them to be credentialed teachers, committed to
teaching in high-needs school districts. The project is providing nine
mathematics majors with two-year scholarships to support the final year of their
undergraduate studies and their subsequent participation in a one-year
credential program. In addition twelve students from the larger group of STEM
majors are receiving scholarships to support their participation in the one-year
credential program. Scholars from Cal Poly and other Noyce scholarship projects
in California also have the opportunity for continued professional development
through the Cal Poly summer Noyce scholars workshops. The intellectual merit of
this project rests in its focus on the recruitment of exceptional students into
a quality teacher preparation program that complements an expanded high-quality
professional development experience during the summers for the Noyce scholars.
Cal Poly Noyce Scholars are mentored by university faculty and local teachers
who challenge them to excel in the classroom and provide them the opportunity to
consider relevant educational issues, as part of their formal training to
receive a secondary teaching credential. This support continues through
attendance at summer workshops as they begin careers as mathematics teachers in
high-needs school districts. The broader impact of this project is felt first in
its preparation and retention of well-prepared secondary mathematics teachers
for high-need school districts. Moreover, the interplay of academic year
preparation and summer professional development with cohorts of teachers from
the region acts to create a network of Noyce scholars who can encourage their
own students to pursue degrees in a STEM discipline.