* 1239274
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research:  Coordinated Resource Management of Cyber-Physical-Social Power Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Pramod Khargonekar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2017
* USD 280,430.00

Large-scale critical infrastructure systems, including energy and transportation
networks, comprise millions of individual elements (human, software and
hardware) whose actions may be inconsequential in isolation but profoundly
important in aggregate. The focus of this project is on the coordination of
these elements via ubiquitous sensing, communications, computation, and control,
with an emphasis on the electric grid. The project integrates ideas from
economics and behavioral science into frameworks grounded in control theory and
power systems. Our central construct is that of a ?resource cluster,? a
collection of distributed resources (ex: solar PV, storage, deferrable loads)
that can be coordinated to efficiently and reliably offer services (ex: power
delivery) in the face of uncertainty (ex: PV output, consumer behavior). Three
topic areas form the core of the project: (a) the theoretical foundations for
the ?cluster manager? concept and complementary tools to characterize the
capabilities of a resource cluster; (b) centralized resource coordination
strategies that span multiple time scales via innovations in stochastic optimal
control theory; and (c) decentralized coordination strategies based on cluster
manager incentives and built upon foundations of non-cooperative dynamic game
theory.

These innovations will improve the operation of infrastructure systems via a
cyber-physical-social approach to the problem of resource allocation in complex
infrastructures. By transforming the role of humans from passive resource
recipients to active participants in the electric power system, the project will
facilitate energy security for the nation, and climate change mitigation. The
project will also engage K-12 students through lab-visits and lectures; address
the undergraduate demand for power systems training through curricular
innovations at the intersection of cyber-systems engineering and physical power
systems; and equip graduate students with the multi-disciplinary training in
power systems, communications, control, optimization and economics to become
leaders in innovation.