* 1239285
* An Accomplishment-Based Request for Renewal of the Susquehanna-Shale Hills Critical Zone Observatory (SSHO)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Christopher Duffy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,173,108.00

An Accomplishment-Based Request for Renewal of the Susquehanna - Shale Hills
Critical Zone Observatory (SSHO)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the NSF
Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) program, CZO workers led by PI Susan Brantley
and coInvestigator Chris Duffy (Pennsylvania State University) will focus on
cross-disciplinary synthesis, data sharing, and outreach at the Susquehanna
Shale Hills CZO. Established originally in the 1970s as a site to study water
flow in forested catchments, the 8-hectare Shale Hills watershed was expanded in
2007 as a CZO to understand broader questions targeting the interplay of water,
energy, atmospheric gases, biota, soils, and the land surface. In addition to
the small Shale Hills catchment, the CZO includes a suite of satellite sites
that overly the same bedrock type (shale) but which are situated in different
climate regimes. One additional satellite site is located on organic-rich
Marcellus shale. These satellites allow researchers to understand how climate
and organic content control water flow and soil formation while working with
minority-and undergrad-serving institutions. CZO researchers are investigating
i) new methodologies to model the age and chemistry of water as it moves from
the atmosphere to groundwater; ii) new techniques to synthesize measurements of
soil moisture for incorporation into land-atmosphere models; iii) observations
that constrain water, energy, and solute fluxes related to trees; iv) models
that quantify how soil grows on shale; v) new uses of isotopes to measure soil
formation; and vi) observations concerning how variables describing
characteristics at depth such as the fracture distribution in bedrock combine
with features at Earth's surface such as the sunniness of hillslopes to control
the evolution of soils and hillslopes over time. Datasets of isotopes,
chemistry, soil moisture, CO2 and energy flux, LiDAR, sapflux, and other
observables collected at high spatial and temporal resolution are published
online. Outreach activities include community education about natural gas
development on shale and K-12 educational opportunities.