* 1239396
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: A Cyber Physical System for Proactive Traffic Management to Enhance Mobility and Sustainability
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Pitu Mirchandani, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 836,000.00

This project demonstrates the synergistic use of a cyber-physical infrastructure
consisting of smart-phone devices; cloud computing, wireless communication, and
intelligent transportation systems to manage vehicles in the complex urban
network -- through the use of traffic controls, route advisories and road
pricing -- to jointly optimize drivers' mobility and the sustainability goals of
reducing energy usage and improving air quality. The system developed, MIDAS-
CPS, proactively manages the interacting traffic demand and the available
transportation supply. A key element of MIDAS-CPS is the data collection and
display device PICT that collects each participating driver's vehicle position,
forward images from the vehicle's dashboard, and communication time stamps, and
then displays visualizations of predicted queues ahead, relevant road prices,
and route advisories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the increasing congestion in
most of the urban areas, and the rising costs of constructing traffic control
facilities and implementing highway hardware, MIDAS-CPS could revolutionize the
way traffic is managed on the urban network since all computing is done via
clouds and the drivers instantly get in-vehicle advisories with graphical
visualizations of predicted conditions. It is anticipated this would lead to
improved road safety and lesser drive stress, besides the designed benefits on
the environment, energy consumption, congestion mitigation, and driver mobility.
This multidisciplinary project is at the cutting edge in several areas: real-
time image processing, real-time traffic prediction and supply/demand
management, and cloud computing. Its educational impacts include enhancements of
curricula and laboratory experiences at participating universities, workforce
development, and student diversity.