* 1239171
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Methodologies for Engineering with Plug-and-Learn Components: Formal Synthesis and Analysis Across Abstraction Layers
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Eric Matson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Effective engineering of complex devices often depends critically on the ability
to encapsulate responsibility for tasks into modular agents and ensure those
agents communicate with one another in well-defined and easily observable ways.
When such conditions are followed, it becomes possible to detect where problems
lie so they can be corrected. It also becomes possible to optimize the agents
and their communications to improve performance. Cyber-physical systems (like
robots, self-piloting aircraft, etc.) modify themselves to improve performance
break those conditions in that some agent modules negotiate their own
communications and decide their own actions, sometimes taking advantage of the
physics of the world in ways we did not anticipate. This renders difficult
application of standard engineering tools to accomplish critical fault diagnosis
and design optimization. This project will produce analysis methods address the
specific needs of cyber-physical systems that, by their natures, break the rules
of convention. We will apply these new methods to the design and analysis of
self-improving controllers for flapping-wing micro air vehicles.

This work will provide advances in both model-checking related formal design
methodologies and in module-based self-adaptive control in computationally
resource constrained cyber-physical systems. The formal methods advances will
significantly expand our ability to properly design and verify systems that
tightly couple computation, sensors, and actuators. The specific test
application addressed is significant to a number of nationally important
security and defense efforts and will directly impact identified national
priorities.