* 1239095
* Collaborative Research: Longitudinal Diagnostic Models
* SBE,SES
* 10/20/2011,08/31/2012
* Robert Henson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2012
* USD 18,401.00

Diagnostic modeling, also known as cognitive diagnosis, is a field of
psychometrics that has seen increased research activity in recent years due to
the potential for diagnosing the mental states of individuals, such as in the
social sciences (e.g., criteria indicating psychological disorders) or in
education (e.g., the skills examinees may possess). To date, such models have
been developed and expanded for use in a broad spectrum of research areas and
have been shown to be effective at classifying individuals on a set of
categorical latent variables. Although the development of diagnostic models has
focused on more comprehensive and flexible measurement models for data collected
at a single occasion, there have been no systematic efforts to extend these
models into the measurement of individual change. Simply put, the researcher who
wishes to study changes in diagnostic status over time currently cannot do so.
This research project will focus on the development, evaluation, and utilization
of longitudinal extensions of diagnostic models for the measurement of change
over time. In developing longitudinal diagnostic models, advances must be made
that balance the model demands of potentially large numbers of parameters with
practical and accurate approximations. The investigators will develop practical
and feasible longitudinal methods for diagnostic measurement, modeling, and
assessment, and they will examine their accuracy, sensitivity, and comparative
efficiency. The investigators also will examine the practical considerations and
statistical issues in applying these methods in real-world longitudinal
diagnostic analyses. Freely available software will be provided for researchers
and practitioners to utilize these methods in their own studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the practicality of diagnostic
models and add to the number of research and real-world scenarios where such
models can be used. The models and software developed from this project will
fill an existing void that has limited the study of diagnostic phenomena over
time. Furthermore, guidelines about the structure of data needed for each model
(i.e., sample size or number of measurement occasions) will allow for
application of such models across a wide spectrum of empirical research areas
studying how behavioral phenomena change over time. The methods developed from
this project will enable a more rigorous examination of how mental states change
over time. The results of this research have the potential to greatly advance
basic understanding of how people develop and change with respect to diagnostic
attributes and clinical criteria.