* 1239963
* The 2012 Machine Learning Summer School at UC Santa Cruz
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Manfred Warmuth, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2013
* USD 30,000.00

The Machine Learning Summer Schools (http://mlss.cc) were established in 2002
with the aim of bringing together world class speakers from academia, the
national labs, and industry to deliver tutorial-style lectures over a two week
period. This project supports the two week long Machine Learning Summer School
(MLSS) at UC Santa Cruz, CA during July 9-20 2012.

Intellectual Merits: Machine learning has many important applications in science
and industry. Modern machine learning uses a mix of insights from different
disciplines, most notably artificial intelligence, statistics and optimization -
areas that traditionally have not had much overlap. The participants will take
part in tutorials given by experts from several different areas of machine
learning - an opportunity that many students do not have at their home
institutions. There is substantial integration of research and education in this
activity. Furthermore, the participants will be able to interact with the
tutorial speakers and with other students.

Broader Impact: The Machine Learning Summer School is designed to enable
participants with different backgrounds to gain in-depth knowledge of the
current state of the art in machine learning. The participants will interact
with leading machine learning experts from academia and industry. It contributes
to the creation of a diverse cadre of machine learning researchers and
practitioners by offering unique training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students from under-represented groups through personalized mentoring
and scholarships.