* 1239945
* Barnard Robert Noyce Teacher Scholars Progam
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2021
* David Bayer, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,199,998.00

The Barnard College Robert Noyce Teacher Education Scholars Program (BNTSP) is a
partnership engaging the following New York City high-needs schools: Bronx
School of Law and Finance, Central Park East Secondary School, James Baldwin
High School, and the Emily Dickinson Elementary School (PS 75). The project
recruits, certifies, and mentors 16 high-achieving undergraduate mathematics and
science majors to become K-12 teachers. As a college for women, the BNTSP works
to increase the number of women who teach and serve as role models and mentors
for girls in STEM fields. The BNTSP serves as a model for recruitment,
preparation, induction, and retention of high-quality science and mathematics
teachers for high-need schools, including the design, implementation, and
evaluation of a collaborative, web-based, STEM teacher learning environment,
which provides scholars with peer, faculty, and mentor support during student
teaching and their first two years of
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internships, scholarships, and a funded ninth
semester option ensure that teacher candidates in mathematics and science can
complete requirements for their STEM major and initial New York State
certification in elementary or secondary education. BNTSP's STEM Colloquia,
which bring STEM experts to the campus for a series of talks or workshops
focused on STEM educational issues, are open to the school partners, the
university, and the public, ensuring broad participation in the presentation,
dissemination, and discussion of K-12 STEM education issues. The associated STEM
Discussion course, which enrolls Barnard and Columbia undergraduates, provides
students with interest in STEM education a venue to explore those interests in
greater depth with other students who share their interests. By hosting BNTSP's
STEM Field Explorations, faculty members have the opportunity to share their
science and mathematics expertise with teachers from partner schools, members of
Barnard's New Teacher Network, and potential Barnard Noyce scholars. STEM Field
Explorations contribute to building teachers' expertise by modeling use of the
unique resources of New York City to teach science and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholarly publications emanating from the BNTSP focus on
the impact of the project on teacher's self-efficacy in terms of their beliefs
about their: a) knowledge of science content; b) knowledge of science teaching
methods; c) ability to respond to students' questions; d) ability to impact
student learning in science or mathematics; and e) confidence in teaching
students from underrepresented groups in high-needs schools. The comprehensive
project evaluation plan ensures the development of evidence-based assertions
about the impact of program initiatives and innovations on STEM teacher
recruitment, development, and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strategies to
ensure broad dissemination of the data and results of this project include the
BNTSP website, conference presentations, peer-reviewed publications, and the
deposit of project data in the Academic Commons, a digital research repository
at Columbia University with global access.