* 1239085
* CPS: Frontier: Collaborative Research: Correct-by-Design Control Software Synthesis for Highly Dynamic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Paulo Tabuada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This CPS Frontiers project addresses highly dynamic Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPSs), understood as systems where a computing delay of a few milliseconds or
an incorrectly computed response to a disturbance can lead to catastrophic
consequences. Such is the case of cars losing traction when cornering at high
speed, unmanned air vehicles performing critical maneuvers such as landing, or
disaster and rescue response bipedal robots rushing through the rubble to
collect information or save human lives. The preceding examples currently share
a common element: the design of their control software is made possible by
extensive experience, laborious testing and fine tuning of parameters, and yet,
the resulting closed-loop system has no formal guarantees of meeting
specifications.

The vision of the project is to provide a methodology that allows for complex
and dynamic CPSs to meet real-world requirements in an efficient and robust way
through the formal synthesis of control software. The research is developing a
formal framework for correct-by-construction control software synthesis for
highly dynamic CPSs with broad applications to automotive safety systems,
prostheses, exoskeletons, aerospace systems, manufacturing, and legged robotics.

The design methodology developed here will improve the competitiveness of
segments of industry that require a tight integration between hardware and
highly advanced control software such as: automotive (dynamic stability and
control), aerospace (UAVs), medical (prosthetics, orthotics, and exoskeleton
design) and robotics (legged locomotion). To enhance the impact of these
efforts, the PIs are developing interdisciplinary teaching materials to be made
freely available and disseminating their work to a broad audience.