* 1239979
* International: US-Poland Workshop on Multiscale Computational Modeling of Cementitious Materials; held in Cracow, Poland, October 18-19, 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Florence Sanchez, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,106.00

The objectives of the workshop are to provide a platform for discussing the
state-of-the-art of computational modeling of cementitious materials at
multiscale levels and identifying the gap in creating a comprehensive and
predictive model linking chemistry, microstructure, and mechanical properties
across length and time scales. The two-day workshop will bring together
researchers from US, Europe, Canada, and Japan in areas of computational
mechanics, materials science, and chemistry. The workshop covers six topics,
from atomistic modeling, chemical kinetics and microstructure prediction
methods, multi-phase reactive transport models, mechanical property prediction,
thermo-chemo-mechanical coupling methods, and multiscale computational
principles and bridging methods. The outcome of the workshop will identify
research needs to achieve next generation of cementitious systems, opening the
door to a new paradigm of ?concrete-by-design?.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
provide forum for world?s leading experts to exchange, debate and assess the
state of knowledge of computational modeling of cementitious materials.
Researchers from multiple disciplines in engineering and science fields will be
engaged, and global collaborations will be stimulated. Also the workshop will
engage young researchers in this new and dynamic field and will provide them
with leadership experience. Graduate students will have the opportunity
interacting with international students attending the workshop. The workshop
will be broadcast over the internet and questions will be placed to message
board. &lt;br/&gt;