* 1239054
* CPS: Frontiers: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Resilient CybEr-Physical Systems (FORCES)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Asuman Ozdaglar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2018
* USD 2,150,000.00

This NSF Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) Frontiers project "Foundations Of
Resilient CybEr-physical Systems (FORCES)" focuses on the resilient design of
large-scale networked CPS systems that directly interface with humans. FORCES
aims to pr ovide comprehensive tools that allow the CPS designers and operators
to combine resilient control (RC) algorithms with economic incentive (EI)
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Contributions&lt;br/&gt;The project is
developing RC tools to withstand a wide-range of attacks and faults; learning
and control algorithms which integrate human actions with spatio-temporal and
hybrid dynamics of networked CPS systems; and model-based design to assure
semantically consistent representations across all branches of the project.
Operations of networked CPS systems naturally depend on the systemic social
institutions and the individual deployment choices of the humans who use and
operate them. The presence of incomplete and asymmetric information among these
actors leads to a gap between the individually and socially optimal equilibrium
resiliency levels. The project is developing EI schemes to reduce this gap. The
core contributions of the FORCES team, which includes experts in control
systems, game theory, and mechanism design, are the foundations for the co-
design of RC and EI schemes and technological tools for implementing
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Resilient CPS
infrastructure is a critical National Asset. FORCES is contributing to the
development of new Science of CPS by being the first project that integrates
networked control with game theoretic tools and the economic incentives of human
decision makers for resilient CPS design and operation. The FORCES integrated
co-design philosophy is being validated on two CPS domains: electric power
distribution and consumption, and transportation networks. These design
prototypes are being tested in real world scenarios. The team's research efforts
are being complemented by educational offerings on resilient CPS targeted to a
large and diverse audience.