* 1239804
* You Teach Physical Science: Noyce Scholars Enhancing Technical Capacity in Arkansas
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2022
* Neil Allison, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,199,998.00

The YouTeach Noyce scholarship program is supporting 28 undergraduate chemistry
and physics majors to become highly qualified 7-12th grade physical science
teachers. The program is partnering with and enhancing YouTeach, the University
of Arkansas' UTeach replication site. This project is aiding the growth of
YouTeach by increasing the number of participants through scholarship support
and by allowing more advanced undergraduates to join the program with the
support of a Master Teacher (MT). The MT is also providing induction support to
the early graduates. All Noyce scholars are receiving additional training and
support in the teaching demands of the high-need classroom from the MT beyond
that called for by the UTeach model. Special attention is being paid to the
recruiting and support of a diverse teacher community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Noyce scholars are benefiting from the extensive connections with local school
districts and teachers that have grown out of previous funded projects including
Fayetteville Public Schools, Fort Smith Public Schools, Siloam Springs School
District, and Springdale Public Schools. The leadership team is well placed in
national professional organizations to make lessons learned through this project
available at the national level. This project is developing a lasting model of
the cooperation of physics and chemistry departments to produce science
teachers, most of whom will teach both chemistry and physics as the new
licensure in Arkansas requires expertise in teaching both
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Placement of 28 qualified physical science
teachers in Arkansas classrooms is improving STEM education and encouraging
matriculation into STEM majors by students in high-needs classrooms across a
state with very poor college attendance rates. Integration into Professional
Learning Communities developed as part of the College Ready MSP is providing
professional support and informing teachers of the barriers to college
attendance. All recruiting activities are being carefully documented to form a
resource that will be published and featured in the PTEC library, a component of
comPADRE and PhysTEC.