* 1239782
* CCEP-II: Climate and Urban Systems Partnership (CUSP)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2019
* Kevin Crowley, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Cooperative Agreement
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 5,882,653.00

The Climate and Urban Systems Partnership (CUSP) is engaging urban residents in
community-based learning about climate, climate-change science, and the
prospects for enhancing urban quality of life through informed responses to a
changing Earth. With over 50% of the world population and 75% of Americans
living in urban areas, the urban climate is becoming the climate and environment
experienced by the majority of the world's population. The urban systems upon
which these populations rely, including energy, transportation, water, and
public health, face unique vulnerabilities to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing, deploying and studying a
transferable model for urban climate education. Working through Urban Learning
Networks (ULN) of community-based organizations in Philadelphia, New York City,
Washington, DC, and Pittsburgh, CUSP is coordinating programs and messages
through three interlinked community platforms that reach residents in
neighborhoods, online, and at city festivals. In addition, ULN members in each
city work as a community of practice to provide peer support to improve their
shared practices in climate change education. These four, integrated community
platforms comprise the CUSP model, connecting the interests and concerns of city
residents to the urban systems on which city life depends, systems that are
vulnerable to climate hazards and climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CUSP
partnership includes the Franklin Institute (TFI), the Columbia University
Center for Climate Systems Research (CCSR), the University of Pittsburgh
Learning Research and Development Center (LRDC), the Carnegie Museum of Natural
History (CMNH), the New York Hall of Science (NYSCI), and the Marian Koshland
Science Museum of the National Academy of Sciences (Koshland). Climate
researchers on the CUSP team are providing syntheses of climate and climate-
change science and climate risk assessments tailored to the CUSP cities. CUSP
education researchers are studying the dynamics of learning across CUSP
programs, elaborating design principles for learning that spans multiple
contexts across a lifetime. External evaluation is focusing on the effectiveness
of the CUSP partnership, the capacity of ULNs to deliver CUSP programming, and
impacts of CUSP programming on urban audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is one of six Phase II projects being funded through the Climate Change
Education Partnership (CCEP) program. The CCEP program was developed as part of
the NSF Climate Change Education program, established through Congressional
appropriations in FY 2009. The CCEP program is a one-time, dedicated NSF effort
to establish a coordinated national network of regionally- or thematically-based
partnerships devoted to increasing the adoption of effective, high quality
educational programs and resources related to the science of climate change and
its impacts. The CCEP portfolio encompasses a major interdisciplinary research
and development effort designed to promote deeper understanding of, and
engagement with, climate system science and the impacts of climate change on
natural and human systems. The vision of this program is a scientifically
literate society that can effectively weigh the evidence regarding global
climate change as it confronts the challenges ahead, while preparing the
innovative scientific and technical workforce to advance our knowledge of human-
climate interactions and develop approaches for a sustainable, prosperous
future. Each CCEP is required to incorporate innovative collaborations among
expertise of climate scientists, learning scientists, and education
practitioners in either formal or informal learning environments to research,
design, and test new models and strategies for effective teaching and learning
about climate science. With its focus on interdisciplinary approaches and
transformative scales of impact, the CCEP program occupies a unique and
complementary niche in the portfolio of Federal investments related to climate
science education and workforce development.