* 1239062
* EAGER: RI: Collecting and Filtering Online Information in Science
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Bruce Buchanan, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 04/30/2013
* USD 21,982.00

This proposal focuses on developing methods to automate the time-consuming
process of selecting good overview and review articles from on-line new sources.
The goal is to select articles understandable by persons outside the field and
use them on the AITopics information portal maintained by the AAAI. The AITopics
website is a widely used authoritative source about Artificial Intelligence that
is used by a wide variety of people seeking information about AI: novices,
students, the press, etc. AITopics is intended to provide explanatory,
accessible material about multiple subtopics that make up the field of AI. This
project will develop new methods for this finding/filtering such articles and
build on methods already used by AITopics. The resulting software will be open-
source and is intended in the long run to be applicable to other scientific
discipline beyond AI, particularly by their professional societies.

The project will pursue two thrusts to generalize the current NewsFinder
program, which was developed as a part of AITopics and currently finds many
types of news stories about AI. The first thrust of this project is to enable it
to find overview and review articles automatically. The second thrust is to
enable the program to learn from data collected from readers and administrators.