* 1239577
* EAGER:   Leveraging Phytochromes for Dominant Developmental Control of Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* J. Clark Lagarias, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 06/30/2015
* USD 295,132.00

Modern agriculture relies on crops that have been carefully tailored for
environments by selective breeding. In this regard, phytochromes are an
attractive target for such modifications, because they are key regulators of
plant growth and development in response to light and shade. As such,
phytochromes have been targets of conventional breeding programs aimed to
improve germination, seedling establishment, leaf development, and flowering
time. Recently, a novel dominant, constitutively activated allele of phytochrome
B (YHB) in Arabidopsis has been identified whose expression impacts all of these
processes. The overall goal of this EAGER project is to exploit the ability of
YHB alleles for selective regulation of photomorphogenic programs in transgenic
plants and to engineer these alleles for use as a plant-derived, antibiotic-free
genetic selection marker in Medicago and Brassica species. The specific aims are
to (1) characterize and exploit spatial and temporal regulation of YHB
expression to selectively regulate phytochrome responses in plants; and, (2)
develop and exploit YHB vectors as plant-derived, chemical-free selection marker
for in planta and tissue culture-based genetic selection. If successful, this
project will provide new insight into phytochrome function that may have
potential broad impact for the improvement of crop plants.

In addition to providing training opportunities for a postdoctoral research
associate, the project will participate in the UC Davis Community College Access
to Research Experiences for Undergraduates (CCAT-REU) program that provides
research training internships to community college students. If successful, the
project is expected to generate and publically distribute new methods and
findings through publications/presentations and through NCBI Gene Expression
Omnibus. All plant and DNA materials generated by this work will be distributed
to all requestors for no charge with appropriate MTA agreements approved by the
UC Davis Office of Technology Transfer.