* 1239521
* CZO: Critical Zone Observatory--Snowline Processes in the Southern Sierra Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Michael Goulden, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory (CZO), located at 1700-2100 m
elevation, crosses the rain-snow transition, an area that is particularly
vulnerable to large changes in climate and landcover. Rapid seasonal changes and
steep gradients in precipitation make this zone an excellent natural laboratory
for studying how critical-zone processes respond to perturbations and how the
water cycle drives critical-zone processes. In particular, differences along
locally pronounced altitudinal and aspect-related gradients in climate offer the
opportunity to substitute space for time in a rich cross-disciplinary array of
process-oriented studies. Collocated with the USFS Kings River Experimental
Watersheds, the CZO takes advantage of multiple, well-instrumented and
characterized catchments and long-term data sets to provide a community platform
for research. Four key findings from the CZO have helped shape the current
research agenda. First is closing the water budget at headwater catchment and
larger scales using a rich set of water-balance, flux-tower and sap-flow
measurements of evapotranspiration (ET). Second, multiple lines of evidence are
consistent with a year-round growing season at mid elevation, with mid-montane
forests exhibiting cold tolerance in winter and avoiding late-summer drought
stress through deep rooting. Third, rates of ET at mid-elevation are high
relative to nearby lower-elevation water-limited and higher-elevation cold-
limited ecosystems. Fourth, deep rooting and soil development are important for
sustaining high rates of net primary productivity (NPP), with over one-third of
ET coming from depths below 1m. Together these results provide a unifying theme
for the current research, which addresses: i) how soil moisture and topographic
variability interact to influence soil-formation and weathering, ii) how the
response of soil moisture, ET and streamflow, to snowmelt and rainfall is
controlled by landscape variability, iii) how and why vegetation and ecosystem
distribution and function vary with climate, iv) and how landscape heterogeneity
and vegetation interact to influence cycling of water, energy, nutrients, and
NPP. The foundation of CZO research is a rich field measurement program, with
geochemical analyses and a well-integrated modeling effort that will provide a
fundamental understanding of the links among climatic, hydrologic,
(bio)geochemical, ecosystem and landscape processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Southern Sierra CZO is a data-rich community platform for process-level research
that enhances the science of multiple individuals and research groups. It is
located in an elevation range that has characteristically rapid seasonal
changes, going from snowcover to wet soil to dry soil over a 1-2 month period.
Regional climate warming will make such changes occur earlier or eliminate them
entirely if snow is largely replaced by rain at the current rain-snow
transition. This will lead to major water- related changes in seasonal-to-
interannual critical-zone processes involving weathering, regolith formation,
nutrient cycling, and vegetation/ecosystem distribution and function. Forest
density of the largely mixed-conifer forest and the threat of catastrophic fire
are very high, raising the chances of major changes in longer-term critical-zone
processes. Research at the CZO is providing an unprecedented predictive ability
for how the linked hydrologic, (bio)geochemical, ecosystem and landscape
processes will respond to perturbations, i.e. changes in temperature,
precipitation patterns, and human management of forests. It is providing a solid
foundation for science-based vegetation and water management in the Sierra
Nevada and other seasonally snow-covered mountain forests. Further, the CZO
provides a basis for the design and evaluation of broader observation networks
for both research and applications. Finally, the research team uses CZO data and
knowledge to enhance the science experience of thousands of middle and high
school students and also many undergraduate students at the participating
universities.