* 1239775
* CCEP-II: National Network for Ocean and Climate Change Interpretation
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Paul Boyle, New England Aquarium Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,506,000.00

The National Network for Ocean and Climate Change Education (NNOCCI) strengthens
the capacity of informal science education institutions (ISEIs) to increase
public understanding of climate change and its impacts on coastal zones and
marine life. Building on ISEIs' large audiences, interpretive capacity, and
public trust, NNOCCI has a transformative impact on public science
communication. The project's goals are to: (1) Expand interpretive techniques
based on sound social science research; (2) Expand the emerging community of
practice developed through a CCEP-Phase I planning grant; (3) Deepen content
knowledge and communication skills of scientists and interpreters; and (4)
Develop a resilient and replicable national infrastructure for reaching ISEIs
and their public audiences. This partnership is led by the New England Aquarium
in collaboration with the Association of Zoos and Aquariums, FrameWorks
Institute, and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, with evaluation
conducted by the New Knowledge Organization, Pennsylvania State University, and
Ohio State University. A series of 14 Study Circles are being developed to
provide professional development for ISEI interpretive staff in collaboration
with climate scientists and cognitive/social scientists. Fifteen Regional
Leaders participate in recruiting and in planning and leading additional
workshops. Special training methods are being developed and implemented for
youth interpreters. For scientists, workshops focusing on strategic framing and
communication are being offered. Best practices from current social science
research are being incorporated into a new e-Workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NNOCCI engages stakeholders from 140 institutions, with
the potential to reach tens of millions of people through their interpretation
and communication. An even larger impact arises from the potential to transform
how ISEIs translate information about climate change and oceans. The activities
of this project help to achieve the vision of scaling up a training program to
reach thousands of interpreters, including underserved youth, over several
years. This project builds on the knowledge, success, and momentum generated
during a previous CCEP-I project to expand the depth, reach, and legacy of this
work over the next five years. NNOCCI will ultimately engage millions of
visitors to aquariums and other ISEIs in learning about the scientific processes
linking climate change and the ocean. The project's strategic impact is its
potential to transform how these organizations present this topic and,
ultimately, how they communicate other complex environmental or scientific
topics that involve policy implications. Anticipated outcomes include: a new
"culture of communication" about complex science within the ISE community; a
national network of interpretive leaders throughout the ISE field who are
skilled, confident, and capable of disseminating that information effectively;
engagement of a critical mass of ISEIs with a broad and diverse national reach;
increased public awareness of climate change as a salient, meaningful, and
actionable topic; and increased capacity of the next generation of ocean
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is one of six Phase II projects
being funded through the Climate Change Education Partnership (CCEP) program.
The CCEP program was developed as part of the NSF Climate Change Education
program, established through Congressional appropriations in FY 2009. The CCEP
program is a one-time, dedicated NSF effort to establish a coordinated national
network of regionally- or thematically-based partnerships devoted to increasing
the adoption of effective, high quality educational programs and resources
related to the science of climate change and its impacts. The CCEP portfolio
encompasses a major interdisciplinary research and development effort designed
to promote deeper understanding of, and engagement with, climate system science
and the impacts of climate change on natural and human systems. The vision of
this program is a scientifically literate society that can effectively weigh the
evidence regarding global climate change as it confronts the challenges ahead,
while preparing the innovative scientific and technical workforce to advance our
knowledge of human-climate interactions and develop approaches for a
sustainable, prosperous future. Each CCEP is required to incorporate innovative
collaborations among expertise of climate scientists, learning scientists, and
education practitioners in either formal or informal learning environments to
research, design, and test new models and strategies for effective teaching and
learning about climate science. With its focus on interdisciplinary approaches
and transformative scales of impact, the CCEP program occupies a unique and
complementary niche in the portfolio of Federal investments related to climate
science education and workforce development.