* 1239135
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: Bringing the Multicore Revolution to Safety-Critical Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Multicore platforms have the potential of revolutionizing the capabilities of
embedded cyber-physical systems. Unfortunately, when such systems have safety-
critical components, multicore platforms are rarely used. The reason is a lack
of predictability associated with hardware components such as caches, memory
controllers, etc., that are shared among cores. With current technology, very
conservative estimates concerning the usage of these shared resources must be
made, to certify that overuse violations do not occur at runtime. The resulting
over-provisioning can be significant, easily negating the processing power of
any additional cores. The goal of this project is to resolve this multicore
"predictability problem" by developing allocation mechanisms that enable shared
hardware resources to be controlled in a predictable way. The research agenda in
this project includes fundamental research on relevant real-time resource
allocation problems, prototyping efforts involving real-time operating systems
and middleware, and experimental evaluations of improvements enabled by the
developed mechanisms in timing analysis tools (which are used to determine task
execution-time budgets).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing the "predictability
problem" associated with multicore platforms would be a breakthrough result for
safety-critical, cyber-physical systems in domains such as avionics and
automobiles. When using multicore platforms to host highly-critical workloads in
these domains, the current state of the art is to obviate the predictability
problem by turning off all but one core. Unless a more intelligent solution can
be found, such domains will not benefit from savings in size, weight, and power
(SWaP) and gains in functionality that multicore platforms afford. Broader
impacts include joint research with industry colleagues on supporting real-time
workloads in unmanned air vehicles, the development of publicly-available open-
source software that can be used by other institutions for research and teaching
purposes, and the development of a new course on cyber-physical systems.