* 1239980
* Collaborative Research:   AToL:   Assembling the Pleurocarp Tree of Life: Resolving the rapid radiation using genomics and transcriptomics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2017
* USD 451,171.00

The evolutionary history of land plants over the last 500 million years is
characterized by periodic bursts of diversification following major climatic
shifts, specific geologic events, or the evolution of specific characters.
Speciation is then so rapid that the relationships among descendants are hard to
identify, and large sets of data are needed to resolve the family tree. The moss
lineage Hypnanae underwent an explosive radiation following its origin 165 mya.
Today, it comprises about 5,000 species, but their grouping into evolutionary
units is obscure. Inferences from extensive sets of genes sampled using a gene
enrichment strategy combined with gene expression data will provide a robust
framework to further our understanding of this diverse, and ecologically
important lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on untangling the
relationships among species that arose from an explosive diversification, on
identifying the geologic or climatic shifts that triggered these events, and on
understanding the significance of morphological innovations allowing adaptations
to diverse habitats. The target group of mosses is more diverse than conifers,
dominates some communities, and plays critical ecological roles throughout the
world. Resolving the patterns and processes underlying the rise of a diverse
lineage offers an opportunity to understand how these organisms may respond to
rapid global change.