* 1239343
* CPS:  Synergy:  Cyber Enabled Manufacturing Systems (CeMs) for Small Lot Manufacture
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Jayathi Murthy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of Cyber Enabled Manufacturing
(CeMs) process control for small lot manufacturing that incorporates a model of
the process directly into the control algorithm. Such a model can be used to
accommodate changes in the physical product and the manufacturing process and
thus the manufacturing monitoring and control algorithm, so that changing
conditions are easily accommodated without extensive additional experiments. A
set of objectives of this physics and cyber-enabled manufacturing process
control system are rational setting of manufacturing tolerances, real time
prediction of manufacturing defects, real time control of process to eliminate
defects, and real time monitoring and control for small lot manufacturing. The
methodologies we propose to achieve these goals are high fidelity, physics based
models including models of faults/defects, uncertainty quantification, reduced
order models that run in real time, measurement, real time prediction, real time
computer architecture, real time control with inverse solutions, and automating
the CeMs process for generic manufacturing processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will greatly reduce cycle time in
producing new or modified products and improve the quality of manufacturing
processes with accompanying reduction in waste, energy use, and cost. The
development of such accurate control algorithms and their application to
manufacturing processes can provide a competitive edge to US manufacturers.
Perhaps more importantly, the education of engineers involved this research will
supply US industry with employees who can apply this technology to many
industrial processes.