* 1240748
* Support for International Conference on Numerical Methods in Multiphase Flows, Penn State University, June 12-14, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Robert Kunz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

1240748 PI: Kunz

Considering the vast importance of multiphase flows in energy systems,
biomedicine, defense systems, manufacturing, and the environment, and the
growing importance of CFD in multiphase flows, the executive co-organizers are
hosting a dedicated conference on the topic of numerical methods in multiphase
flows, to bring together the international community in a focused technical
exchange environment. The executive organizers of ICNMMF believe that the pace
of the maturity of the technology of multiphase flow numerics could and should
be enhanced. What is needed is focused emphasis on the topic in the context of
books, conference sessions, and dedicated conferences on the topic that can
bring together the international community in a very focused technical exchange
environment. It is this latter need that has motivated ICNMMF.

The co-organizers of ICNMMF are a group well-known leaders in the field of
multiphase flow modeling. In the context of the emphasis on ?new methods?, each
of these individuals has contributed to the assembly of a proposed list of
topics from which solicit conference contributions have been solicited. The list
of topics for ICNMMF include: 1) Direct Numerical Simulation and Large Eddy
Simulation, 2) Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics, 3) Eulerian Homogeneous and Two-
fluid Models, 4) Direct Quadrature Methods, 5) Lagrangian Methods, 6) ALE
Methods, 7) Interface Capturing Techniques, 8) Multiscale Methods, 9)
Compressible Multiphase Flows, 10) High-Order Accuracy Flux Schemes, 11) General
Advanced Algorithms, 12) Particle Methods, 13) Uncertainty Quantification, 14)
Lattice Boltzmann and Molecular Dynamics Methods.

The broader impacts of ICNMMF are that: 1) all presentations that authors wish
to include in a conference DVD will be distributed to participants
electronically immediately after the conference, and to the general public
through the conference website, which will remain ?live? until the next ICNMMF,
2) interactions between conference participants, with inputs from government
sponsors, industrial practitioners and experimentalists, will focus research
endeavors and research funding, and engender collaborations in new/modern sub-
disciplines of multiphase flows analysis, 3) the executive organizers of ICNMMF
intend this conference to be the first in a series (every two years we believe),
and therefore this first meeting will set the stage for a much longer/broader
benefit to the multiphase flow community specifically, and more generally, the
energy, biomedical, defense, and environmental sciences that have come to depend
on this science.