* 1240555
* MSPnet.org: An Online Professional Learning Network
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Brian Drayton, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 5,319,715.00

MSPnet.org is an online professional learning network created to serve NSF's
Math and Science Partnership program. It facilitates the sharing of strategies,
challenges, resources and expertise within and across MSP projects. It is also
an effective vehicle for sharing the lessons learned by MSP projects with the
U.S. Department of Education's MSP program, as well as with researchers,
practitioners, and the public at large. Finally, it provides an innovative model
of inter-linking e-communities of practice to others interested in developing
online learning communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;MSPnet, which was first
launched in January 2004 with 351 pre-registered members, now serves over 7,200
members who are affiliated with current or past MSP projects. In addition, it
has successfully attracted a large public user-base of over 1.5 million unique
visitors, who have accessed over 7.4 million page-views. MSPnet's professional
learning network facilitates cross-project dialogue while also providing each
NSF MSP project with its own project space, including interactive tools to
enhance collaboration between partners. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The current
effort includes new features and functionalities to insure that the network
stays innovative and up-to-date with rapidly changing technology. Changes to the
site are responsive to evolving community needs, principles of Web and community
design, navigational ease, and usability. While seamlessly continuing previous
activities, innovative formats and interactive events (e.g., interactive online
poster sessions, interactive panels and webinars), MSPnet is supporting
additional cross-project dialogue, enhancing mechanisms for users to quickly
find resources relevant to their needs, and providing synthesis and research
briefs of MSP-authored research. These are accessible to a wide audience, and
create new mechanisms for the sharing of resources with other resource centers
and communities.