* 1240992
* CS 10K: New Mexico Computer Science for All (NM CSforAll)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Irene Lee, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 10/31/2017
* USD 1,226,332.00

The Santa Fe Institute (SFI), in partnership with the University of New Mexico,
the Supercomputing Challenge, and other educational organizations, industry
partners, and local schools, proposes a project called New Mexico Computer
Science for All (NM-CSforAll). NM-CSforAll?s primary targets middle and high
school STEM teachers, preparing them to be future CS teachers. It offers a
novel, interdisciplinary approach that uses modeling and simulation as the basis
for teaching CS Principles, the proposed, new Advanced Placement (AP) CS course.
Teachers first take the modeling and simulation version of CS Principles and
then implement it as a dual credit course for their students. During a Spring
semester-long course, the teachers investigate real-world problems, view them
through the lens of complex systems--SFI's primary research area--and then model
and analyze them using agent-based modeling techniques. The project uses a
"flipped" classroom methodology, meaning the lecture portion of the course will
be offered as online videos, while the exercise and project work will take place
in the lab, face-to-face. A Summer workshop focuses on reviewing the CS content
of the course, learning pedagogy, and recruitment techniques in preparation for
the Fall semester implementation in the schools. The Fall implementation of the
dual credit CS Principles class for high school students uses the videos
developed for the teacher professional development course as lecture material
and weekly "lab" session meetings led by participating teachers acting as
learning coaches. (NM now requires a dual-credit, AP, or honors course for high
school graduation and this course will fulfill the requirement.) NM CSforAll's
secondary strategy fosters teachers' CS content learning, CS teaching pedagogy,
and computer programming practice through engagement in a professional online
community. NM-CSforAll's online network will include video sharing, uploading of
documentation of work sessions, and social networking capabilities providing
opportunities for teachers to learn from each other?s implementations of CS
activities and communicate with each other, STEM educators, CS professionals and
educational researchers. Teacher participants, as the co-creators of content for
the site, will have shared authority, a critical factor in creating environments
conducive to building knowledge about teaching and learning CS. The project
evaluation will determine whether teacher professional development in CS that
integrates computational modeling and analysis of complex systems, builds
capacity in future CS teachers, and whether co-creation and use of an online
professional development network can improve teachers' pedagogical skills and
sustain their interest in CS.