* 1240171
* Enabling continued operation of IT services and infrastructures during floods and other disasters
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 05/31/2014
* USD 40,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 12-40171 PI(s): Matsunaga, Andrea Fortes, Jose A. Institution:
University of Florida Title: Rapid: Enabling Continued Operation of IT Services
& Infrastructures during Floods & Other Disasters Project Proposed: Thi RAPID
project, studying the effectiveness of virtualized Internet data centers on
improving IT service continuity during and after a disaster through virtual
machines (VM) live migration and backup/checkpointing, conducts research on the
use of virtualization technologies. These technologies enable mitigating and
recovering from the impact of catastrophic events on IT infrastructures and the
services they deliver. Working with Thammasat University in Thailand, Internet
Data Centers (IDCs) will be leveraged as disaster recovering sites, where
government and corporate data can be backed up and operational servers can be
temporarily located in order to provide high-availability and resiliency for the
organizations? operations and services. The recent catastrophic events in the
2011 Thailand flood raised a many issues in the disruption of operation and
services provided by various organizations that can contribute in handling other
future catastrophic events. Several research questions have arisen: The - Need
to assess existing infrastructures since suitable solutions have dependencies on
the type of disasters and the realities of the IT environments in the disaster
locations, and - Need to address challenges when migrating VMs across geographic
locations, given that existing VM migration technology have been developed with
local area network assumptions that do not hold true in disaster recovery
scenarios. Thus, the work leverages existing infrastructure and experience in
machine visualization technologies and cloud computing deployments to conduct
realistic experiments, to assess the effectiveness of mechanisms offered by
existing visualization technologies to maximize the availability of services and
minimize costs to maintain and/or recover all the services during and after
disaster. Research efforts will be developed in the following thrusts: -
Collection and analysis of data related damaged IT services due to the 2011
Thailand Flood; - Studies of the nature of the IT services and their
infrastructure design; - Studies of the practicality and scalability of VM live
migration and backup/checkpointing in wide-area setting; and - Investigation of
virtualized-based resilient middleware architectures for service continuity.
Broader Impacts: This project will advance our understanding of how to provide
robust middleware for protection and recovery of IT infrastructure that performs
well for different types of disasters. It will also inform policy-makers and IT
managers in Thailand and the USA on how to evaluate and integrate emerging
commercial virtualization solutions for backup and/or recovery-oriented
computing systems under the extreme conditions found during and after a
disaster. The research supports a female minority PI and a US graduate student.
The project has been submitted for co-funding from the Thailand Research Fund
(TRF), which, if successful, would represent a precedent-setting partnership
between the NSF and TRF which could be a model for future collaboration.