* 1240478
* EFRI-PSBR: Microalgae Lab-on-Chip Photobioreactor Platform for Genetic Screening and Metabolic Analysis Leading to Scalable Biofuel Production
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2012,05/31/2019
* David Stern, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2019
* USD 2,300,000.00

EFRI-PSBR: Microalgae Lab-on-Chip Photobioreactor Platform for Genetic Screening
and Metabolic Analysis Leading to Scalable Biofuel Production INTELLECTUAL MERIT
The multi-disciplinary research team will develop microfluidic lab-on-chip
devices with capabilities to precisely assay and manipulate parallel samples at
single-cell resolution. The devices will enable the integration of multiple
experimental parameters on a single user-friendly platform. These devices will
then be used to analyze and optimize the growth and hydrocarbon production
potential of an engineered recombinant photosynthetic microalgae. The specific
test case will be a recombinant, fast growing Chlamydomonas reinhardtii algal
strain that will be engineered to express a high-yielding hydrocarbon
biosynthetic gene system derived from the slow-growing microalaga, Botryococcus
braunii. These specific hydrocarbons produced by these organisms are of
particular interest because they can be readily converted into petroleum-
equivalent fuels.

BROADER IMPACTS The proposed research will have broad scientific impact because
the developed microfluidic platforms will directly contribute to and
dramatically accelerate research and development in the general area of microbe-
mediated biofuel and biometabolite production. Educational outcomes will include
training of the next generation of microbial bioenergy engineers and scientists
through research, involving undergraduate and minority students, local high
school students, and high-school teachers in conjunction with existing programs
at the participating institutions to provide them with early exposure to science
and engineering. This project will allow students from multiple disciplines
(engineering, microbiology, biochemistry) to interact and gain first hand
experience in interdisciplinary research.