* 1240037
* Morehouse CollegeNoyce Pre-Service STEM Teacher Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2022
* Charles Meadows, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,199,583.00

Morehouse College in Atlanta, GA is providing scholarships to 27 African
American and other underrepresented minority male students majoring in STEM
fields and obtaining Georgia Teacher Certification. These students are committed
to teaching at Georgia critical-needs high schools. This DREAMS II program
emphasizes interdisciplinary approaches for learning science and mathematics.
Moreover, the program integrates inquiry-based learning, technology, and problem
solving, which are concepts and skills stressed by the state's national
recommendations for teaching. Innovative teaching methodologies include online
learning communities, scholar-supervised research activities, interdisciplinary
applications and one-on-one mentoring activities across the curriculum. These
activities strengthen future teachers' ability to integrate interdisciplinary
ideas and strategies across the curricula. This program has the potential to
transform the national educational agenda by providing empirical data on best
approaches to recruit and maintain male STEM students from underrepresented
groups for careers as pre-college teachers. In addition, the project provides
data on best practices to encourage and retain underrepresented STEM majors
using diverse strategies that include targeted recruitment, enhanced mentoring,
research training, and community building.