* 1240416
* EFRI-BioFlex: Miniature, low-cost fiber-optics technology for measurement of tissue structure at sub-diffractional length scales: a platform for cancer screening
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Hemant Roy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,394,995.00

This project is at the interface of biophotonics, electronics and computational
electrodynamics with applications to medicine. The main thrust is the
development of a principally new disposable, low-cost, miniature fiber-optics
probe technology that would enable minimally or non-invasive population
screening for major cancers while being comfortable to patients, enabling a
major improvement in diagnostic accuracy, and reducing health care costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;From the engineering
perspective, the key areas of innovation are biophotonics and computational
electromagnetics. The underlying biophotonics technology is Low-coherence
Enhanced Backscattering Spectroscopy. The major technological advantages are
miniaturization and the ability to depth-selectively quantify sub-diffractional
(down to a few tens of nanometers) structure of live tissue, which is impossible
with existing endoscopic or fiber-optic tools. In its application to cancer
screening, the proposed approach takes advantage of the concept of field
carcinogenesis, the notion that, initially, molecular/nanostructural alterations
develop diffusely throughout an affected organ while further stochastic
mutations lead to focal tumors. Thus, a cancer risk can be assessed by non-
invasive analysis of tissue ultrastructure from an easily accessible surrogate
site, such as the rectum for colon cancer, cheek mucosa for lung cancer,
duodenal mucosa for pancreatic cancer, endocervix for ovarian cancer, etc. The
project has three aims: (1) Development of a new paradigm for linking the
ultrastructural and optical properties of tissue based on the Finite-Difference
Time-Domain modeling of light-tissue interactions with nanoscale detail.
Stochastic Finite-Difference Time-Domain simulation, a principally new approach
to numerically solving Maxwell?s equations and modeling light transport in
tissue of arbitrary complexity, will be developed. (2) Development of the
miniature Low-coherence Enhanced Backscattering Spectroscopy probe. The design
is a radical departure from other fiber-optics probes currently under
development for biomedical applications, leveraging micro- and nano-fabrication
technology and new sub-millimeter image sensors to produce an integrated device
with unprecedented compactness capable of fully resolving the enhanced
backscattering peak, and in turn, quantifying nanostructural changes in tissue.
(3) Pilot human studies to demonstrate the potential clinical impact of the
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Although it is well
accepted that cancer screening can dramatically decrease cancer mortality, no
population screening exists for the majority of cancers. This is because
existing techniques require examination of already formed cancerous or pre-
cancerous lesions through interventional procedures (colonoscopy, endoscopy,
bronchoscopy, etc.) and suffer from some of the following drawbacks:
invasiveness, expense, low patient tolerance, or low sensitivity to curable
lesions. The proposed technology may lead to a new paradigm in cancer screening
that would be applicable to essentially any major cancer type and, due to its
low-cost and high patient tolerance, can actually be used in the entire
population. Furthermore, the implementation of the technology has the potential
to dramatically reduce health care costs by identifying early preventable
neoplastic lesions or early, readily treatable cancers. The project will also
help increase the exposure of middle and high school students from
underrepresented minority groups and inner-city schools to engineering, science
and technology.