* 1240049
* Collaborative Research:  AToL:  ACCESS DNA viruses: A Comprehensive survey of Circular Eukaryotic Single-Stranded DNA viruses in Invertebrates and Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Siobain Duffy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2019
* USD 650,121.00

Viruses affect all forms of cellular life; however, it is extremely difficult to
trace their evolutionary history. This project will reconstruct the phylogeny of
an understudied branch of the viral tree of life: that of circular eukaryotic
single-stranded DNA (CESS) viruses. CESS viruses are the smallest known viruses,
yet they include pathogens with devastating impacts on agriculture worldwide.
Recently, general environmental sampling has uncovered a diversity of CESS
viruses that are only distantly related to these pathogens and has shown that
they infect a wider range of hosts than previously thought, including insects
and fungi. This project systematically tests previously unexplored hosts to
discover, sequence, and classify their CESS viruses. Phylogenetic analyses will
then determine how all CESS viruses are related to one another, providing a
framework for classifying the CESS viral tree of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research include training of
graduate students, undergraduates, and postdocs, as well as K-12 outreach and
creation of web-based resources for the scientific and general public. Middle
school students will be involved in collecting invertebrate samples, which will
be processed during a virology training workshop for graduate students and
postdocs on CESS virus genomics. Project results will be displayed on a website
to increase public knowledge about CESS viruses, and bioinformatics tools will
be shared freely with the scientific community.