* 1240409
* Building a US innovation network (I-Corps) node in Michigan
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Aileen Huang-Saad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,924,737.00

Building a US innovation network (I-Corps) node in
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is establishing a founding network
node at the University of Michigan (UMich) to successfully replicate the I-Corps
curriculum at geographically distributed regions throughout the nation and
further study how innovation permeates the academic culture. Although the
current I-Corps program trains the nation's researchers in cutting-edge customer
development methods, it does not offer additional support for start-ups once the
go/no-go decision is made. Providing such support to local teams can offer great
benefit, since most researchers are unlikely to relocate to the most active
geographical regions of entrepreneurial activity. Building a robust network of
innovation nodes across the country is critical to help support potential
startups; therefore, this project offers a path toward leveraging a connected
group of knowledgeable and highly experienced groups to help mitigate the issues
and risks associated with creating new enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
UMich node will deliver the I-Corps hypothesis/validation-based (Lean LaunchPad
- LLP) curriculum that focuses on Customer Development Methodology to cohorts of
NSF-designated teams on a semi-annual basis. This will allow for training and
development of I-Corps teams in an alternate location, while additionally
increasing the breadth/depth of training and helping to scale the overall impact
of the I-Corps program. UMich organized a team of trainers to present the
I-Corps curriculum to I-Corps teams and help expand the pool of prospective
I-Corps faculty who are able to teach the I-Corps curriculum, work with the
selected teams, and help to further inform the national innovation
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of an I-Corps node at the
UMich is fostering the pursuit of both short-term and long-term research and
development projects to help achieve the goals of the NSF I-Corps program. The
node is researching, analyzing, and leveraging data from the I-Corps education,
training and opportunity development efforts to: 1) develop an understanding of
how institutions can improve support for innovation ecosystems; 2) create and
share methods for successfully scaling effective practices and models that
foster innovation; 3) explore how the network can enable new collaborations
among geographic regions to support commercialization opportunity development,
independent of geographic locations; 4) examine and track the I-Corps teams'
dynamics, activities, and outcomes; and 5) identify and propose improvements to
the I-Corps curriculum materials, training practices, and national innovation
network utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UMich node is expanding the
I-Corps cadre of innovation experts that are disseminating effective practices,
fostering a change in culture (particularly in academia) and helping to mentor
others in their business development efforts on a national scale. The UMich node
has the potential to have a positive influence on future research direction at
all universities. While the I-Corps training program doesn't increase overall
research activity, it encourages a culture among university researchers to
pursue areas in which there are confirmed industrial/societal needs.
Furthermore, UMich has a set of existing entrepreneurship programs that can be
leveraged to support I-Corps.