* 1240073
* STEM Colorado Teaching to Learn Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2020
* Noah Finkelstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 799,998.00

This Phase II project is designed to integrate, expand, and align teacher
preparation, induction, and mastery by bringing together Noyce Teacher Teams of
current and prospective teachers with different types and levels of experience.
The focus of each team of veteran, novice, and prospective teachers is on
conducting classroom research and the goal of this centralizing activity is the
critical examination of assumptions about teaching and learning. The mechanism
by which such reflection occurs is scientific inquiry into one's own practice,
the practices of others, and the practices of students. Team members collaborate
on four different aspects of their own professional development, preparation, or
induction program: (1) discipline-based educational research in the K-12
classroom, (2) implementation of state of the art technology and research-based
approaches, (3) planning of and reflection on teaching and learning, and (4)
conference presentations and journal publications. The Teaching to Learn project
is a collaboration of the University of Colorado Boulder, Adams Twelve 5-Star
Schools, Boulder Valley, Cherry Creek, Denver Public Schools, Englewood,
Jefferson County, Mapleton, and St. Vrain Valley school districts associated
with former Noyce projects. The Teaching to Learn research team activities serve
as mechanisms both for the professional growth of participants and as a model
for how scientific inquiry into personally and professionally meaningful
problems leads to knowledge generation. The project is providing scholarships
and stipends to 30 preservice teachers, including undergraduates and post-
baccalaureate certification students. In addition to providing extended field
experiences for preservice students, the project offers an expanded professional
development program for recent and more experienced Noyce graduates supported
under previous grants. The expectation that Noyce Teacher Teams publish and
present their work leads to a greater impact on teacher-driven professional
development nationwide.