* 1240580
* Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics, Aug. 23-24, 2012, Arlington, VA.
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Erica Corral, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 47,937.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the 2012 Professional
Development Workshop in Ceramics is to enhance the career development of the
next generation of future leaders in ceramic materials research and education.
Four early-career faculty who have recently been awarded NSF CAREER grants from
the Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials Research are the focus of the
workshop activities. They are being immersed in an intensive two-day technical
and professional development workshop with ten to twelve colleagues and peers
from the international scientific community with expertise in ceramic materials.
The unique exchange and interaction between all participants will impact the
early-career faculty's respective fields of research, exchange of best practices
for training and teaching students, and the forging of new collaborative or
cooperative research opportunities worldwide. Other participants include
Assistant Professors and postdoctoral associates with research expertise in
ceramics who can benefit from the scientific and professional
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The 2012
Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics focuses on four technical topics
to be presented by each early-career faculty: 1) thermochemistry of
nanosintering; 2) processing and properties of perovskite oxide ferroelectrics;
3) mechanical behavior of high temperature materials; and 4) processing -
structure - property - performance relation in functional ceramics. The
respective early-career faculty and the technical experts in their field of
ceramic materials research are leading the technical discussions for the purpose
of critically evaluating research plans, career development, and education
efforts. In addition, the technical discussions are supplemented by discussion
of research opportunities that complement and enhance ongoing teaching and
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Junior researchers interested in this
activity should contact the PI directly.