* 1240678
* Developing Research and Teaching Capacity in the Ecological Sciences at Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs)
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Don Bowie, Science and Engineering Alliance Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 01/31/2014
* USD 99,593.00

This award will provide funds to build a more diverse ecological science
workforce trained to undertake trans-disciplinary research and educational
outreach at several of the Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) by leveraging
the expertiseband knowledge of large ecological projects such as the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and ESA's Future of Environmental
Decisions (FED) education activities. The Science and Engineering Alliance, Inc.
(SEA) and the Ecological Society of America (ESA) propose to conduct two
workshops that will bring faculty and graduate students from Minority Serving
Insitutions to the next Ecological Society of America Annual Meeting. The first
workshop will provide a forum for faculty to gain knowledge of infrastructure
enabled continental scale research, technologies and protocols to implement
local research that dovetails with large projects like NEON, and develop
collaborative partnerships with other MSIs and Ecologists. The second workshop
will focus on Engaging HBCUs and MSIs in Education Using Large Scale Datasets.
Participants will gain knowledge of data analysis and systems eduction in the
context of Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education, common student
misconceptions of key ecological concepts, and assessment strategies associated
with introducing large scale data analysis in the classroom. The workshops
strategically target underserved communities to increase their training and
research capabilities in continental scale ecology. Through participation in the
workshops and participation in the ESA Annual Meeting, the participants will
increase their knowledge, skills, and ability to conduct large scale research
and prepare students for a research future at the lead edge of a new field of
ecology.