* 1240507
* What are Sustainable Climate-Risk Management Strategies?
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Alan Robock, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2019
* USD 11,910,966.00

Past fossil fuel use has conferred a complex mixture of benefits and risks on
current and future generations. While enabling a tremendous growth in
prosperity, the resulting greenhouse gas emissions may contribute to
irreversible changes. For example, the Greenland Ice Sheet might disintegrate in
response to anthropogenic climate forcings. The resulting sea-level rise would
create serious risks for the sustainability of low-lying regions in the United
States and beyond. Managing climate risks has already motivated local, national,
and global actions: utilities replace coal-fired power plants with gas turbines,
engineers design sea-walls for future climates, companies sequester carbon
dioxide into geological reservoirs, and the U.S. Government Accountability
Office has assessed possible geoengineering approaches. These actions raise the
question: what are sustainable, scientifically sound, technologically feasible,
economically efficient, and ethically defensible climate-risk management
strategies? Answering this question is nontrivial for several reasons. First, it
transcends the traditional boundaries between academic disciplines as well as
between academia, industry, government, and nongovernmental organizations.
Second, choosing a strategy involves complex trade-offs across a large range of
temporal and spatial scales. Third, this is a problem imbued with deep
uncertainty where decisionmakers disagree about the appropriate problem framing,
model structure, parameter values, and objectives. Characterizing and
representing this deep uncertainty is critical. For example, analyses under
different ethical frameworks can suggest strongly divergent strategies. Current
analyses of climate-risk management strategies have typically used integrated
assessment models that link knowledge and tools from fields such as Earth system
science, engineering, economics, decision analysis, operations research, and
statistics. These integrated assessments have broken important new ground, but
they face severe limitations with respect to four interrelated research
questions: (i) How large are the uncertainties? (ii) What might be actionable
early warning signals? (iii) What are the trade-offs between the diverse set of
current and potential future objectives? (iv) What are the relevant value
decisions and how do they affect the conclusions? Analyzing these questions
requires fundamental advances in the relevant disciplines, an effective, large-
scale, and sustained network to link them together, a research-training program
to educate the next generation of scientists and engineers, and an integration
of stakeholders and decisionmakers within a process of shared discovery. This
research network on sustainable climate-risk management strategies will provide
these advances and address these research questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research network will catalyze fundamental, mission-oriented, and
transdisciplinary research to characterize the trade-offs associated with
choosing among climate-risk management strategies and analyze how different
sustainability criteria interact across a broad range of temporal and spatial
scales. More broadly, the network will (i) train the next generation of diverse
scientists and engineers through an international and multi-institutional
research, education and mentoring program, (ii) provide cyber-infrastructure to
support transdisciplinary and computationally intensive research collaborations
using high-performance computation, new models, and analysis tools that are
accessible via a web interface, (iii) bring together experts across disciplines
in workshops, (iv) integrate a diverse set of stakeholders and decisionmakers
into the analyses, providing them with decision-relevant information, and (v)
reach out to educators, decisionmakers, underrepresented groups, and the general
public through cyber-infrastructure resources and interactive teaching
materials.