* 1240502
* High Plains Convection: Diurnally Varying Mesoscale-Synoptic Scale Interactions over Complex Terrain during the Mesoscale Predictability Experiment (MPEX)
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2017
* USD 443,252.00

This research seeks to identify atmospheric structures and physical features for
which uncertainties associated with initial and bottom boundary conditions are
likely to limit the 0-24 h forecast predictability of convective weather
phenomena over and east of the Rockies during the Mesoscale Predictability
Experiment (MPEX) to be held in late spring and early summer 2013. MPEX will
incorporate special datasets into high-resolution convection-allowing mesoscale
models to test ways to reduce convective storm forecast uncertainty in the 0-24
h range. Specific atmospheric structures and physical features to be targeted
include: 1) upper-tropospheric subsynoptic/mesoscale disturbances, 2) upper- and
lower-level jets, 3) three-dimensional moisture plumes, 4) boundary layer
moisture tongues, 5) lower and middle troposphere shear profiles, 6) atmospheric
stability as manifest by the steepness of midlevel lapse rates, 7) low-level
thermal and moisture boundaries, and low-level relative vorticity strips, and 8)
soil moisture content and land use characteristics. The PI will be active in the
forecasting component of MPEX will seek to identify potential atmospheric
structures and physical features that can be targeted for extra dropsonde
observations and Microwave Temperature Profiling data coverage needed for
atmospheric predictability studies. A primary research focus will be the
preparation of synoptic and mesoscale analyses of a variety of selected
convective weather systems during MPEX to help assess the feedbacks between deep
convective storms and their environment, given that the bulk upscale effects of
organized deep convection are known to modify the downstream upper-level flow
(e.g., jet/ridge structures). These physically based storm analyses will be used
to help assess model predictability in collaboration with other MPEX principal
investigators.

Intellectual merit: This project will enhance our understanding of the dynamical
and thermodynamical processes that conspire to limit the atmospheric
predictability a subset of convective weather phenomena that occur over complex
terrain and are inherently difficult to predict. The results from this project
should help to establish bounds on error growth rates for convective weather
phenomena. The project will also provide an opportunity for collaborate research
efforts between observationalists and modelers to assess to what extent
subjectively derived feature-based uncertainty estimates can be employed in
atmospheric predictability studies.

Broader impacts: The results from this study will have applications to the
forecast community and the general public. Significant gaps in our core
knowledge exist about how convective weather systems develop, organize, mature,
and dissipate over complex terrain of the Rockies and the High Plains. Enhanced
datasets obtained during the field phase of this study should allow researchers
to gain a greater scientific understanding of convective storm phenomena. The
results from this study will be disseminated widely to the research and
operational communities. Graduate students will be trained in mesoscale
analyses, convective storm dynamics, and atmospheric predictability studies.