* 1240410
* EFRI-BioFlex: Rapid Identification of Blood, Urine, and Saliva Toxins and Bacterial Infections with a SERS/LSS Flexible System
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,999,839.00

Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activity: A portable hybrid sensing system for
the rapid detection and identification of toxins and bacteria in blood, urine,
and saliva will be developed by combining surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
and light scattering spectroscopy. The unique chemical sensitivity of Raman for
toxin detection and the sensitivity of light scattering for bacterial
identification in an inexpensive, portable system would provide a powerful and
rapid diagnostic tool suitable for emergency, ambulatory or home use.
Unintentional drug overdose deaths account for more than 25,000 annual
fatalities in the United States. Similarly, bacterial infection results in an
even larger number of deaths. Both toxin poisoning and bacterial infection,
which can cause sepsis and septic shock, are serious health problems in
emergency medicine, affecting millions of people. In life threatening cases of
poisoning and bacteremia, the patient survival rate is highly correlated with
the speed of identifying the offending agent. Interfacing the system with a
portable data transfer device such as a smartphone to quickly transmit results
to healthcare providers in a personalized telemedicine manner will allow for the
fastest possible treatment times in situations that need them most. The
combination of toxin and bacterial identification in a single system has the
potential to decrease or eliminate the need for several major time-consuming
diagnostic tests that require large expensive instruments and advanced
facilities. This system will allow rapid, reliable, and inexpensive
identification of virtually all biologically dangerous compounds and will
surpass the limited number of toxins which current large and expensive clinical
instruments can detect. Similarly, blood culture technology for identifying the
bacterial species in an infection takes several days, with some strains taking
up to five days to be detected, or simply failing to culture entirely. In cases
of severe sepsis, this slow procedure results in a patient survival of
approximately 40%. Additionally, the rapid classification of bacterial
infections has a likelihood of reducing the emergence of bacterial strains with
antibiotic resistance. The proposed flexible system will be transformative in
nature, will have an immediate impact on the mortality rates in life-threatening
circumstances, and could also have a profound influence on the future of
healthcare delivery.

Broader Impact of Proposed Activity: The developed instrumentation will serve as
a research and educational tool for clinical fellows specializing in emergency
and laboratory medicine at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and by Harvard
Biological and Biomedical Science Program graduate students in their thesis
research projects. It will also be made available to other educational
institutions for use in collaborative projects. The project also involves summer
undergraduate and high school students to work on sub-topics in the research and
development related to the device. Material related to the rapid identification
of chemical toxins and blood stream infections with the proposed system will be
incorporated in two courses at Harvard. The results of this work will also be
disseminated broadly through peer-reviewed journal publications and
international conference presentations. The Center for Advanced Biomedical
Imaging and Photonics is dedicated to the integration of members of under-
represented groups. One key goal is to have women and minorities as active
postdocs and/or graduate students in all research groups. The combined flexible
system will benefit society in three ways. First, a substantial decrease in the
cost and complexity of operation of the diagnostic tests will reduce the cost of
healthcare. Second, the presence of fast tests for toxin and bacterial
identification will save tens of thousands of lives. Third, the proposed system
will reduce the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains, which would
help alleviate one of the largest and most expensive emerging healthcare issues.