* 1240412
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Colonial Persistence and Transformation of Social and Economic Relations:  Veracruz Port to Pensacola Presidios
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Barbara Stark, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2015
* USD 29,890.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Barbara L. Stark, Ms. Krista Eschbach will compare
18th century historical and archaeological data from casta neighborhoods in
Veracruz, Mexico, to that from presidios of Pensacola, Florida, to assess
persistence and transformation in social and economic relations. Colonial
research often structures questions of social transformation within a
colonized/colonizer dichotomy, which can disguise variation within both groups.
Between A.D. 1698 and 1763, hundreds of castas (those of mixed heritage) were
sent from urban centers in Mexico to three Pensacola presidios. This research
will make explicit the origin and strategies of these diverse colonial agents
that were historically linked through military recruitment and governmental
supply. Because the presidios were sequentially occupied over 65 years, they
offer an ideal case for assessing rapidity of social change in a borderland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess strategies, Ms. Eschbach will analyze historical
data and pottery from residential contexts. Approximately half of the pottery
categories recovered from these contexts are well understood, but plain, lead-
glazed, and slipped (or painted) pottery have received less attention and will
constitute the main focus of laboratory procedures. Analyses will include visual
inspection of attributes, chemical and mineralogical studies, and petrography.
These methods will be used to identify wares that were locally produced in
Veracruz and Pensacola and to compare manufacturing techniques to discriminate
between wares produced by castas and Native Americans in Florida.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project represents one of the few interregional studies of
changing ceramic technology and socioeconomic relations in an imperial frontier.
At the conceptual level, this research examines the contributions of both
institutions and diverse colonizers in social transformations. A better
understanding of social transformations offers insights into imperial/colonial
persistence and the emergence of new nations within the following century. At
the substantive level, this research revises broad categorization of pottery in
Florida by discriminating production by castas from Native Americans. Further,
this research will provide comparative data from Instrumental Neutron Activation
Analysis for regions that have received less attention and will compare the
utility of a lower cost method of chemical characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will add to current understanding of the colonial
era in Mexican archaeology and contribute to information sharing across
international borders, through publications, presentations, and public talks in
Spanish and English in Mexico and the United States. All data will be made
permanently available online through the Digital Archaeological Record. Graduate
and undergraduate anthropology students will receive training and experience in
archaeometric techniques. In the United States, this project will add to our
current understanding of African and Mexican contributions to the American past.