* 1240091
* Expanding and Strengthening the Secondary STEM Teacher Training Program
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Allison Wilson, Benedictine University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,199,804.00

The Noyce Teacher Scholar Program at Benedictine University is providing 2-year
scholarships to 27 pre-service undergraduates and 33 STEM professional career
changers. In addition, 23 undergraduates potentially interested in STEM teaching
careers are enjoying summer internships where they become exposed to the basics
of problem-based learning and then assist with the Summer Sleuths program. The
project expects to produce at least 49 new mathematics/science teachers highly
qualified to teach mathematics or science in grades 6-12. Building on existing
campus strengths, the project is focusing on chemistry, physics, biology, and
mathematics. The project is partnering with nearby school districts including
Naperville Community Unit School District 203 and Chicago Academy High School,
as well as the Golden Apple Foundation. The project is utilizing "Inquiry
Weekend Workshops" to allow Noyce Scholars to learn the basics of inquiry
pedagogy from master teachers. A required seminar course "Careers in Science" is
helping to recruit students to the STEM teaching profession. Master teachers
mentor the Noyce Scholars throughout their teaching internship and into their
first year of teaching, in addition to allowing the Scholars observation
opportunities in their high needs classrooms. Faculty from multiple disciplines
are ensuring teachers are prepared with strong content knowledge, a commitment
to inquiry-based science instruction, and a thorough preparation in pedagogy.
The project is creating a model that includes inspirational educational
experiences for future teachers, early exposure to field experiences, and
interdisciplinary interactions that help students develop innovative pedagogical
techniques. The project is advancing, applying, and disseminating knowledge
about strategies for the recruitment, preparation, induction and retention of
highly-qualified STEM teachers for high-needs schools in an urban area.
Preparing scholars to be the nation's leading educational change agents who
integrate inquiry, problem-based learning, and research into their mathematics
and science courses will have a significant impact on increasing learning
opportunities and achievement for students in high-needs schools. The project
also is expected to increase their interest in and enthusiasm for science, which
will result in higher numbers of these students pursuing STEM careers.
Implementation of the proposed model is being documented so that it can be
replicated in other urban settings.