* 1240798
* Dimensions:  Collaborative Research:  Anthropogenic nutrient input drives genetic, functional and taxonomic biodiversity in hypereutrophic Lake Taihu, China
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Wayne Gardner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 499,980.00

Human activities have dramatically increased nitrogen inputs into many rivers
and lakes, causing algal blooms that threaten economic and recreational uses of
those waters. Lake Taihu, the third largest lake in China, experiences damaging
blooms of toxic cyanobacteria as a result of excessive nutrient inputs. The
identities, nitrogen processing capabilities, and activities of microbial
communities in Lake Taihu will be examined to determine if nitrogen processing
can be predicted from knowledge of the identity and genetic makeup of those
communities. Various components of the nitrogen cycle will be measured and
linked to representative molecular markers which, coupled with high throughput
genetic sequencing, will provide a genetic database of nitrogen-cycling
processes in freshwater ecosystems. A goal of the project will be to link
microbial taxonomic, genetic, and functional data in a model that can predict
how reduction of nutrient inputs will affect toxic cyanobacterial
blooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have broad applicability to the
management of aquatic systems that are threatened by excessive nutrient inputs,
a problem that is increasing worldwide. Additional broader impacts will include
training of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, international
student exchanges, training of a postdoctoral researcher, and incorporation of
science journalism students into field studies to promote adult scientific
literacy.