* 1240677
* International Workshop on BioDesign Automation (IWBDA)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) brings together
researchers from electronic design automation (the practice of using computer
software to build complex electronics) and synthetic biology (the forward design
of novel biological systems using engineering principles). The goal of IWBDA is
to make biology more easily, robustly, reliably, and predictably engineered and
therefore, tackle challenges in biology and medicine, leading to advances in
disease diagnosis, treatment and prevention.

Existing synthetic biology conferences and meetings do not explicitly focus on
bridging the gap between the work of experimentalists and computational
researchers. Bridging this divide is essential for the field of synthetic
biology to fulfill its promise. Furthermore, other venues do not actively
include the EDA community, which can bring a wide range of experiences,
expertise, and perspectives to the design of novel biological systems.

IWBDA has been held successfully in 2009, 2010, and 2011 when it was co-located
with the largest conference for EDA (the Design Automation Conference; DAC). DAC
connected the IWBDA audience to the EDA community of over 10,000 academic and
industrial participants. IWBDA includes keynote and invited talks, tutorials,
poster sessions, panel discussions, as well as dedicated time for informal
discussions.

The intellectual merit of this workshop is a key strength. This workshop will
provide a venue for between twelve and fifteen technical talks, four invited
lectures, ten to twenty posters, and include an industry/academic panel session.
Topics will be diverse and include areas such as: Parts and Standardization,
Biological Circuit Simulators, Biological Circuit Design, CAD Tools for
Synthetic Biology and Gene Network Reconstruction. No other such workshop exists
in Synthetic Biology/EDA. The broader impacts of IWBDA are numerous. A wide
variety of researchers (120+) from EDA and synthetic biology will be brought
together in a unique context which does not exist elsewhere. The slides,
posters, and abstracts from the session will be available for the community.

NSF support ensures a technical and diverse set of undergraduate, graduate, and
post doctorial students can attend the conference to present research, learn
more about the field, and expand their networking opportunities.