* 1240434
* SCOSTEP:  U.S. Participation in the Scientific Committee On Solar-Terrestrial Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Katherine Bailey, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 159,683.00

This award supports the continued representation of the United States in the
Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics (SCOSTEP) of the International
Council for Science (ICSU). SCOSTEP organizes and conducts international solar-
terrestrial physics programs of finite duration in cooperation with other ICSU
bodies, including the Committee of Space Research (COSPAR), International
Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA), International Association of
Meteorology and Atmospheric Sciences (IAMAS), International Astronomical Union
(IAU), International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP), International
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR), and the International Union of Radio Science (URSI). SCOSTEP's
principal tasks are to promote, organize, and coordinate international
interdisciplinary programs and symposia in solar-terrestrial physics (STP), and
to define the data relating to these programs that should be exchanged through
data centers. Through its programs, SCOSTEP advances scientific knowledge of
solar terrestrial physics, supports a globally-aware and engaged STP community,
and promotes the development of early-career STP scientists. SCOSTEP provides a
forum where scientists from different disciplines can interact, generate ideas,
and implement activities along and across disciplinary lines. SCOSTEP's current
scientific program is the Climate and Weather of the Sun-Earth System (CAWSES),
which is designed to significantly enhance the understanding of the space
environment and its impacts on life and society. The U.S. continues to have a
substantial scientific and leadership role in SCOSTEP, and the U.S. dues support
these activities.