* 1240264
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Multi-scale Origami for Novel Photonics, Energy Conversion
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2021
* Anastasios John Hart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,404,013.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to study how the folding of planar
sheets can produce novel, three-dimensional, functional structures ranging from
millimeters to nanometers in size. Special "nanostructured paper" will be
created, comprising thin films and membranes containing a variety of functional
nanoscale objects (e.g. carbon nanotubes, semiconductor and metal nanoparticles,
etc.); the nano-paper will be etched and perforated to facilitate controlled
folding into more complex shapes, which can be programmed to respond to impulses
and pre-determined conditions such as local and global changes in temperature,
humidity, and light. The research will examine how folding can be triggered by
mechanical strain, external electrical or magnetic fields, and local laser
heating. Using a combination of experiments and computer modeling, the
fundamental principles governing the creation and transformation of sheets into
three-dimensional (3D) objects will be studied, in particular focusing on how
the size of the object influences the folding dynamics. This knowledge should
help resolve significant challenges of materials integration into complex and
robust 3D structures for, e.g., the control of light propagation in energy
conversion devices, scalable fabrication of optical and electromagnetic
metamaterials, and engineering of reconfigurable "smart" surfaces powered by
changes in ambient conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research can address broader technological and societal challenges, including
those in the areas of renewable energy harvesting, energy efficiency, water
purification, environmentally benign microfabrication, etc. Specifically, this
work may result in novel approaches to the design and deployment of focal plane
arrays, beam steering, dynamic control of radar signatures, thermal management,
and other applications. Paper folding techniques (www.mattshlian.com) will be
used as a means of inspiration, realization, and visualization of structures at
larger scales, and will provide design principles for scale-independent
miniaturization. Special sessions on ?origami electronics? will be conducted at
the scientific conferences attended by the investigators. The visual and hands-
on nature of the research is likely to resonate with a wide range of students
and audiences, which will be reached through summer workshops on origami and its
technological applications. Further outreach activities will include exhibiting
at the world-renowned Ann Arbor Art Fair, the Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum, and
presentations at various arts / design / interdisciplinary conferences (e.g.
Siggraph, ARS Electronica), as well as at traditional gallery venues for the
arts (e.g. Detroit Institute of Arts, Cranbrook Academy, Urban Institute for
Contemporary Art).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in part by
funds from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research.