* 1240459
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Multi-field Responsive Origami Structures - Advancing the Emerging Frontier of Active Compliant Mechanisms
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Mary Frecker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,124,000.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-Assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to develop methods to design origami
structures that actively fold from an initially flat sheet to complex three-
dimensional shapes in response to multiple fields (e.g., electric, thermal,
magnetic). They will also actively unfold, in contrast to current origami
structures that must be manually unfolded. These multi-field responsive origami
shapes will be developed through collaboration with a visual artist and
approximated and modeled using geometric modeling and &lt;br/&gt;origami
mathematics. The artistically inspired shapes will provide targets for designing
novel active compliant mechanisms, which along with predictive multi-scale
modeling and multi-physics simulations, will guide the development of new active
materials. This new class of multi-field responsive materials includes micro-
and nano-enabled hybrids where a graded distribution of particles enables
coupling between multiple external fields to allow selective folding and
unfolding along creases. A design optimization framework will be developed to
integrate the modeling, design, and active materials efforts and enable system
trade studies from the nano to the macro scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
completion of this project will foster novel concepts and design innovation in
several application areas. For example, origami-based surgical instruments will
benefit minimally invasive surgery, where there is a need for mm-scale devices
that can deploy inside the body to manipulate tissue. Similarly, origami-based
adaptive aircraft structures, reconfigurable robots, and deployable space
structures will help enhance mission versatility. A summer student exchange
program and multi-university capstone design projects among Penn State, Rowan,
and George Mason will help broaden participation of under-represented groups in
engineering &lt;br/&gt;and STEM majors. The research will also be leveraged to
create interactive artistic pieces and K-12-targeted workshops for the Discovery
Space Museum in State College, PA and Penn State's Palmer Museum of Art.