* 1240079
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: "Proyecto Omo:  Social Differentiation and Mortuary Variability at the Provincial Tiwanaku Site Omo M10 (Moquegua, Peru)"
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Sarah Baitzel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 18,716.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Paul S. Goldstein, Sarah Baitzel will analyze and
compare burial contexts associated with the high-altitude Tiwanaku culture (A.D.
500-1000), one of the earliest expansive states to arise in the South American
Andes. The burials were excavated in 2010-2011 at the site of Omo M10, a
Tiwanaku colony located in the Moquegua Valley of Southern Peru on the western
slopes of the Andes. Although the work focuses on a single prehistoric culture
its intellectual relevance is broad and has present day relevance because it
provides insight into the mechanisms through which members of diverse ethnic
identities were able to integrate into a unified social
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being the only Tiwanaku colonial settlement with a
temple, the Omo M10 site occupied an important role in the region as a religious
or administrative center. The spatial separation of burials into 13 cemeteries
located around the temple forms the basis for this comparative research. By
testing whether patterns in the distribution of grave offerings and mourning
activities correspond with the spatial sectoring of cemeteries, this project
will investigate in what ways this reflected the social order of Tiwanaku
colonial society. The uniquely large and well-preserved burial sample from Omo
M10 will allow Ms. Baitzel to investigate funerary rituals in their entirety,
ranging from more traditional materials like human remains and pottery to rare
preserved cloth and food items. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
individuals formed and maintained their social identity as members both of
ethnic kin groups and participants in newly emerging states plays a central role
in the study of early complex societies. Mortuary archaeology offers two
distinct advantages for this investigation: it directly links material evidence
of funerary activities to the deceased individuals. In addition, it focuses on a
period of social crisis, during which the death of a community member requires
mourners to reaffirm and public assert and display their affiliation.
Accordingly, this research contributes to Tiwanaku and Andean archaeology a new
perspective of how rituals created and maintained different identities social
relations; the results will also present a comparative case study for similar
research on complex societies around the world. The combination of a
quantitative, material-oriented methodology and a theoretical focus on social
practice, ritual and identity formation bridges divided and diverging schools of
thought in the field of mortuary archaeology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will have a broader impact both at the local and international level.
The data resulting from this research will provide a comparative sample and
database that will serve as a resource for future investigations, and will form
the basis of several upcoming doctoral dissertation projects in the U.S. The
proposed analyses bring together specialists and students from U.S. (University
of Florida, Arizona State University) and Peruvian institutions (Universidad
Cayetano Heredia, Lima) to provide opportunities for collaboration and training.
The resulting publications written for peer-reviewed journals and a public
audience will be made available to local institutions and libraries in English
and Spanish; presentations of the research will be directed towards academic
audiences in the U.S., Peru and Chile, as well as the general public in
Moquegua. Special emphasis will be placed on disseminating this research to the
public through local institutions and media to advance understanding of the
region's prehistory and to raise awareness about conservation of cultural
patrimony.