* 1240064
* Central Virginia Undergraduate Mathematics Scholarship Program (CVUMSP)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2020
* Cynthia Thomas, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,449,960.00

Partners for this Track 1 project to produce 41 high school mathematics teachers
include Virginia State University (VSU) as the lead institution, three community
colleges (John Tyler and J. Sargeant Reynolds Community Colleges and Richard
Bland Junior College) and two school districts (Petersburg and Chesterfield
County Public Schools). Their overall goal is to recruit, prepare and sustain
teachers, from underserved populations, who are capable of creating
professional, positive, research-informed, STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) responsive, technologically-intensive and effective
mathematics learning environments for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Scholars are being recruited from three specific populations: (1) VSU's current
STEM majors, (2) students pursuing certificates or degrees in STEM-related
disciplines at the partnering two-year community colleges, and (3) juniors and
seniors at local high schools. As a recruiting tool, summer internships are
being offered to 100 freshman and sophomore students from both VSU and the
cooperating community colleges. The internship includes, among other activities:
(1) a three credit mathematics course; (2) reinforcement of mathematics skills;
(3) introduction to web technology; and (4) an overview of STEM careers. The
program for the scholars emphasizes community building and includes: (1) faculty
and peer mentoring; (2) preparation for all requirements of secondary licensure,
including the Praxis; (3) resume writing and interviewing skills; (4) an
introduction to useful technology and grant writing; (5) participation in
professional organizations and meetings; and (6) team building. Support for the
Scholars during their first three years of teaching, includes: (1) a Mentor
/Scholar Teacher Professional Community comprised of new teachers, mentors and
faculty at VSU and the partnering community colleges designed to provide
individual, group, and internet housed contact among the participants; (2)
summer mini-workshops involving current and past Scholars, exemplary mathematics
high school teachers, and VSU and partnering community college faculty that
focus on effective pedagogy, problem solving, diversity preparation, technology,
and classroom management; and (3) a funded one credit-hour hybrid
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Information from the research-
based evaluation of the project will be widely disseminated through contacts in
the state and through presentations at professional
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The nature of the student
population at the institutions involved and the emphasis of the program on
service at underserved schools insures creation of a diverse effective set of
secondary mathematics teachers throughout the schools served by this project.