* 1240380
* EFRI BioFlex: Flexible Resorbable Organic and Nanomaterial Therapeutic Systems (FRONTS)
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Vivek Subramanian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2017
* USD 2,000,000.00

The investigators propose to design, develop and characterize novel flexible,
resorbable nanomaterials and devices for wound healing applications. The work is
divided into three tasks to support the engineering of a resorbable system for
wounding healing: a) the development of flexible, resorbable materials
themselves containing resorbable, high-quality conductors (for use as
interconnects and electrodes); b) the development of resorbable, biocompatible
batteries; c) the use of implanted flexible -- ultimately resorbable? devices to
map and control the electric field wound gradient in internal wounds.
Additionally, the work leverages efforts at UCSF on internal wound healing in
the context of anastomoses and the extensive experience of the Pediatric Device
Consortium
(www.pediatricdeviceconsortium.org/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;When implanting therapeutic electronic constructs within the body, a
key concern is their removal after the therapeutic effect is complete. This need
to remove such constructs has largely limited the deployment of electronic
therapeutic systems to applications where they may be easily removed.
Specifically, it is typically unacceptable to leave such a device within the
body, since gradual degradation of the device could introduce toxic materials in
large quantities and sizes into the body. The proposed effort lies at the
intersection of nanomaterials, flexible electronics, and medical electronics.
The effort brings together leading researchers in these fields. By leveraging
the world-leading expertise of the individual researchers in each of these
fields, the effort aims to achieve several dramatic innovations in medical
electronics, including novel approaches to resorbable conductors and
implantable, resorbable power sources. If successful, these efforts will create
a body of knowledge and technology to enable the realization of sophisticated
in-body therapeutic systems that leverage electrical stimulation to improve
healing. This systems approach at translating cutting edge flexible and
resorbable electronics directly to the clinic has the potential to transform
soft-tissue wound healing therapies. While there are efforts aimed at electronic
systems on skin, these efforts are limited by the absence of materials and
process development specifically for medical applications, and generally do not
aim to develop therapeutic applications; at best therefore, they are
diagnostically focused. Similarly, there are numerous efforts focused on
flexible electronics, but only relatively simple in-body systems have been
demonstrated. This research will provide high resolution, in-body mapping of the
wound gradient field in a minimally invasive way and will impact the knowledge
and success of cell recovery in many medical procedures. Likewise, the impact of
a demonstration of successful stimulation to affect internal wound healing in a
controlled or predictable manner would be very high.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The effort will introduce a
multi-facetted education and outreach program, targeted at increasing
recruitment and retention of high-school students into science and engineering,
and extending opportunities to underrepresented minorities at all levels of
education from school to university. Opportunities for high school students,
undergraduates, and graduate students, as well as underrepresented minorities at
all levels will be provided, and will be matched to research within the effort.
In addition to research opportunities, seminars and tutorials will be organized
to develop interest in flexible electronics for medical applications.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in performing this work.
Undergraduates will be engaged in experimental design and metrology tutorials to
prepare them for future careers in research. The results of this proposal will
also be used in a University-sponsored high-school outreach program. High-school
students will be invited to visit the laboratory and to gain hands-on
experience. Finally, specific programs targeting recruitment of minority
students will be developed as part of this project, with the goal of providing
opportunities, training, and mentorship at all levels for minority students to
drive their retention and success in STEM field.