* 1240000
* Developing Highly Qualified Middle Grades Teachers with Expertise in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Daniel Mosse', University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This Capacity-Building project at the University of Pittsburgh in Partnership
with the Pittsburgh Public School District and Propel Schools is designed to
accomplish the following: (1) develop a program (SUSTAINS--STEM Undergraduate
Students Teaching Adolescents Innovation and Sustainability) that allows
undergraduate STEM majors at the University of Pittsburgh to interact with young
adolescents in formal and informal learning contexts and to engage with peers
and faculty members around issues pertaining to K-12 education; (2) develop a
state-approved, one-year Masters of Arts in Teaching (MAT) program to prepare
middle grades (4-8) teachers who will specialize in mathematics and/or science;
(3) integrate issues related to sustainability across the undergraduate and
teacher preparation programs; and (4) expand the University's capacity for
faculty in the Schools of Education, Arts &amp; Sciences, and Engineering to
collaborate on program and course design. These capacity-building activities
enable the University of Pittsburgh to support a robust Noyce Scholars program
in the future. In addition to the K-12 schools and the University, informal
science education venues (the Carnegie Science Center and Grow Pittsburgh, an
organization concerned with sustainable food production in urban settings) are
integral to the program blueprint. A core theory of action undergirding the
design of this new teacher education program is that the next generation of
educators needs to be prepared to engage young learners in studying,
understanding, and contributing to the solutions for complex environmental
challenges, in part by drawing connections between their personal decisions and
sustainability. The envisioned SUSTAINS and MAT program would prepare new
teachers who can support adolescents as they make those crucial connections.