* 1240641
* City as Living Laboratory for Sustainability in Urban Design
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* John Fraser, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 09/30/2012
* USD 60,127.00

The Institute for Learning Innovation, in collaboration with Mary Miss Studio
and the Institute for Urban Design, is conducting an exploratory research and
development project on sustainable practices related to the built infrastructure
of New York City. The work will (1) pilot test and study new interpretive
strategies for urban "place-based" public learning experiences that focus
pedestrians' attention on a city's ecology and existing built sustainability
infrastructure; (2) engage urban design professionals and STEM researchers to
explore how these new strategies have the potential to transform how urban
design fields inform, dialog and interact with the public about sustainable
urban design and planning; and (3) assess the effectiveness of these public
interpretation programs on STEM learning beyond traditional Informal Science
Learning Environments (ISEs) such as science museums. Project participants also
include faculty from the City College of NY Graduate Program in Urban Design,
STEM faculty from Columbia University, and staff of the Provisions Library in
Washington, D.C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an early phase of the
"City as Living Laboratory" initiative that can leverage the Rockefeller
Foundation-funded Urban Design Week program in New York City scheduled to occur
September 15 - 20, 2011. This request to NSF adds an additional track to the
process to specifically focus on STEM learning and urban sustainability. From
the promotional materials: "The Institute for Urban Design is currently
preparing for the first annual Urban Design Week, a public festival created to
engage New Yorkers in the fascinating and complex issues of the public realm and
celebrate the city's exceptional urbanity. Through a rich roster of charettes,
summits, installations, film screenings, exhibitions, and tours, Urban Design
Week will draw in citizens from every borough and walk of life and highlight the
idea that cities are made by collective effort, and that each of us can be a
part of that great endeavor." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to
generate new models for public engagement with science in the city environment
and to explore how urban designers and planners, as they design for
sustainability, can more effectively collaborate with STEM researchers and with
the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has both research and programmatic
deliverables.&lt;br/&gt;Research activities include: Public Audiences:
observational study of pedestrians in the installation environment; intercept
surveys of the public about their experiences with the streetscape
installations. Professional Audiences: pre-installation surveys on the role of
public space science interpretation for altering public discourse about urban
planning and sustainable cities; focus group assessment of professionals'
experiences with observing public interactions with the installations; online
delayed- post experience survey on learning outcomes in terms of knowledge,
attitude, motivation and anticipated impacts on professional practices; analysis
of blog postings and public media surrounding the installation; survey of
attendees at an ISE forum on the project, its goals, outcomes and potential for
future developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmatic deliverables include: a
workshop that engages urban design students in the development of experimental
streetscape installations; a pilot installation on streets in the City College
of NY (consistent with approvals already received by NYC Dept. of
Transportation); a City as Living Laboratory art-science workshop for Urban
Design Week professionals to highlight possible benefits of inter-disciplinary
collaboration; a panel discussion around new forms of citizen engagement through
a "city as a science learning environment"; a forum specifically for ISE
professionals to explore the research findings and potential for use as a
strategy to increase science learning in city places.