* 1240035
* STEM EduGators: UF Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,165.00

This Phase I project establishes the STEM EduGators to increase the quantity and
quality of STEM majors who enter the teaching profession. A total of fifty
$10,000 scholarships for undergraduate students entering the final student
teaching experience and ninety $4950 summer internships are being awarded. The
Program is expanding opportunities for 10 undergraduates per year who need
financial assistance as they continue their major in a mathematics or science
discipline while acquiring a minor in education. The Noyce Summer Internship
Program provides 18 STEM EduGators with job opportunities in informal science
education settings. Project partners include the University of Florida's College
of Liberal Arts and Sciences and College of Education, the Alachua County school
district, and the PK Yonge Development Research School. The project, using
formative and summative assessment as well as an external evaluator, is tracking
the Noyce scholars to determine outcomes of bringing STEM majors into teaching.
The project includes research on and support for Noyce Scholars as they enter
the teaching profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program operates as a component of the University of Florida UFTeach program.
During their first four years of full-time teaching, the Noyce Scholars are
expected to impact and enhance learning for approximately 18,000 students. The
first cohorts of UFTeach students recruited from fall 2009 through spring 2011
indicate that the program is significantly increasing the number and diversity
of STEM majors going into teaching. Over the five-year duration of funding
ninety informal science education internships are being awarded. Each intern is
reaching out to hundreds of school children and citizens.