* 1240374
* EFRI-ODISSEI:   Photo-Origami
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Elisabeth Stade, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2014
* USD 1,999,377.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to create a holistic approach, named
photo-origami, to transform a flat polymer sheet into a mechanically robust 3D
structure via a sequence of light-activated folding and deformation steps. This
new manufacturing approach will be achieved by integrating shape memory
polymers, photo-responsive compliant material, and optical waveguides into a
smart canvas to enable sequentially folding. The research will develop methods
that are applicable to several interdisciplinary fields including active
materials, photomechanics, photochemistry, and optics, and thus can be exploited
in a wide array of applications. The research approach starts from the
establishment of the basic components and the corresponding mechanistic
understanding, progresses to the development of multiphysical nonlinear design
theory, and achieves the final goal of creating photo origami. Deliverables
include a suite of active materials and their activation methods, multiphysical
modeling and design tools, demonstration and validation, documentation of
research results, engineering student education, engineering research experience
for high school students, and dissemination the research achievements to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will enable fundamentally new approaches to manufacture materials and devices
with extraordinary functionalities. Example applications include new sparse
materials with low weight but high strength or anisotropic properties, deep 3D
MEMs with integrated electronic, RF or optical circuit elements. Manufacturing
approaches from this research will offer the advantage of a flat initial state
where functional devices can be easily placed and a final complicated 3D
structure. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from a rigorous
training at the interface between material science, mechanics, optics, and
design optimization through involvement in the research. The research will also
be tightly integrated into STEM education and outreach activities by partnering
with the local school district to bring public awareness and to inspire K-12
student?s interest in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in
part by funds from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research.