* 1240308
* Support for student travel to the 34th Symposium (International) on Combustion, Warsaw, Poland, July 29 - August 3, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Paul Ronney, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1240308&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Paul D.
Ronney&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to help
support travel and living expenses for about 25 graduate (and possibly
undergraduate) students to attend the 34th International Symposium on Combustion
and present their research at that venue. All students supported by this grant
will be (i) U.S. citizens or permanent residents (ii) Full-time Ph.D. students
at an accredited U. S. university (iii) Supported by their academic advisor, as
evidenced by a letter of recommendation, and (iv) An author or co-author of a
contributed paper accepted by the Program Committee. NSF funds are targeted to
increase the participation of graduate students at the meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion research is a multi-disciplinary field
encompassing diverse disciplines in engineering and science. Society relies on
combustion for power generation, transportation, and manufacturing. The
combustion symposium provides a forum for international exchange of technical
ideas. Policymakers will also be in attendance to participate in the exchange of
information. The intellectual merit of this activity arises from the
participation of international combustion experts from various countries,
dissemination of their technical findings, their communications with students,
and their visions of future research directions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 80%
of the world's energy production and use is based on the combustion of fossil
fuels. Combustion is ubiquitous in traditional energy conversion systems such as
automotive engines, stationary and aircraft gas turbines, rocket and space
propulsion, electrical power generation, industrial furnaces, and home and
institutional space heating. Moreover, emerging technology areas such as
hypersonic propulsion, micro scale power generation and material synthesis
depend critically on chemically reacting flow processes. The world's dependence
on combustion processes has led to many technological challenges including air
quality, energy efficiency, global warming, and fire/explosion safety. Thus,
combustion is an active, vital area of research.