* 1240488
* EFRI-PSBR: The Diatom-based Photosynthetic Biorefinery
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Bettye Maddux, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,000,000.00

Intellectual Merit- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainability of algal biofuels
production has been the subject of recent life cycle analysis studies and
resource analysis studies, which conclude that algal biofuel production must be
coupled with production of co-products though distributed or consolidated
bioprocessing routes which require water and nutrient recycling to be viable
systems.The overall goal of this project award made to Professors Gregory L.
Rorrer, Debra Gale, Christine J. Kelly, Bettye L. Maddux, J. Antonio Torres and
Robert Durst, all of Oregon State University, is to harness the biosynthetic
capacities of algae to make unique and valuable coproducts in addition to
advanced biofuels in scalable photobioreactor systems. To demonstrate this
integrated approach,the research will harness the unique biosynthetic capacities
of photosynthetic, biomineralizing diatoms to flexibly make three diverse
product streams: N-acetyl glucosamine biopolymer (chitin) microfibers and its
monomer glucosamine for biomedical &amp; food applications, lipids or terpenoid
hydrocarbons for chemicals and liquid transportation fuels, and metal oxide
nanomaterials with a host of unique properties &amp; applications. This project
will focus on bioprocess engineering systems approaches to guide the cellular
biosynthesis of three valued product streams by diatom microalgae, all within a
single organism. One example configuration to be evaluated incorporates three
cultivation stages, each carried out at a separate feeding strategy designed to
stimulate biosynthesis of a given product. This is one of the awards made by the
Emerging Frontiers of Research and Innovation Program (EFRI) at the National
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts-
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the sustainable production of chemicals and
energy will be one of the grand challenges of the 21st century. Photosynthetic
microorganisms such as algae can capture solar energy to drive the reduction of
CO2 to energy-dense molecules. However, coproducts &lt;br/&gt;are also needed to
enable the commercial viability of algal biofuels. The diatom-based biorefinery
concept can extend beyond &lt;br/&gt;glucosamine, biofuel, and metal oxide
nanomaterials as the major products. However, this is an excellent model system
to advance fundamental science and engineering understanding of photosynthetic
biorefineries, particularly with respect to the bioprocess engineering and
underlying cellular processes in photosynthetic algal culture systems needed to
orchestrate the flexible biosynthesis of a diversity of valued product streams,
not just biofuels, in a scalable context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use
the proposed EFRI project to deliver multiple education and outreach
opportunities, designed to bring photosynthetic biorefinery concepts to a broad
audience, and to engage under-represented groups in the biosciences and
engineering. Specifically, a research-based summer residential camp for high
school students from under-represented groups called SESEY, coordinated through
OSU, will be enhanced to provide support for four additional student teams on
algal biofuel related topics. Design project modules based on photosynthetic
biorefineries will also be incorporated into undergraduate bioengineering
capstone design courses. Existing programs at OSU, including the College
Assistance Migrant Program, will be used to recruit four undergraduate students
from under-represented groups for summer research experiences. Finally, a
university-level course titled Navigating the Academy in the Biosciences will be
developed to provide professional development of graduate students and post-docs
from underrepresented groups in the biosciences and bioengineering.