* 1240010
* Delaware State University Scholarships for Teachers in Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Rayton Sianjina, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,999.00

Delaware State University (DSU) in partnership with Delaware's Lake Forest and
Red Clay Consolidated School Districts is recruiting 28 new highly-qualified,
mathematics and science teachers for Delaware and surrounding states. The Phase
I Teacher Scholarship Track program provides up to 3-years in scholarships for
four cohorts of 7 DSU juniors and seniors majoring in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The scholarships help Noyce scholars
complete their BS degrees in STEM disciplines and receive a Master of Arts in
Teaching (MAT). This program builds on DSU's NCATE-accredited teacher education
program and the existing early field experiences partnerships with the Red Clay
Consolidated and Lake Forest School Districts. First year Noyce Scholars are
introduced to teaching by pairing them with board-certified veteran mentor
teachers for extensive field experiences. The Scholars also participate in
Saturday round table meetings, and receive high-quality training in standards
driven inquiry- and problem-based teaching, curriculum development, teaching
with technology, and reflective practice. Further, Noyce graduates enroll in a
First Year Teachers Seminar course at DSU and receive stipends for continued
support and professional development during their crucial first year of
teaching.