* 1240441
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Mechanical Meta-Materials from Self-Folding Polymer Sheets
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Ryan Hayward, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,008,500.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to develop self-folding polymer sheets
as a platform for new mechanical meta-materials that take advantage of origami
principles to provide highly tunable mechanical responses. This research
combines physical chemistry, physics, origami mathematics and artistic
expression to develop modular, origami components, such as folds and vertices,
which are assembled into more complex folding structures. Theoretical tools will
be developed to predict the mechanical properties of fold patterns, and these
will be validated by comparison to measurements on micro-fabricated structures.
This research also explores new origami motifs by incorporating curvature and
shape into the origami repertoire to inspire new artistic
achievements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, we will produce new polymer
materials whose static mechanical properties can be tuned over a wide range of
behaviors, and which can buckle and fold dynamically. Because the theoretical
tools we will develop will also be broadly applicable to any material whose
expansion and contraction can be made to respond to a stimulus, we expect our
research to have broad applicability in many industries ranging from packing
materials to artificial tissues to actuators. The work will train undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students and be disseminated through publications,
conferences and a workshop that will bring together other ODISSEI groups,
scientists, and origami artists and mathematicians. It will also contribute to a
teacher-training program at Western New England University to use origami as a
hands-on way to teach mathematics and material science to K-12 students, and a
theatrical performance currently being written. The artistic prototypes and
models produced will be part of a traveling exhibit for science
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in part by funds from
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research.