* 1240268
* EFRI-PSBR: Cyanobacterial Biorefineries
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Christos Maravelias, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,394,999.00

Technical Impacts-&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A useful long term vision of the
chemical industry integrates the use of modern biotechnology and chemical
catalysis to engineer systems where everyday fuels and chemicals are produced
from renewable resources. The vision of this award, made to Professors Brian F.
Pfleger, Christos Maravelias, Katherine D. McMahon, Thatcher W. Root and Andrew
Greenberg of the University of Wisconsin-Madison is to develop and evaluate a
biorefinery strategy using cyanobacteria to produce compounds that support a
chemical industry based on photosynthesis. It will demonstrate methods for
producing high-value commodity chemicals from CO2 and sunlight that will replace
current petrochemical-based processes. Key fundamental questions that will guide
the establishment of such a sustainable chemical economy based on photosynthetic
cyanobacteria include: 1) What chemicals, i.e. final products or intermediates
of value, should be made by living systems to optimize a chemical industry based
on photosynthesis? 2) At what rate and fraction of theoretical yield can
cyanobacteria produce target compounds? &lt;br/&gt;3) What process parameters
are critical to effectively scale up photosynthetic bioreactors from the
laboratory to industrial size? Is there a limit to the feasible size of a
photosynthetic biorefinery? 4) Can a photosynthetic biorefinery be integrated
with waste remediation (e.g. municipal wastewater treatment) to simultaneously
meet sustainability and environmental objectives? This award details a number of
key features in the fundamental science and technology supporting their
photosynthetic biorefinery vision, and is made through the Emerging Frontiers in
Research and Innovation Program at NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts-
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the long term the proposed work will contribute to
restructuring the chemical industry away from fossil fuels and towards renewable
carbon sources. In addition establishing photosynthetic biorefineries is a route
for achieving energy security and maintaining national defense. Deployment of
successful, commercial photosynthetic biorefineries could generate a sustainable
source of fuels and chemicals without altering current agricultural practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact on education and outreach has many individual
strategies proposed by the PIs, including a)Integrating technoeconomic analysis
and LCA into CBE process design and lab courses; b)Providing independent study
and research experiences for undergraduates in the university labs; c) Mentoring
an interdisciplinary undergraduate synthetic biology research team (iGEM); d)
Providing summer research experiences for high-school students and teachers; and
e) Recruiting students from underrepresented groups through successful, existing
UW-Madison programs.