* 1240144
* EarthCube Assessment of the 2012 State of Geoinformatics: A Community and Interagency Exploration of the LifeCycle, Citation, and Integration of Geoscience Data
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Peter Fox, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 05/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

EarthCube is focused on community-driven development of an integrated and
interoperable knowledge management system for data in the geo- and environmental
sciences. By utilizing a cooperative, as opposed to competitive process like
that which created the Internet and Open Source software, EarthCube will attack
the recalcitrant and persistent problems that so far have prevented adequate
access to and the analysis, visualization, and interoperability of the vast
storehouses of disparate geoscience data and data types residing in distributed
and diverse data systems. This award funds broad, inclusive community
interactions and a follow-on workshop to GeoData 2011 which will address gaps in
the funding portfolio and development of EarthCube, a major new NSF initiative.
Some of these gaps include unresolved issues related to data accessibility and
attribution. Others involve interagency planning for improving interoperability
and integration of large Federal data repositories with academic datasets and
data management facilities. The funded workshop and associated conversations
will be open and available to the public via virtual participation of interested
parties not included in the list of invitees. Broader impacts of the work
include fostering of close interaction between communities and federal agencies
that do not presently effectively interact with one another and to build
alignment around a common goal of creating a new, interoperable paradigm in data
and knowledge management in the geosciences.