* 1240625
* CE21 Special Project: Principled Assessment of Computational Thinking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Marie Bienkowski, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 09/30/2015
* USD 690,538.00

SRI International (SRI) will design, develop, and validate assessments of
computational thinking (CT) for the high school Exploring Computer Science (ECS)
curriculum. Partners in this work are ECS developers and teachers, and other
experts and stakeholders in computer science (CS), computer science education
and assessment. In Year 1, SRI will apply evidence-centered design to refine an
existing CT-practices assessment framework and design patterns; begin to design
and develop ECS assessment tasks and scoring rubrics; convene an expert panel to
review the correspondence between the assessment tasks and design documents; and
pilot the tasks and scoring rubrics with a small number of teachers. In Year 2,
SRI will use pilot results to design and develop a final set of tasks and to
build forms of the unit and summative assessments; convene a second expert panel
to review the unit and summative assessment forms; and field test the unit and
summative assessment forms and scoring rubrics with a larger number of teachers.
Both the pilot test and field test will include cognitive interviews with
students to inform and evaluate definitions used in the design. SRI will use
assessment scores, response processes, and other validity evidence from the
field tests to conduct psychometric evaluation of the unit and summative
assessments.

The ECS curriculum is being used to engage high school students in computer
science across the country. As ECS expands to more locations and students, ECS
teachers will need high-quality assessments to make valid inferences about
students? computational thinking practices. By co-designing formative and
summative assessment resources with ECS teachers, SRI will ensure that the
resources are useful to teachers. High-quality CT assessment tools and resources
will lower barriers for adopting and using the ECS curriculum, as well as other
CS curricula, and will pave the way to reporting actionable evidence of student
progress and readiness to engage in further learning in the CT practices domain.
SRI also expects the PACT project to contribute more broadly to the CS 10K
project by providing new CS teachers with accessible and adaptable resources for
assessing their students? CT knowledge and skills.