* 1240892
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: The role of taxonomic, functional, genetic, and landscape diversity in food web responses to a changing environment
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Kerry Oliver, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2018
* USD 655,192.00

This research will address how genetic, taxonomic, ecological, and landscape
diversity affect the natural control of agricultural pests by predators. The
study will focus on three crops (corn, alfalfa, and soybean) and the group of
aphid species that attacks them. Aphids are normally kept in check by roughly 20
common predators. Because these predators move frequently among fields and other
habitats, their ability to suppress aphids depends upon the diversity of the
landscape. Furthermore, aphids contain bacterial symbionts that give their
insect hosts tolerance to high temperatures. These symbionts thus make it
possible for aphids to evolve in response to global warming. The proposed
research will use remote sensing, field experiments, and genetic assays to
understand the roles of ecology and evolution in maintaining the natural control
of aphid pests.

Corn, alfalfa, and soybean dominate the agricultural landscape of much of the
USA, and predators naturally suppress many potential agricultural pests. A
changing climate, or another anthropogenic environmental change, could break
down this natural control, leading to greater pest problems for US agriculture.
Understanding how ecological and evolutionary diversity confers resilience
against environmental changes could improve understanding of warning signs of
potential pest problems, and also provide possible solutions. The research will
not only address this scientific challenge but will also educate the public by
enlisting the help of citizen scientists who will sample aphids and predators
across the USA, bringing hands-on science into citizen's backyards.