* 1240128
* A Summer Workshop on the Analysis of Longitudinal Study of American Youth (LSAY) Data
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Jon Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 05/31/2014
* USD 98,926.00

The present project will support a training workshop on the Longitudinal Study
of American Youth (LSAY) data set for advanced graduate students, early career
scholars, and other interested researchers. Since 1987, LSAY has followed a
national probability sample of 7th and 10th grade public school students, and is
the longest-running and most comprehensive data set available to examine the
factors that contribute to student and young adult interest in and understanding
of science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and medicine. The LSAY is
distinctive in its measurement of home, school, peer, and community variables
over more than two decades, making it ideal for analyses that seek to understand
the interaction between and among these factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
comprehensive and longitudinal nature of the LSAY data set can present
challenges to researchers unfamiliar with LSAY, such as the breadth of measures
and the particular statistical procedures appropriate for analyses of change
over time. To address this, this project will recruit 20 researchers for a 5-day
workshop, hosted by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan. Topics will include: (1) an
introduction to the structure of the LSAY data set; (2) participants'
achievement in science and mathematics, including the psychometric basis for
these measures; (3) the coding of the many open-ended items in the LSAY; (4) the
presence and use of geographic and location data; (5) measurement errors in
repeated, longitudinal studies, and appropriate methods to address such errors.