* 1240737
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Precarious Power: Ritual, refuse, and reuse at El Zotz, Peten, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Stephen Houston, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 16,821.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Stephen Houston, Sarah Newman will investigate the
relationship between ritual and refuse at the ancient Maya site of El Zotz,
located near the large city of Tikal in the modern Department of Peten,
Guatemala. The focal point of this project is an enigmatic "problematic deposit"
found in the palace complex at El Zotz and dating to the Terminal Classic period
(AD 850-1000). This large-scale deposit represents an unusual and widely
variable combination of human, faunal, ceramic, and lithic remains, questioning
traditional dichotomies between ritual and secular, elite and commoner, and
waste and value. In order to gain a better understanding of the human actions
responsible for this complex archaeological assemblage, this project employs
innovative methods for the examination of depositional and post-depositional
processes, drawn from osteological studies but extended to all artifact
categories in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detailed assemblage and
taphonomic analyses employed in this project will contribute to clarifications
in defining and studying depositional behaviors through their traces in the
archaeological record. The major aims of this research are to examine how
specific materials and their depositional histories vary among types of
archaeological discard and thereby recognize "signatures" of ritual and refuse
deposits. These will provide concrete criteria that can aid archaeologists in
interpreting difficult deposits, decrease the likelihood of either ignoring or
over-identifying the remains of ritual practices, and enable inter- and
intrasite comparisons between archaeological deposits that rely on more than
qualitative assumptions or intuition. Moreover, this project highlights methods
that have often been under-utilized by archaeologists, including analysis at the
scale of the assemblage and the application of taphonomic techniques to artifact
types beyond osteological remains. As such, this project will offer a means by
which current categories may be reevaluated, perhaps allowing for a more
informed view of the continuum of quotidian and ritual actions that entangles
past objects, people, and places.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate three main hypotheses: (1) that the Terminal Classic "problematic
deposit" at El Zotz was produced by the structured deposition of domestic or
ceremonial refuse and intentional terminations of objects and architecture; (2)
that this deposit represents a unique and intermediary type of ancient discard
(the ritual reuse of refuse); and (3) that this example of large-scale
investment in ritual practice at El Zotz was employed to reassert political
authority and social integration during periods of potential instability
(whether real or perceived). In order to test these hypotheses, Newman will use
archaeological and taphonomic analyses to evaluate specific materials and
depositional histories represented by refuse and ritual deposits in the El Zotz
region, for comparison with the deposit in question. Attributes of individual
specimens, including pre-depositional wear, fragmentation, weathering, and other
natural and cultural modifications, will be used to identify the "signatures" of
assemblages with clear behavioral correlates (such as middens or caches) and
compare these with the less straightforward deposit, enabling an evaluation of
its role in ancient Maya offering, discard, and ritual practices. The broader
contexts of ritual deposits will also be explored to assess their role in
reasserting political authority and maintaining social integration during
periods of instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International
cooperation represents a major component of this research, in terms of
fieldwork, analysis, and publications, as well as training provided for both
American and Guatemalan archaeology students. This project also plays a part in
strong public outreach and education efforts on behalf of the El Zotz
Archaeological Project, including guided tours of the ruins of El Zotz for
members from the local community of Cruce Dos Aguadas and training sessions and
interpretive signs to inform local tour guides and visitors about the site and
its place in Maya history. As the sites in the El Zotz region have suffered a
long history of heavy looting, with incidents known from as recently as 2010,
embracing the role of local communities in site management promotes stewardship
of archaeological resources and the sustainable use of the ruins through eco-
tourism. Finally, reconsidering the spectrum of depositional behaviors from
refuse to ritual forces a reevaluation of trash as a cultural category, in both
the past and the present. These issues not only resonate deeply with current
concerns over waste management and environmental awareness, but also highlight
the hidden potential of trash to offer insight into cultural systems of meaning
and value.