* 1240083
* Recruitment, Preparation and Retention of STEM Students as High School Teachers.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 985,005.00

The University of Houston Robert Noyce Scholarship Program is addressing the
shortage of qualified physics and chemistry teachers through recruitment,
preparation and retention of science majors for teacher certification in physics
and chemistry. The program, built on the successes of the teachHOUSTON program,
annually provides (1) 12 summer internships for lower division undergraduates to
work with science master teachers at a middle school STEM camp for underserved
students; (2) early field experiences to scholars in high need schools with
established partner school districts; (3) $12,000 annual scholarships for 24
junior or senior level physics or chemistry majors or post baccalaureate
students seeking physics or chemistry teacher certification who commit to
teaching two years in a high-need school district for every year of scholarship
support after graduation; and (4) a Physics By Inquiry Course that engages
scholars and STEM majors in the teachHOUSTON program in effective inquiry-based
teaching pedagogies for physics and chemistry. This project has the potential to
provide a total of 24 content knowledgeable physics and chemistry teachers to
underserved schools in the Houston area, provide innovative methods for
recruitment, preparation and retention of physics or chemistry teachers, and
promote active inquiry based methods for teaching, training, and learning
physics and chemistry. This program leads to improved teacher content knowledge
and enhanced student learning resulting in an increase in the number of
students, particularly those from underserved populations, entering into STEM-
related professions. Dissemination of knowledge gained from this program is
transmitted to STEM and education related conferences.