* 1240626
* CREATIV:   Paleodevelopmental Evolution in Echinoids
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Eric Davidson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2016
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Evolution of Developmental
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Integrated Organismal Systems in the
Biology Directorate and by the Sedimentary Geology &amp; Paleobiology Program in
the Division of Earth Sciences in the Geology
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All contemporary animal forms, including
ourselves, are the result of evolution from prior forms, as demonstrated
unequivocally by the fossil record. But observation of fossils cannot inform as
to how changes in body plan occurred; that question can only be answered
experimentally. This interdisciplinary INSPIRE project capitalizes on a unique
opportunity to study the same set of divergent characters from an evolutionary
structural vantage point, using fossils; and from a developmental molecular
biology vantage point studying processes in living descendants of the fossil
lineages. Echinoderms have left a superb fossil record stretching back more than
half a billion years because of their easily fossilized skeletons, some aspects
of which will be studied with 3-D digital high energy X-ray technology for this
project. The developmental processes which generate the specific skeletal
structures which have arisen in given branches of echinoderm evolution can now
also be accessed experimentally in the laboratory. This project has the unique
opportunity of providing an explanation for what actually happened in evolution,
in the specific terms of changes in genetically controlled process for building
bodily structure. This is among the major, fundamental questions in bioscience.
If successful the outcome will indeed transform this area of biology, by
demonstrating a new powerful approach to understanding, in which is combined,
sophisticated observation of deep time remains, with sophisticated experimental
and synthetic exploration of living descendants. The project illustrates the
potential power of interdisciplinary marriage between traditionally separate
areas. It will require new ways of thought and in the process, joint training
and research experiences will be instituted for involved graduate students in
the Division of Biology at the California Institute of Technology and in the
Department of Earth Sciences at the University of Southern California. This type
of multidisciplinary cross-training will produce a new breed of evolutionary
scientists who will pioneer further advances in understanding the mechanisms of
evolution.