* 1240768
* BP: Computing Beyond the Double Bind: Women of Color in Computing Education and Careers
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Maria Ong, Council for Opportunity in Education
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 599,048.00

The Council for Opportunity in Education, in collaboration with TERC, seeks to
advance the understanding of social and cultural factors that increase retention
of women of color in computing; and implement and evaluate a mentoring and
networking intervention for undergraduate women of color based on the project's
research findings. Computing is unique because it ranks as one of the STEM
fields that are least populated by women of color, and because while
representation of women of color is increasing in nearly every other STEM field,
it is currently decreasing in computing - even as national job prospects in
technology fields increase. The project staff will conduct an extensive study of
programs that have successfully served women of color in the computing fields
and will conduct formal interviews with 15 professional women of color who have
thrived in computing to learn about their educational strategies. Based on those
findings, the project staff will develop and assess a small-scale intervention
that will be modeled on the practices of mentoring and networking which have
been established as effective among women of color who are students of STEM
disciplines. By partnering with Broadening Participation in Computing Alliances
and local and national organizations dedicated to diversifying computing,
project staff will identify both women of color undergraduates to participate in
the intervention and professionals who can serve as mentors to the
undergraduates in the intervention phase of the project. Assisting the
researchers will be a distinguished Advisory Board that provides expertise in
broadening the representation of women of color in STEM education. The external
evaluator will provide formative and summative assessments of the project's case
study data and narratives data using methods of study analysis and narrative
inquiry and will lead the formative and summative evaluation of the intervention
using a mixed methods approach. The intervention evaluation will focus on three
variables: 1) students' attitudes toward computer science, 2) their persistence
in computer science and 3) their participant attitudes toward, and experiences
in, the intervention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends the PIs'
previous NSF-funded work on factors that impact the success of women of color in
STEM. The project will contribute an improved understanding of the complex
challenges that women of color encounter in computing. It will also illuminate
individual and programmatic strategies that enable them to participate more
fully and in greater numbers. The ultimate broader impact of the project should
be a proven, scalable model for reversing the downward trend in the rates at
which women of color earn bachelor's degrees in computer science.