* 1240194
* CCI Phase I: Center for the Sustainable Use of Renewable Feedstocks (CenSURF)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Peter Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,775,582.00

The Center for the Sustainable Use of Renewable Feedstocks (CenSURF) will
address the significant challenge of developing the renewable resources carbon
dioxide and lignocellulosic biomass as alternative feedstocks to petrochemicals.
Advancing the science and technology for their industrial utilization will be a
major intellectual achievement in the chemistry of sustainability. CenSURF
researchers will investigate new strategies for electrochemical reduction of CO2
to ethylene and to other C2 compounds, using both molecular and heterogeneous
copper-based catalysts. Other team members will probe oxidative disassembly of
biopolymer lignin to aromatic monomers, using bio-inspired electrochemical redox
mediators (both metal-based, and organic redox shuttles), while a third group
will explore a recently-discovered family of catalysts that effect reductive
disassembly of lignin and lignocellulose. New sustainable practices will have a
major impact both on the practice of chemistry and on the education of new
researchers in the chemical sciences. CenSURF's focus on developing
heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysts based only on Earth-abundant elements
will ensure that new processes are scalable and preserve precious metals and
other rare elements for use by future generations. CenSURF will educate graduate
and undergraduate students in the principles and practices of sustainability in
the chemical sciences, while providing an incubator for innovation in
sustainability. Center members will also develop educational and outreach
materials in Sustainable Chemistry that will be disseminated widely in schools,
through service organizations and via the internet.

The Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program supports research centers that
can address major, long-term fundamental chemical research challenges that have
a high probability of both producing transformative research and leading to
innovation. These Centers will attract broad scientific and public interest by
sharing the results of their approach to this challenging question.