* 1240483
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Synthesizing Ccomplex Structures from Programmable Self-Folding Active Materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,398,106.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to discover new techniques for
synthesizing complex 3D structures from programmable, self-folding 2D elements.
Elements will be massively foldable, meaning fold characteristics and locations
will be of near-infinite variety and not limited to pre-engineered folds or
joints. This will be made possible by the incorporation of active shape memory
layers that provide actuation capabilities. Elements will be programmed by
specifying the locations and sequences of localized folding operations. Multiple
elements will connect to form larger and more complex 3D structures. The
research team will create new theories and methods for (a) multi-scale and
multidisciplinary systems analysis and optimization; (b) active materials
modeling and structural analyses; (c) computational folding algorithms for
design synthesis; (d) geometric modeling, visualization, and fine art; and (e)
bio-inspired folding-based design synthesis methods. Deliverables include
simulation models of the self-folding material elements, experimental studies
validating the simulation models, and a demonstration of the overall synthesis
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
constitute a substantial leap forward in engineering technology and knowledge,
allowing engineers to design complex systems in fundamentally new ways. The
capability to program a material element to fold, un-fold, and re-fold in
different ways will have a long-term impact on several areas of national need,
including significant challenges in space missions, sustainability, and defense.
Research results will be disseminated broadly. Graduate and undergraduate
engineering students will benefit through classroom instruction and direct
involvement in the research. Underrepresented students from the 6th-12th grade
levels will learn about science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
topics through a robotics competition organized in partnership with National
Instruments. In partnership with the Center for Puppetry Arts in Atlanta, GA,
the research team will produce origami-themed lessons about STEM subjects that
will reach over 10,000 elementary-age school children
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in part by funds from
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research.