* 1240020
* CCI Phase I: CO2 as a Sustainable Feedstock for Chemical Commodities
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* G. Tayhas Palmore, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,750,000.00

This Center for Chemical Innovation will develop new catalytic chemistries that
enable the use of CO2 as a sustainable feedstock for manufacture of large-scale
commodity chemicals. The Center brings together researchers with expertise in
organometallic synthesis, computational catalyst design, chemical synthesis of
advanced catalyst support architectures, and catalyst and electrocatalyst
performance testing to focus on the conversion of carbon dioxide into three
chemical commodities: ethylene, acrylates, and formate. These chemical products
currently are produced on a multimillion-ton scale annually from petroleum
feedstocks, and are themselves feedstocks for more complex chemical products and
high-value plastics. Three strategic areas of research and innovation are
proposed that taken together support the overall vision of the proposed CCI: (1)
to gain new fundamental insight into the mechanisms by which metallic catalysts
activate CO2 to initiate its conversion, (2) to co-develop with industrial
partners new processes that incorporate activated CO2 in the industrial
synthesis of commodity targets, and (3) to co-develop with industrial and
utility partners new approaches to compressing and purifying CO2 from power
plant flue gases into a physical state suitable for utilization as a
concentrated chemical feedstock.

The successful development of CO2 as an alternative feedstock would profoundly
impact the sustainability and societal footprint of the chemical industry.
Collaborative student training, an emphasis on innovation and entrepreneurship
development, and public outreach are also key components of this proposed CCI.
Members of underrepresented minorities will be engaged at both Brown and Yale
Universities through the Leadership Alliance Program, a national consortium of
32 institutions of higher learning, headquartered at Brown University.

The Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program supports research centers that
can address major, long-term fundamental chemical research challenges that have
a high probability of both producing transformative research and leading to
innovation. These Centers will attract broad scientific and public interest by
sharing the results of their approach to this challenging question.