* 1240822
* CS 10K: The Partnership for Early Engagement in Computer Science High School (PEECS-HS) Program: Exposing Students to Computer Science in Washington, DC Public Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Legand Burge, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2018
* USD 996,239.00

The Howard University Department of Systems and Computer Science proposes the
Partnership for Early Engagement in Computer Science High School (PEECS-HS)
program. This program partners Howard University with Washington, D.C. Public
Schools (DCPS) and Google, Inc. to introduce a new course titled "Introduction
to Computer Science (CS)" across DCPS high schools. The course will adopt and
extend the Exploring Computer Science curriculum, originally piloted in the Los
Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD). PEECS-HS will introduce students to the
broad range of opportunities in CS, and allow them to develop basic competencies
in CS fundamentals, and maintain a positive perception of CS. In addition, the
program will produce a new unit on Mobile Application Development, which will be
added to the general Exploring Computer Science curriculum. PEECS-HS will
prepare in-service and pre-service DCPS teachers to teach the new curriculum.
For sustainability, PEECS-HS will prepare in-service teachers to lead future
Introduction to CS professional development sessions. As with many urban school
districts, DCPS is predominately African-American, an important but often
overlooked, component of the U.S. computing workforce. Many of these students
exit or never enter the computing pipeline, in part because they often see CS as
boring and unrelated to their interests. Introduction to CS aims to change those
misperceptions. Adapting the Exploring Computer Science model to this
environment will give further insight into mechanisms for attracting and
retaining students from underrepresented populations in urban environments.