* 1240756
* BP: Computer Science for the Social Good: Using Near-Peers to Engage Latino/a Students
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 09/30/2015
* USD 599,998.00

ETR Associates will design and test a near-peer strategy, called CSteach, for
infusing Computer Science (CS) content and the connection between CS and the
social good into K-12 technology programming curriculum. Effective strategies
for engaging Latino/a students in computer science (CS) require an increased
focus on the societal implications of computing. CSteach employs a
multigenerational approach where trained high school students (near-peers)
facilitate a weekly afterschool class where they provide instruction and role
modeling to 5th grade students. The goals are to create a sustainable and
scalable network that will increase the interest and capacity of Latino/a
students to pursue computer science. Intended outcomes include increased
knowledge and support systems of 5th grade and high school students to pursue
computer science classes and careers. External evaluation will monitor project
progress toward these goals and assess changes in students? and teachers?
knowledge and attitudes. The project builds on the exemplary practices of the
Watsonville TEC program, the Computing Alliance for Hispanic Serving
Institutions, and the Global Information Internship Program at UC Santa Cruz.

CSteach will contribute to our understanding of the teaching and learning of
computing K-12 students. The scalable curriculum and training materials produced
as a result of this project will help leverage Latino students' existing
interest in computing. The program will be culturally relevant, but the advanced
computing concepts and connection to the social good will be applicable to other
groups.