* 1240682
* Analytics-driven Efficient Indexing and Query Processing of Extreme Scale AMR Data
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Nagiza Samatova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,999.00

High-fidelity scientific simulations of natural phenomena, such as massive star
explosion, hurricane movement, or fusion energy production increasingly become
not only compute-intensive but also data-intensive. "Big" data produced by
large-scale simulations calls for sustainable data management solutions that
increase energy efficiency, enable predictive data analytics, and reduce time-
to-discovery. In response to this critical need, Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR)
has emerged as a promising technology to achieve considerable savings in memory,
computation, and storage resources, while maintaining or even increasing
simulation accuracy. With AMR, scientists can adaptively balance between high-
resolution look into "the unusual" areas and low-precision glance at "the usual"
areas of the simulated phenomena.

The strength of AMR selective fine-grain refinement of salient areas of the
simulationis also becoming its weakness. The non-uniform structure of its
underlying mesh leads to inefficient post-simulation access to the "Big" data
along the path from data analytics to scientific discovery. The data generation
process of space-time simulation proceeds from one time step to the next and
requires the context of only two time steps, while storing data for only one
time step on the disk. In contrast, visual data analytics often requires the
full context of the available data, not just a single time step. In fact,
simulations that are driven by local space-time relationships are largely
performed with the purpose of discovering or explaining non-local and large-
scale space-time relationships through interactive "what-if" data exploration.
Thus, the fundamental differences in data context and heterogeneity of access
patterns call for analytics-driven scientific data management solutions.

To close this gap, this project aims to significantly advance database
management for "Big" AMR data by making data analytics and data reduction the
first class citizens of the database design and query processing. To support
analytics-driven efficient query processing, it offers a transformative shift
from the traditional indexing of data to the proposed indexing of information
about data compression and hierarchical data layout in storage. The former
incurs substantial storage overhead, while the latter is anticipated to be
storage-friendly with significantly faster data retrieval in response to user
queries.

To realize this ambitious goal, innovations are proposed in three broad areas of
data-intensive computer science: semantic modeling, scientific database
management, and high performance storage. Specifically, the scientific database
management is going to be cognizant of rich data access-and-query semantics
specific to AMR data, capable of in situ data compression and indexing during
data generation by the simulation, and optimized for heterogeneous access
patterns through novel data layout methodologies.

This research is being conducted in a close partnership with the three national
labs' research teams with pioneering technologies in high performance storage,
AMR, and high-fidelity climate change simulations. The approaches and formalisms
developed in this research are expected to be applicable to a broad range of
scientific and engineering problems that utilize simulation models for
predictive understanding of physical processes through "Big" data analytics. The
techniques developed under this project are expected to accelerate the crucial
process of data-driven exploration and knowledge discovery in the scientific
workflow. This project also plans significant efforts in "Big" data education,
diversity, community engagement, and the dissemination of results through
academic publications and open-source software.