* 1240115
* Oakland Teacher Residency
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Ruth Cossey, Mills College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2014
* USD 230,115.00

Building on the success of the exemplary teacher education program at Mills
College, the primary investigators' experience with Teacher Residency Programs
at a national level, the new and talented Oakland Unified School District (OUSD)
mathematics and science district leaders, the exemplary urban-focused STEM
teacher professional development offerings of the Lawrence Hall of Science, and
the talents of the faculty in Division of Natural Sciences, Mills College plans
to develop a program adapted to the unique context and needs of Oakland,
California, which is experiencing a shortage of high quality mathematics and
science teachers in middle and high schools. The grant period focuses on the
design of a program and an implementation plan to admit (over a five year
period) to the Oakland Teacher Residency Program (OTR) 150 teachers who will
obtain their high school or middle school certification. It is also expected
that a cadre of at least 15 current teachers of STEM subjects will become highly
qualified Master Teachers. The partners (Mills College Division of Natural
Science, Lawrence Hall of Science and OUSD) are strengthening their
collaborative infrastructure and plan professional development for the Mentor
Teachers and new Master?s degree program to sustain the program. The OTR
curriculum and professional development programs are being designed to closely
align with the particular needs of the participating schools, the District as a
whole, the Common Core State Standards in Mathematics and the Next Generation
Science Standards. An innovative dual focus on STEM content and classroom
support ensures that OTR participants are being prepared for the specific needs
of the students in a high-needs urban school district, thus providing a model
program for similar university-school district partnerships. It is the intention
to have in place a curriculum for a 12-month Master's program, specifically
tailored to the issues involved in STEM teaching in an urban, high-needs school
district and a rubric for selecting target schools, recruiting materials for
Teaching Fellows and Master Teachers, a professional development curriculum for
the Master Teachers, a plan for mentoring and support for Teaching Fellows, a
data collection and evaluation plan, and a research and publication plan. These
model materials are to be disseminated so that other university-school district
partnerships may use them to implement a program similar to OTR, thereby
providing a much broader impact.