* 1240584
* Routes to Sustainability for Natural Gas Development and Water and Air Resources in the Rocky Mountain Region
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Patrick Bourgeron, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 12,310,792.00

1240584 &lt;br/&gt;Ryan&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The current energy system in the
United States relies on finite resources that are the major cause of climate
change and a key source of global conflict. A sustainable energy system - one
that uses renewable, low-carbon, affordable, and local energy sources - may be
decades away. Natural gas is seen as the "bridge fuel" to a more sustainable
energy system because natural gas combustion emits smaller amounts of greenhouse
gases than coal combustion. However, conflicts have arisen between accelerated
natural gas development and water and air resources protection. These conflicts
are becoming acute in the Rocky Mountain region, which has always played an
important role in the energy system of the United States. Most of the recent
growth in natural gas production is the result of extracting gas from
"unconventional" sources (coal-bed methane, shale gas, tight gas) with the
techniques of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing. Hydraulic fracturing
requires large volumes of water that are chemically amended and injected to
increase the permeability of the gas-bearing formations. The fracturing fluid
left in ground and the fracturing fluid that returns to the surface (flowback),
along with produced water, present risks to ground and surface waters. Natural
gas extraction results in atmospheric emissions, particularly the release of
greenhouse gases, oxides of nitrogen, and volatile organic compounds tied to the
generation of ozone. These stresses on local water and air resources must be
weighed against the benefits of natural gas production for the nation and the
public must be provided with reliable information to make decisions about energy
sources and resource protection. This Sustainability Research Network (SRN)
addresses the conflict between natural gas extraction and water and air
resources protection with the development of a social-ecological system
framework with which to assess the conflict and to identify needs for scientific
information. Scientific investigations will be conducted to assess and mitigate
the problems. Outreach and education efforts will focus on citizen science,
public involvement, and awareness of the science and policy issues.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SRN proposal includes (1) examination
of the effects of natural gas development on water and air resources by
analyzing trade-offs between local, regional, and national costs and benefits in
environmental, social, and economic domains (social-ecological systems); (2)
review of industry practices for hydraulic fracturing, well drilling and casing,
and gas collection infrastructure for best management practices recommendations
(natural gas infrastructure); (3) investigation of the hydrologic processes that
determine impacts of natural gas extraction on groundwater withdrawal and
contaminant transport in drinking water aquifers and surface waters (water
quantity); (4) characterization of the potential risks of fracturing fluid
migrating to drinking water aquifers, the injection or discharge of flowback and
produced water, and the mitigation of these risks by treatment of the flowback
and produced waters (water quality); (5) improved spatial and temporal
monitoring of air pollutants by a combination of high-resolution mobile sampling
and the use of personal air monitors as an example of "citizen science" feeding
data to air quality models that assess the local, regional, and national
implications of natural gas development (air quality); and (6) quantitative and
qualitative assessment of the health risks, both chemical and non-chemical,
associated with water and air exposure. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
SRN includes improved public understanding of the effects of natural gas
development on water and air resources and better decision-making regarding the
local effects and regional and national benefits and costs of natural gas
development. The broader impacts will be achieved through extensive education
and outreach activities: (1) dissemination of best management practices in
collaboration with all stakeholders, (2) diverse communication about scientists
and scientific activity that will reach a broad portion of the public, (3)
collaboration with Native American tribes and other under-represented groups
disproportionately affected by natural gas development, (4) educational efforts
aimed at providing appreciation for the science-policy interface at the
university and K-12 levels, and (5) engagement of the public through citizen
science, workshops, and scenario planning.