* 1240985
* CER: DEPICT: Developing Elementary (Learning) Progressions to Integrate Computational Thinking
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Danielle Harlow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 10/31/2017
* USD 688,167.00

The University of California, Santa Barbara proposes to discover low anchor
points and develop learning progressions for computational thinking and related
computer science concepts. These learning progressions are a necessary step
towards the integration of computational thinking and computer science concepts
into K-12. The project staff will develop two curricula - one for grades 2-6 and
one for grades 4-6. The curricula and learning progressions will iteratively
inform one another. Further, the curricula will be a proof of concept that
students can develop computational thinking skills in a way that reinforces
other academic subjects and their own culture, and provide a practical way for
teachers to begin teaching computer science at different entry points within
grades 2-6.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing has infiltrated almost all corners of
life and is an increasingly important part of driving innovation, and the next
generation of inventors need to understand how to develop and use software. The
ability to analyze and express problems in a way compatible with software
solutions, or computational thinking, will become critical in modern society.
This work has the potential to revolutionize how computer science is taught in
elementary schools by showing how these computational thinking skills can be
developed in three or six years while supporting education in the existing
curriculum. In addition, the resulting curricular materials will be developed
with diverse students as the targets. First, the project staff will explore the
prior knowledge that students with different backgrounds have, leading to
everyday examples that are more accessible and meaningful to diverse students.
Second, the content delivery will use the latest research in teaching diverse
students computer science concepts.