* 1240252
* EAGER: Density functionals from Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Kieron Burke, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Kieron Burke of the University of California, Irvine, is supported by an Eager
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division. The award is cofunded by the Condensed Matter and Materials
Theory program in the Division of Materials Research and the Computational and
Data Enabled Science Program in the Division of Mathematical Science. Density
functional theory (DFT) is at the heart of modern electronic structure
calculations, which play an ever increasing role in chemical and material
design. Present-day approximations are created by an unholy alliance of
inspiration and pragmatism. Progress in their improvement is slow and
unsystematic. Burke and his colleagues are applying Machine Learning (ML) to the
problem of approximating density functionals. ML provides a totally new way to
approximate functionals that takes maximum advantage of DFT formalism. They have
demonstrated that chemical accuracy on self-consistent densities can be reached
for a simple model case, and a measure of the reliability of the approximation
can be given. The goal of the EAGER grant is to develop these methods in
application to DFT, overcoming any challenges, and reaching the real world of
electronic structure calculations as quickly as possible, by approaching the
problem in a well-defined series of small
steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates an entirely new
subfield of theory/computation, in which machine learning (ML), a branch of
computer science, is applied to electronic structure problems, a branch of
theoretical physics and chemistry that allows prediction of new molecules and
materials by solving the equations of quantum mechanics. New algorithms, at the
cutting edge of ML research, are being developed in order to apply ML to find
density functionals, needed for solving electronic structure. This is a true
synergy of physical and computer sciences. Success of this proposal would
revolutionize materials design, allowing millions of atoms to be treated instead
of hundreds by present methods. This would truly transform predictive capability
in a broad range of scientific and technological problems, from biomolecular
liquid simulations to crack propagation in materials.