* 1240328
* Collaborative Research:  Research Initiation Grant:  Influence of Motivation on Learning Outcomes in an Engineering Service Course
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Ellen Usher, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 02/28/2015
* USD 75,000.00

This engineering education research initiation grant seeks to establish an
interdisciplinary collaboration between engineering and educational psychology
to understand student motivation and achievement in large, interdisciplinary
service courses. Such courses are taken by large numbers of students early in
their engineering degree programs. The investigators seek to understand how to
create better means of teaching courses to motivate students from a range of
engineering disciplines who may not see the course material as relevant to their
degree. The investigators focus on determining how the planned course
interventions affects students' perceptions of value and development of self-
efficacy.

The broader significance and importance of this project arises through
developing ways to better retain students in engineering programs. Since
students are more likely to leave engineering in the first two years when the
large service learning courses are often taken, discovering how to improve how
relevant these courses are perceived by students may contribute to retaining
higher numbers in engineering. This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals
of transforming the frontiers through preparation of an engineering workforce
with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for
society is enabled by creating results and research that are useful for society
by informing educational policy and practices.