* 1240438
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Externally-Triggered Origami of Responsive Polymer Sheets
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,846,358.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to study a new class of origami by
means of polymer sheets that fold in response to external triggers (i.e.,
light), for hands free folding. Folding occurs in response to the localization
of energy to hinges that are defined on the polymer sheet by Deskjet printing.
The appeal of this approach is its simplicity, versatility, and ability to
harness the multitude of 2D patterning techniques to convert surface patterns on
pre-strained polymer sheets into 3D objects within seconds upon exposure to a
stimulus. The team, which includes two artists/designers who specialize in
surface design and sculpting, a mechanical engineer with expertise in multi-
scale mechanics of materials, a mathematician with 35 years of origami
experience, and materials/chemical engineers, seeks to study experimentally and
model computationally the folding process to create new multi-functional 3D
structures that can form rapidly with precise control over shape. We will
explore experimentally and model the scaling laws of folding, the rate of
folding, and the mechanics of folding to develop compliant folding mechanisms.
Our interdisciplinary team will collaborate to advance our scientific objectives
while broadening participation of underrepresented groups and developing
outreach modules on origami for K-12 students.

Generation of novel structures based on folding/unfolding of 2D sheets is
expected to lead to a novel paradigm towards developing materials with
unprecedented function/property. Our approach has significant commercial
relevance because it is compatible with both low-tech, high throughput 2D
patterning techniques (e.g., roll-to-roll patterning) as well as 2D patterning
of electronics and photonics. Packaging or manufacturing of unfoldable materials
employed in various technological applications (including those relevant to the
Air Force, such as, unfoldable air foils for precision airdrop of humanitarian
supplies) constitute examples of structures that will benefit from the research
effort. We will develop a means of attracting local K-12 teachers and students
to take part in our interdisciplinary research endeavors through educational and
outreach programs at NC State University, Elon University, and at Meredith, a
neighboring women?s college. The outreach programs will be developed and
distributed synergistically by our team featuring artists, a former high school
teacher, a mathematician who teaches origami, and engineers / scientists from NC
State University.

This project is supported in part by funds from the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research.