* 1240841
* CS 10K: Mobile CSP: Using Mobile Learning to Teach CS Principles in Connecticut Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Chinma Uche, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,129,917.00

Trinity College, in partnership with the Hartford Public School System, the
Connecticut Chapter of the Computer Science Teachers Association, and other
Hartford area high schools, will train approximately 30 Connecticut high school
teachers to teach Advanced Placement (AP) computing courses in Connecticut high
schools that currently do not teach AP computer science. The course will be
based on a mobile Computer Science Principles curriculum, Mobile CSP, which uses
the new mobile computing language, App Inventor for Android, to provide a
rigorous, programming-based introduction to computational thinking. The main
research question addressed is whether the Mobile CSP curriculum is an effective
way to teach CS Principles and whether it can serve as one model to help train
teachers for the CS 10K project. The curriculum is project-based and takes a
constructionist approach to learning computing -- i.e., students learn through
constructing their own artifacts and mental models. Student projects will focus
on building socially useful, place-based mobile apps using the App Inventor
programming language. In this way, student learning will be associated closely
with their interests and grounded in their schools, their homes, and their
communities. The curriculum, which was developed and tested at Trinity College
and the Greater Hartford Academy of Mathematics and Science (GHAMAS) as one of
the Phase 2 pilot courses for the College Board's CS Principles project, will be
carefully evaluated along several dimensions, including its efficacy at
improving programming and problem solving skills and its impact on student and
teacher attitudes toward computer science education. The Mobile CSP project has
three main goals: (i) To develop a rigorous computer science principles AP
curriculum based on mobile computing; (ii) to teach it to Connecticut teachers
in 6-week summer workshops; and (iii) to support participating teachers in their
effort to implement the AP pilot courses in Connecticut schools that do not
currently teach AP computer science. The 2013-2014 cohort of teachers will be
drawn primarily from the Hartford school district, a district whose students
come mostly from demographic and socio-economic backgrounds that have been
underrepresented in computer science. In years two and three the project will
expand to other, similarly situated, Connecticut cities and towns.