* 1240593
* The transport of dissolved organic matter by river networks from mountains to the sea: a re-examination of the role of flow across temporal and spatial scales
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Mark Green, Plymouth State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 25,400.00

This project will facilitate the collaboration of a group of scientists
interested in delivery, transport and transformation of organic matter in a
variety of surface waters. The group will synthesize data across spatial and
temporal scales and bring together a multi-disciplinary team at the John Wesley
Powell Center for Analysis and Synthesis. The effort will re-evaluate the
fundamental relationships between discharge and DOM concentration and
composition and focus on synthesizing mature datasets from small headwater
basins to large coastal basins using statistical techniques and modeling. Data
are available that represent a range of temporal sampling intensities from
seasonal samples, to more frequent samples from automated samplers, and finally
to data from continuous optical sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This synthesis
collaboration is expected to advance scientific understanding of the processes
and patterns of organic matter transport by exploring key data sets at a level
of detail and scale that has not previously been attempted. The work is expected
to also benefit the policy and management communities that rely on data, models,
and understanding of the controls on nutrient, trace metal, and pollutant
transport in river networks and to estuaries. This is a joint synthesis projects
with the USGS Powell Center, Fort Collins Colorado.