* 1240332
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mobility and Herd Management Strategies of Early Pastoralists in the Central Rift Valley and Athi Plains, Kenya, 3000-1200BP
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Diane Gifford-Gonzalez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 24,406.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Diane Gifford-Gonzalez, Anneke Janzen will use
domestic animal teeth excavated from early pastoralist sites in Kenya to shed
light on the earliest pastoralists in East Africa. Specifically, she will apply
stable isotope and mortality profile analysis to explore ancient herding
practices and assess whether these differ from recent and present-day herders'
practices in the region. Based mainly on domestic cattle, sheep, and goats,
African pastoralism is broadly sustainable in lands too dry to farm. It emerged
c. 7500 years ago in the then-green Sahara, and recent analyses have
demonstrated dairying then. As the Sahara dried, herding groups moved south into
western and eastern Africa, entering far northern Kenya c. 5000 years ago and
the highly productive savannas of southern Kenya c. 3300 years ago.

Studies in Europe and South Africa demonstrated that analysis of stable isotopes
in livestock teeth from archaeological sites could inform on ancient
pastoralists' mobility and animal husbandry practices (age of weaning, movement
of herds). Isotopes testify to what plant communities fed an animal over its
lifetime (stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes), whether these circumstances
changed over its lifespan, and whether it moved far enough from the locale of
its youth to end up on a different geological substrate (strontium isotopes).
Mortality profile analysis complements this by constructing a picture of the
modal ages at which different domestic species were slaughtered, data best
derived from dentitions.

Little detail is yet known of ancient Kenyan herding practices, which modern
cases suggest could be quite flexible, according to environmental circumstances
and herders' production goals (meat vs. dairy vs. combinations). Ms. Janzen will
investigate: (1) whether early herders in the steep-sided and narrow Rift Valley
pursued mobility similar to recent pastoralists, who seasonally shifted their
herds from the valley floor to high alpine meadows, or whether, in those less
populous and moister past times, they remained in the lowlands year round. (2)
How far livestock moved during their lifetimes, not just seasonally, but over
longer time spans and distances. This can elucidate interactions among herder
communities, for whom livestock exchange, gifts, and theft can play a major
economic and social role. (3) Economic relations between the incoming herders
and the hunter-gatherers who had lived in the region for millennia.
Historically, hunter-gatherers symbiotic with pastoralists ultimately start to
convert from pure foraging to a mix of foraging and some livestock, usually
goats and sheep. Isotopic analysis can show whether domesticates in forager
sites were locally grown or brought in from elsewhere.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in its contribution to pastoralist's
history as part of the region's integrated farming, foraging, and herding
economies, emergent well before the colonial era, and documentation of land use
through East Africa's long-term history. Its broader impacts include documenting
long-term variations in pastoralism, which may help planners assessing future
alternatives in today's rapidly desiccating region. It gives professional
training to Ms. Janzen, plus affording Masters-level Kenyan archaeology students
a hands-on introduction to cutting-edge methods to zooarchaeology.