* 1240757
* STEMing the Tide: Exploring Factors Related to Minority Males Interest, Engagement and Achievement in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* James Davis, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This symposium will convene researchers in education and the
social sciences with practicing STEM professionals to review, explore, and
respond to research on identity factors linked to minority male success in
science and mathematics. The following topics will be addressed: (1) the impact
of minority male gender identity on interest and engagement in science and
mathematics, with particular interest in how conceptions of manhood and
masculinity are relevant; (2) gender role socialization and implications for
teaching and learning of science and mathematics content for minority men and
boys; (3) institutional and organizational models and programs (e.g., school
design, same-sex classroom) and pathways that influence minority men and boys'
interest and entry into science and math majors and careers; and (4) shared
interests and goals (e.g., evidence-based initiatives), and collaboration
opportunities for researchers and STEM
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This symposium will serve
as a catalyst for focusing on and developing a knowledge base around the
educational opportunities and challenges of many minority men and boys.
Manuscripts from the symposium will be distributed in a special issue of a major
journal focusing on minority men and boys in math and science, as well as
through an edited book with national distribution. The symposium will be a
significant forum to inspire collaborations and networks among similarly
interested researchers and STEM practitioners to potentially development future
NSF research grant proposals.