* 1240693
* US-Qatar Workshops: Engineering Ethics for a Globalized World, Doha, Qatar, October 2011 and College Station, Texas, October 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Colleen Murphy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 48,634.00

1066174 &lt;br/&gt;Murphy, Texas A&amp;M University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary
of Proposal: This project is for support for US participants, including
professors and students - to a workshop on ?Engineering Ethics for a Globalized
World, Doha, Qatar, October 2011? The co-Organizer is Dr. Hassan Bashir, at
Texas A&amp;M University in Qatar. The plan is for the workshop in Qatar to be
followed by a second one at Texas A&amp;M in College Station, Texas in 2012. The
first workshop will concentrate on identifying the precise ways that
globalization challenges engineering ethics standards and education. It will
include sessions on (1) globalization; (2) the relevance of Western engineering
codes in non-Western contexts; (3) challenges in licensure in an international
context; (4) global differences in engineering practice; (5) pedagogical
challenges in teaching engineering ethics in an international context; (6)
comparison of Western and non-Western moral perspectives; and (7) comparison of
Western and non-Western approaches to moral decision-making. The second workshop
will focus on formulating responses to the challenges identified in the first
workshop. It will include sessions on (1) the possibility of an international
code of ethics; (2) the standards and limits of internationalization in
engineering practice; (3) the possibility of international standards of
professionalism and registration; (4) the possibility of an international
engineering ethics curriculum; and (5) the justification of international
standards and an international curriculum in a pluralistic world. The PIs, and
TAMU, have played an important role in engineering ethics education through
establishing a course and authoring a textbook on engineering
ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: While globalization is clearly
taking place and the need to develop an international set of standards for
engineering ethics is recognized, there has been no systematic treatment of why
and how engineering ethics codes, licensure examinations, and curricula must be
modified to make them appropriate for and relevant to an international audience
and globalized professional setting. The proposed workshops will be among the
first international efforts to address these issues. The backgrounds of the PIs
and foreign collaborator in engineering, philosophy, and political science make
them quite suited to organize the workshops and to bring together knowledge and
expertise in the technical, moral, and social/political dimensions of
engineering practice and education in an increasingly globalized context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Engineering research and education has an
increasingly globalized character. This raises significant issues about how
engineers should adjudicate among different cultural and institutional
frameworks. The proposed workshops have direct implications for engineering
ethics standards and education, helping to identify and develop the materials
required to educate engineers to understand and take into account the social
dimensions and implications of their work. Several female scientists from the US
and from other countries will participate in the workshops.