* 1240611
* Organic Acid Concentrations and Fluxes over a Southeastern Forest during the Southern Oxidant and Aerosol Study (SOAS)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Delphine Farmer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 283,920.00

One of the key gaps in our understanding of how atmospheric chemistry impacts
air quality and climate is the role of the biosphere in affecting the
composition of the atmosphere. The biosphere potentially acts as both a source
and a sink for oxidized volatile organic compounds (VOCs), complicating our
interpretation of biosphere-atmosphere interactions. Organic acids are one suite
of biogenic VOC oxidation products that have varying VOC precursors and
potential primary biogenic emission sources, and may serve as tracers of
biogenic VOC oxidation. However, understanding their biosphere-atmosphere
exchange is necessary for interpreting their sources, sinks, and role in the
atmosphere's photochemical cascade of organic compounds. The primary objectives
of this project are: (1) To investigate the potential of organic acids to act as
tracers of biogenic VOC oxidation chemistry by quantifying gas-phase
concentrations of four key organic acids (formic acid, acrylic acid, methacrylic
acid, pyruvic acid) using gas-phase organic acids using high resolution chemical
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, and (2) To better constrain the
magnitude, variation and controlling process of biosphere-atmosphere exchange of
organic acids by quantifying ecosystem-scale fluxes of these organic acids.
These measurements will be made over a Southeastern U.S. forest as part of the
Southeastern Oxidant and Aerosol Study (SOAS) in the summer of 2013. The
Southeastern United States is a significant source of isoprene and other
biogenic VOCs, as observed in VOC and particle concentrations, and is thus an
excellent site for studying organic acids and their ecosystem-scale fluxes.

The broader impacts of this project include: (1) The teaching and training of
graduate students, (2) Enhanced infrastructure for research by expanding
networks between the PI's group and scientists at other institutions and
national labs, (3) Improved understanding of biogenic VOC oxidation and
biosphere-atmosphere exchange of organic acids, which is essential for accurate
modeling of air quality and climate on local, regional and global scales, and
(4) Broad dissemination of the research and observations through publications
and presentations to the scientific and local (high school, undergraduate,
graduate students) community.