* 1240085
* Teachers for a New Tomorrow (TNT)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2021
* John O'Haver, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,199,282.00

To combat the urgent local need for improvements in mathematics and science
education, the University of Mississippi (UM) Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program,
Teachers for a New Tomorrow (TNT), provides the support to expand and enhance
the efforts of UM's Center for Mathematics and Science Education (CMSE) in
addressing this issue. Through the TNT program, the CMSE provides unique
opportunities for STEM majors to pursue a career in mathematics or science
education, thus increasing the number of certified teachers prepared to teach
science and mathematics in secondary schools. Thirty STEM majors are obtaining
teacher certification in science or mathematics by enrolling as a double major
(in STEM and STEM Education) or by enrolling in the School of Education's Master
of Arts in Curriculum and Instruction (MACI) program. In addition to meeting
course requirements, TNT scholars enrich their pedagogical knowledge by
participating in the TNT Preparation Program by enrolling in CMSE's enrichment
programs. These events and activities are designed to train pre-service teachers
with additional education activities created specifically for TNT scholars. Once
certified, TNT scholarship graduates fulfill their commitment by teaching in a
partnered high-need school district at least two years for each year a Noyce
scholarship award was received. The project's formative and summative evaluation
processes ensure that the program maintains a focus of improving mathematics and
science education in Mississippi. This program is a multifaceted endeavor that
includes diversity in the partnering districts and in participants with focus on
areas of greatest economic need.