* 1240944
* CS 10K: A Model for Statewide Deployment of CS Principles Courses
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jeffrey Gray, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,011,133.00

The University of Alabama (Tuscaloosa) proposes to develop and evaluate a model
for the scalable deployment and sustainable persistence of the new CS Principles
course across a statewide network of teachers. The model adopts the successful
practices of a national Advanced Placement (AP) training program developed by
the National Math and Science Initiative (NMSI). It applies those practices in a
professional development program based on in-person training and distance
learning collaboration. It will provide year-long professional development to
support teachers, rather than the week-long summer institutes that are typical
of most AP training programs in other STEM areas. A statewide "Teacher Leader"
model will be explored where those already teaching more rigorous CS courses
(e.g., the existing AP CS A) will assist in training new peer cohorts as they
establish CS Principles in their schools. Teachers in these cohorts will
collaborate together on content and pedagogical learning experiences, fostered
by peer leaders and facilitated through A+ College Ready (A+CR), the NMSI
partner for Alabama. A+CR has demonstrated success in promoting AP advancement
in other STEM areas, especially among students from underrepresented
populations. The pedagogical approach will be centered on inquiry/discovery-
based techniques that introduce computer science as a broad set of topics as
defined by the learning objectives contained in the Big Ideas of CS Principles.
The elaboration of the model will support both rural and urban school teachers
through use of virtual collaboration tools (e.g., Blackboard Collaborate or
ACCESS, which is a statewide distance learning infrastructure deployed in all
Alabama schools). The assessment, led by Haynie Research and Evaluation, will
uncover the facets of the proposed model that are most suitable for building a
successful and sustainable nationwide network of CS Principles teachers. The
participants will include: a cohort of 50 high school teachers who will receive
year-long professional development training to teach the CS Principles course;
students of those teachers, who will participate in summer camps, weekend study
sessions, and statewide competitions; and college students from secondary
education and computer science majors who will assist with project tasks.
Partners include A+CR and the Alabama State Department of Education, which has
committed support and needed resources (e.g., ACCESS) to the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address scalability, NMSI will recommend the model
developed in this project to six partner states across over 320 high schools (in
2011-2012, NMSI supported 75,000 students). To address sustainability, all
teachers will be supported after project completion by A+CR under its operations
as a NMSI partner. The results of the project will be submitted for publication
in journals, and a Moodle website will be created to serve as a repository for
disseminating the results of the project, including developed curricular
materials. The PI has conducted one of the College Board's CS Principles pilots
and leads several K-12 outreach and broadening participation in computing
activities in Alabama.