* 1240151
* CCI Phase 1: Center for Sustainable Nanotechnology
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,844,429.00

Members of this Center for Chemical Innovation (CCI) will collaborate to
understand, predict, and control the specific chemical and physical interactions
between nanomaterial surfaces and living systems via a molecular level,
chemistry-centered approach. Chemically stable nanoparticles having precisely
controlled compositions, sizes, shapes, and surface functionalizations will be
employed to investigate how they interact with lipid bilayers and with model
organisms, toward the goal of understanding the factors influencing the routes
by which nanoparticles enter biological systems. Experiments will use lipid
bilayers as model systems for biological membranes, Shewanella oneidensis as a
single-cell model, and Daphnia magna as a model whole organism. The resulting
molecular level changes in gene expression and metabolism will be characterized
and used as biomarkers to evaluate biological responses induced by different
nanoparticles and surface functionalizations. These biological responses will in
turn be used to inform the design and synthesis of nanoparticles having reduced
adverse biological impacts. State-of-the-art analytical approaches, including
nonlinear optical spectroscopies and genome sequencing tools, will be developed
and used to characterize the interaction of functionalized nanoparticles with
cells and simple organisms at the molecular level. These results will be
informed by concurrent computational studies to provide fundamental insights
into nanoparticle-biological interactions and to develop models with which to
evaluate future nanomaterials.

The research of this CCI will ultimately contribute to the use of nanomaterials
for societal benefit in a sustainable manner by leading to the development of
nanomaterials with reduced environmental impact. The research will also provide
enhanced training of graduate students in interdisciplinary science and the
societal impact of nanotechnology. Graduate and undergraduate students will
receive training in scientific and technological innovation that will help
translate scientific results into economic benefit and other forms of societal
impact. The CCI researchers will integrate their research on the sustainable
nanotechnologies with educational and outreach activities to develop a program
for informing and enhancing citizen engagement in nanotechnology and
sustainability science using social media. CCI participants will also engage
with teachers to develop K-12 and introductory level university science modules
on the chemistry of safe and sustainable nanomaterials. Faculty and students of
the CCI will engage with faculty and students at regional minority-serving
institutions to increase participation from underrepresented groups via
academic-year and summer research programs.

The Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program supports research centers that
can address major, long-term fundamental chemical research challenges that have
a high probability of both producing transformative research and leading to
innovation. These Centers will attract broad scientific and public interest by
sharing the results of their approach to this challenging question.