* 1240771
* EAGER: Exploring Routes to Nanocomposites Linking Silicate and Carbon-Based Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Alexandra Navrotsky, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 140,124.00

NONTECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Modern technology demands strong lightweight materials
with properties tailored to specific applications. Nanostructured materials
containing silicon, carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen are of interest in applications
ranging from lithium ion battery electrodes to spark plugs to high temperature
materials in the aerospace industry. Heretofore their synthesis has been by
laborious and expensive pathways involving toxic organosiliicon polymer
precursors and giving this class of materials the name polymer-derived ceramics
(PDC). This project explores alternate synthesis routes to these and related
materials. Materials with new structures may be discovered, and understanding
will be gained about their properties, stability and possible new applications.
This research may pave the way to more economical and environmentally benign
manufacturing methods. Furthermore it is possible that related materials may
exist in planetary interiors at high pressure, and this project thus may impact
geology and planetary science as well as materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Strong, lightweight and unreactive
ceramic materials for use at high temperature are needed for applications in
aerospace, automotive, nuclear, and other industries. Though direct reaction of
silica with carbon, silicon carbide and/or silicon nitride to form
multicomponent amorphous, glassy, or crystalline materials has met with little
success, a polymer precursor route, has led to a new class of very interesting
materials called polymer-derived ceramics (PDC). Their recently discovered
thermodynamic stability suggests that they and/or related materials should be
accessible by other, perhaps simpler, pathways. This project explores such
alternative syntheses, using various reactive and nanophase starting materials.
The goal is to generate new materials avoiding expensive, difficult, toxic, and
dangerous organosilicon polymer precursors. Starting materials involving organic
molecules confined in mesoporous silica and metal organic frameworks will be
explored, with pyrolysis under atmospheric pressure, laser ablation, and high
pressure reactions as possible synthetic pathways. Furthermore it is possible
that related materials may exist in planetary interiors at high pressure, and
this project thus may impact geology and planetary science as well as materials
science. This project will train young scientists in synthetic and
characterization techniques and in relating concepts in synthesis, structure,
physical properties, and thermodynamic stability.