* 1240643
* How Cloud Processes Alter the Effects of Midlatitude Cyclones on the Atmospheric General Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2015
* Yuanchong Zhang, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2015
* USD 666,309.00

The extratropical cyclones cyclones associated with midlatitude weather systems
are typically accompanied by extensive cloud cover, but the extent to which the
clouds have an effect on cyclone development is not well known. This project
investigates the impact of cloud radiative and latent heating on the development
of extratropical cyclones, as well as the amount of energy and moisture they
transport poleward. The work uses newly developed datasets in which cloud
radiative and latent heating are derived from satellite observations, in
combination with meteorological reanalysis products which capture cyclone
characteristics including winds, temperature, and humidity. Feature tracking
algorithms are used to follow individual cyclones and determine the impact of
cloud heating on all stages of the cyclone lifecycle. Previous studies have
addressed cloud heating impacts on extratropical cyclones, but with somewhat
mixed results, in part due to the lack of available cases on which to base
conclusions. The new datasets thus offer the promise of more definitive
conclusions, due to the larger number of cases that can be examined, along with
improvements in the quality of the cloud heating fields.

The work broader impacts in two ways: first, it will support a graduate student,
thereby providing for the next generation of scientists in this research area.
Second, the work will be beneficial for evaluating and improving weather and
climate models.