* 1240417
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Uniting Principles of Folding and Compliant Mechanisms to Create Engineering Systems with Unprecedented Performance
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Spencer Magleby, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,400,000.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to unite principles of origami and
compliant mechanisms to enable the creation of engineered systems with
unprecedented performance. Compliant mechanism principles will provide a means
to translate origami-based discoveries into engineered systems that achieve
desired behaviors. The objective will be accomplished using the following
approach: 1) overcome obstacles limiting origami principles from being widely
applied to non-paper materials, 2) create design methods that unite origami and
compliant mechanism principles, 3) employ the united principles to create
engineered systems with unprecedented performance, and 4) exhibit the
relationship of origami art to engineering advances. Deliverables include a
library of surrogate folds that mimic origami creases, design methods and
mathematical modeling approaches for creating origami-based compliant
mechanisms, engineered systems that further national goals, student education,
broadening participation results, and a traveling museum exhibit with
accompanying outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research success will
enable advances in applications such as highly compact mechanisms (e.g., medical
implants, electronics equipment, and aerospace components), collapsible devices
that are compact during transport and deployed at the location of operation
(e.g., surgical devices, space mechanisms, and search and rescue systems), and
applications with limited manufacturing processes available (e.g.,
microelectromechanical systems and cost-sensitive applications).
Commercialization of the research will demonstrate its potential for real and
significant economic impact. Engineering, mathematics, and industrial design
students will be intimately involved in all aspects of the research. An exhibit
of origami art and its extension to engineering and mathematics will be
developed for display nationally.