* 1240458
* 2012 Southeast Biofuels and Renewable Energy Conference: Networking for a Sustainable Energy Future, Jackson, Mississippi, August 8-9, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Rafael Hernandez, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

1240458 (Hernandez). Considerable research is being conducted worldwide on
biofuels and renewable energy. Successful implementation of specific processes
will require different clusters of expertise and key components. The proposed
event will be configured as panels of experts highlighting the configuration of
networks necessary to produce renewable feedstocks, biofuels, and bioproducts.
Five panels of experts will be configured to discuss (1) Biodiesel from Algae at
a Power Facility (Kemper County, Mississippi), (2) Biofuels from Wastewater
Produced by Pulp and Paper Operations, (3) Prolysis Oils and Biofuels from
Mississippi Pine, (4) Bioproducts from Biomass, and (5) Solar Power
Applications. Each panel of experts will be composed to 5-7 integrated
presentations. The conference will inform biofuels stakeholders from industry,
academia, and agriculture of advances in biofuels research, define the
challenges facing the biofuels industry, and provide networking opportunities
for people interested in collaborative research and/or employment in the ?green
energy? arena. The organizing committee of the conference has selected specific
renewable energy applications and will configure panels of experts to discuss
specific technological and economic aspects in an integrated and sequential
manner. The conference will aid in the dissemination of the latest biofuels
research in the areas of catalysis, feedstock preparation, and resource
utilization. The conference will also foster collaborations among researchers in
industry and academia, resulting in the further advancement of biofuel
technology. The conference will have a positive impact on all types of
attendees: scientists and engineers will learn about the latest methodologies in
biofuels development; students will have the opportunity to present research and
network with potential employers and/or graduate advisors; attendees from the
general public will become more aware of the science behind biofuels and become
more interested in how they can participate in ?green energy? advancement. By
providing key information regarding biofuels on both academic and industrial
levels and facilitating the networking of biofuels stakeholders, the 2012
Southeast Biofuels and Renewable Energy Conference will aid in the development
of fuel technologies that are both ?green? and sustainable.