* 1240920
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Communities and Sociopolitical Integration in Pre-Columbian Dominica, West Indies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Michael Heckenberger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 27,581.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael Heckenberger, Isaac Shearn will conduct a
one-year archaeological study of Dominica, a volcanic island in the southern
Lesser Antilles noted for its intense topographic variability, rugged coastline,
high rainfall, dense tropical forests, and fertile volcanic soils. The main
objective of the project is to characterize settlement patterns and artifact
variability within and between micro-regions in order to determine the degree of
integration between communities on Dominica during the Late Ceramic Age (ca.
A.D. 1000-1500). The project provides the basis for Mr. Shearn's doctoral
dissertation research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively little archaeological
work has been done on the pre-Columbian period in Dominica in comparison to most
other islands in the region. The proposed research represents the first major
syntheses of long-term archaeological investigations on this island. The
proposed research will help resolve important problems in contemporary Caribbean
archaeology, as well as test new geospatial methods for identifying communities
in the archaeological record of the islands. By applying contemporary theory on
the archaeology of communities to region-specific problems, this research will
advance both the understanding of regional community organization, and broader
theoretical and methodological issues surrounding the concept of community in
Anthropology. In particular, this project will help identify the nature of
socio-political integration in smaller, rich islands of the Lesser Antilles, and
whether they represent small scale complex societies, which has broad relevance
to understanding similar settings in other world
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary research questions guide the study:
&lt;br/&gt;1) Were multiple sites within micro-regions integrated communities or
do sites represent basically autonomous local communities?; 2) Were communities
within micro-regions autonomous or were they integrated with other such
communities in other micro-regions into higher-order regional communities?; and
3) If integrated, how were higher-order communities organized with respect to
sociopolitical hierarchy and/or heterarchy within and between micro-regions? To
address these questions, specific objectives of the proposed research include:
identification of sites; characterization of variability in terms of site size
and structure; characterization of relations between sites within the micro-
region based on distance, intervisibility, and geographic setting; and
collection of artifacts to provide evidence of interaction, including intra- and
inter-island exchange. Excavations and systematic surface collections will be
conducted within three micro-regions of Dominica to provide comparable datasets
from each micro-region, and from multiple sites within each micro-region. The
analysis will indicate whether communities included hierarchical
characteristics, such as centers for specialized socio-political, ritual or
economic activities or were more heterarchical, involving structurally similar
and/or autonomous local groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
include significant public outreach initiatives designed to promote cultural
heritage management by raising awareness about the island's Amerindian history
and the value of archaeological sites as cultural resources; and promote local
participation in the execution, interpretation, and presentation of the
research. To accomplish these objectives, Mr. Shearn will present lectures at
community centers and schools, and participate in radio broadcasts; produce
informational posters and exhibits for display in village community centers and
national parks; design an exhibit for the Dominica Museum; and provide
opportunities for students and others to participate in all stages of the
research and design methods for the dissemination of the results.