* 1240652
* Design and Implementation of Algorithms for an Experimental High-Radix Network Switching system
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* John McCalpin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2013
* USD 149,888.00

Technology and economic trends in computer hardware have led to the widespread
adoption of extremely large clusters of multicore servers as today?s
supercomputers. As applications are modified to exploit the increased
parallelism of these additional nodes and cores, the application?s network
messages typically become both smaller and more frequent. Although the bandwidth
of the interconnect networks in current supercomputer systems is almost keeping
up with increases in compute performance, there has been little improvement in
the overhead of sending messages, and correspondingly little improvement in the
throughput of the network when sending short messages. As a consequence of these
two trends, many applications scale poorly on existing supercomputing systems,
and many more applications are expected to scale poorly as the industry moves
forward with even larger supercomputer systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
study, TACC is investigating a possible solution to these issues with a new
network switch and network interface architecture that can sustain full network
bandwidth using very short messages. This project is investigating the
programming models required to use this network efficiently and is evaluating
the performance of the new interconnect network in direct comparison with a
modern (quad-data-rate Infiniband) interconnect that is widely used in current
supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation of the new system is being
conducted through a number of case studies. Implementations of algorithms known
to exhibit poor parallel scaling on standard systems due to network performance
limitations are being ported to the new system and instrumented with timers and
hardware performance counters to document the detailed performance
characteristics. This study will provide an initial evaluation of the technical
viability of the current implementation of this new architecture for these
algorithms, and is expected to provide recommendations for future enhancements
to the architecture.