* 1240383
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Programmable Origami for Integration of Self-assembling Systems in Engineered Structures
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Daniela Rus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,000,000.00

The research objective of this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) Origami Design for the Integration of Self-assembling Systems for
Engineering Innovation (ODISSEI) award is to create computational materials
called programmable origami whose properties can be programmed to achieve
specific shapes or mechanical properties, such as stiffnesses, upon command.
Creating functional programmable origami systems poses many technical
challenges. New computational materials that integrate sensing, actuation,
computation, and communication will be designed. New planning and control
algorithms will be developed to enable the creation of a desired origami object
using computational materials and autonomous folding operations. The materials
and algorithms will be integrated in a programmable origami system capable of
producing a range of different origami geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide an opportunity to create
smart devices that are capable of accomplishing self-assembling tasks. Example
applications include the creation of specialized soft tooling for manufacturing,
customized toolkits, and project kits for education. Devices made possible by
the research will combine the advantages of planar fabrication with autonomous
self-assembly. The results will be disseminated to allow the creation of
commercial devices that can be fabricated rapidly at reduced cost, reduced
weight, and improved recyclability. Graduate and undergraduate engineering
students and pre-service teachers will benefit through classroom instruction and
involvement in the research. Students studying to be 6-12 technology and pre-
engineering teachers will be engaged to provide them firsthand research
experience that they can draw on throughout their teaching
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in part by funds from
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research.