* 1240964
* Collaborative Research: BP: CS Unplugged: Encourage Computing without Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Cyndi Rader, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 09/30/2017
* USD 531,444.00

Colorado School of Mines, in collaboration with the National Center for Women
&amp; Information Technology at the University of Colorado, will implement and
evaluate Computer Science (CS) Unplugged activities at five middle schools in
the Jefferson County Public Schools district. CS Unplugged activities are
designed to engage students in computational thinking activities without using
computers. Many in the CS community hypothesize that the absence of a computer
and the social of the Unplugged activities make CS Unplugged especially engaging
for female and under-represented minority students who tend to have less
experience and confidence with computing concepts. But what is the impact of
Unplugged on students? Using pre- and post-surveys and learning assessments the
project team will explore a number of questions to assess the impact of
Unplugged activities on students. For example, does participation in CS
Unplugged activities actually have a positive impact on students' interest
(especially women and underrepresented minorities) in pursuing computing as a
major or career? Can exposure to CS concepts in a more accessible format (i.e.,
with no computers) increase students' confidence that they are able to learn the
fundamentals required to continue in the field? In addition to evaluating the
impact on students, the project team will explore how to effectively incorporate
CS Unplugged activities in a middle-school classroom, and how to encourage
middle school teachers to include CS Unplugged activities and CS concepts in
their classroom instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many K-12 school students have
had limited exposure to computing concepts, and therefore, have a very poor
understanding of what computing education and careers involve. To address this
lack of knowledge, an international community of CS Unplugged contributors has
developed activities to illustrate the kind of thinking that is expected of a
computer scientist. CS Unplugged activities involve problem solving to achieve a
goal, and engage students via kinesthetic activities, games, magic tricks, and
competitions. Studies have shown that middle school is where students' interest
in computing deteriorates; thus, this project will extend CS Unplugged
activities with career information and then assess the impact of the Unplugged
activities in the largest school district in Colorado with significant student
diversity.