* 1240041
* From the Laboratory to the Classroom:  Building Capacity for Math and Science Teaching in DC (Lab2Class)
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Bianca Abrams, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,999,403.00

From the Laboratory to the classroom: Building Capacity for Math and Science
Teaching in DC Secondary Schools (Lab2Class) is a collaborative NSF Teaching
Fellows (TF) project that brings together American University's (AU) School of
Education, Teaching, and Health (SETH), Departments of Mathematics and
Statistics and Environmental Science, The Carnegie Institution of Washington,
the District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS), and DC Public Charter Schools
(DCPCS). The overarching project goals are to increase the number of highly
qualified math and science teachers in high-need schools in Washington, DC by
recruiting STEM professionals with strong backgrounds in science and math to
teach in DC schools for at least four years after completing a one-year
intensive teacher certification Masters degree program designed to prepare the
Fellows for teacher licensure. Two cohorts of Lab2Class Fellows, consisting of a
total of 32 Fellows, 16 in science and 16 in mathematics, are supported
throughout their first four years of teaching with professional development,
mentoring support and salary supplements. The project is built on the premise
and research base that teachers with very strong content knowledge in STEM
fields can help secondary school students develop these essential skills.
Strategies and outcomes include the following: 1) careful preparation of
teachers with deep math or science understanding to be effective teachers; 2)
pedagogical innovations for teaching to traditionally under-prepared urban
students; 3) assessments of student achievement; 4) insights of the Fellows
regarding training and classroom activities; and 5) data on how knowledgeable
teachers affect student attainment in a high-need school district. This project
is grounded in the literature on what constitutes student learning in science
and mathematics. The partners have come together to design a program that
empowers teachers to think differently about how they teach in the STEM fields,
focusing on inquiry and by using assessments as a tool for instructional
decision-making with the ultimate goal of increasing the quality of instruction
and student achievement in mathematics and science. The project also brings new
information to bear on the conversation around the relationship between teacher
content knowledge and student learning. While the partnership is increasing the
quality of math and science teachers in Washington, DC, the impact is expected
to grow as the participants take on leadership roles and engage in a more
systemic change to improve STEM education in the District and beyond. This
partnership serves as a model of teacher development in STEM education with
potential to increase the pipeline of minority students into the STEM fields.