* 1240008
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: 3dWomen: Exploring Three Decades of Women's Groups in Sustainable Development and the Impact of Social Media on Women's Professional Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Noshir Contractor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 06/30/2013
* USD 98,360.00

Our understanding of why people come together to create social networks is
evolving as social media grow in complexity and popularity. Of particular
interest is understanding how social networks emerge and are enacted across
geography, culture and over time ? especially when they are generated by a
polarizing event such as global climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, 3dWomen, will study the emergence and enactment of a network among
women that has coalesced around the World Congress on Sustainable Development
(CSD) that meets every ten years (1992, 2002, and will convene again in June
2012). The 3dWomen project takes advantage of a unique opportunity for three
dimensional research on the emergence of this network across time (three
decades), space (global networks) and culture. This in-depth and
multidimensional research is only possible because, in response to the great
sense of urgency to address the global climate crisis, the women?s caucus which
will reconvene in 2012 will bring together the women from the CSD events in
1992, 2002 and 2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our analysis - based on interviews,
archival data and social network analysis - will allow us to elucidate how
different networking mechanisms at and between the CSD events, contribute to
women persisting to engage in networks on specialized fields such as
sustainability, science and climate change.