* 1240933
* Materials World Network: Collaborative Research: Modeling Ferroelastic Strain Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ju Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 274,556.00

This joint project between Ohio state University (OSU), the University of
Pennsylvania (UPenn), and the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in
Japan combines critical experiments from the Japanese side with multi-scale
modeling and simulation from the U.S. side to understand and predict the
nanoscale mechanisms underlying the effects of point defects on the
thermodynamics and initiation and propagation kinetics of martensitic
transformations (MTs). In collaboration with the partner institution in Japan on
processing, testing and characterization of shape memory alloys and strain
glasses, the US participants address fundamental questions of long standing
interest concerning MTs and the effects of point defects, such as what
elementary defect and defect process constitute the smallest unit of MT, what
the activation pathway and barrier energy of these elementary defect processes
are, and how point defects modify them. In particular, the investigators
systematically probe the effects of random point defects on the multi-plane
generalized stacking fault (MGSF) energy landscape along the minimum energy
pathway (MEP) connecting the parent phase lattice to the martensitic phase
lattice and on the vibrational entropies, which together constitute the
crystalline free energy that replaces the phenomenological Landau free energy. A
new microscopic phase field model of MTs based on the ab initio energetics and a
reaction-coordinate theory will be tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology
and approach to be developed are rather general and applicable to a larger set
of shear-dominated processes such as the displacive-diffusional transformations
found in many advanced alloy systems and the shearing-reordering process during
plastic deformation of ordered alloys. Computational tools developed will be
disseminated widely through free download from the project website. The
educational effort involving the exchange of graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and faculty will inject cutting-edge development in materials
science and technology and provide a broad international perspective to the
student curricula.