* 1240153
* The Weather Ready Nation Conference: Imperatives for Severe Weather Research; Birmingham, AL; April 23-27, 2012
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Karyn Sawyer, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2013
* USD 18,000.00

Intellectual merit This conference will further identify, prioritize, and set in
motion an actionable and fully integrated physical and social science research
plan to enhance our nation's readiness, responsiveness, and resiliency to severe
local weather, specifically tornadoes.

Broader impacts Expected as results of the workshop are:

1) Research areas that include the need to reduce the false alarm rate and to
conduct social science research on watch/warning messaging and the impacts of
false alarms and lead times on social responses 2) Social science research that
will result in increased hazard mitigation and emergency preparedness in advance
of NWS warnings 3) Identifying advancements in longer term outlooks and
forecasts and their links to preparedness 4) Identifying advancements in short-
term forecasts, watches and warnings and their links to responses 5) Development
/ mining of finer-scale datasets centered on severe storm and tornado prediction
6) Identifying storm-scale processes controlling tornado genesis, longevity,
track and intensity 7) Refinement of gap-filling observing technologies and
means for their optimal assimilation into high-resolution models 8) Enhance
resilience with improved description and understanding of near-surface airflow
characteristics pivotal to impacts on built structures and human casualties,
including engineering analyses derived from post-storm damage surveys

UCAR's Joint Office for Science Support (JOSS) will use funding provided by the
National Science Foundation for support of the conference to provide full travel
support for ~11 attendees.