* 1240443
* EFRI-BioFLEX: Tissue Engineered Flexible Sensors, Actuators and Electronics for Chronic Wound Management
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Babak Ziaie, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,999,980.00

Flexible bioelectronics (BioFlex) is an emerging area with broad implications in
advancing basic life sciences and providing much needed tools in many clinical
applications. One of the key application areas of flexible biomedical systems is
in chronic wound management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to revolutionize wound treatment by
utilizing advances in flexible polymeric MEMS, sensors, biomaterials, tissue
engineering, microsystems technology, and microelectronics through the
development of the Bio-Flex Smart-Dressing platform. The smart-dressing consists
of a flexible/stretchable platform with embedded electronics and an array of
physical, chemical, and biological modules capable of sensing (physical and
chemical) and active intervention (biological, chemical, and physical) in wound
microenvironment. This platform brings together several treatment and monitoring
modalities on a conformal flexible substrate. More specifically, during the
course of the proposed research, PDMS/Parylene/Hydrogel composite
substrate/platform which forms the base for the integration of various modules
will be developed. This will be followed by the design of physical, chemical and
actuation (electrical, mechanical, and chemical) modules, and microfluidic drug
delivery modules their integration onto the smart dressing platform to stimulate
and expedite wound healing processes. Furthermore, the incorporation of
integrated electronics enables stimulation, sensing, communication and RF energy
scavenging for long-term use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The developed platform will have a broader impact to the biomedical
community at large. The BioFlex platform for management of chronic wounds will
be of immense benefit to a growing elderly population with high susceptibility
to wounds due to falls, returning war veterans exposed to serious burns,
athletes with sports related injuries, and diabetics with poor healing response.
The technologies developed during this effort will also have impact in other
applications where a close integration of electronics and targeted drug delivery
with tissue is necessary in order to achieve favorable therapeutic and
rehabilitative outcomes. These include interfaces for central and peripheral
nervous systems, drug delivery platforms for hollow organs, and integrated
biotic-abiotic diagnostic microsystems. In the education and outreach area, in
addition to training graduate students, undergraduate students will be involved
in research programs through (1) Tufts Summer Scholars Program (2) Purdue's
Discovery Learning Research Center (DLRC) Internships, (3) MIT's Undergraduate
Research Opportunity Program (UROP) and (4) NSF REU Program. Targeted
recruitment and retention of engineering/science students with emphasis on
women, underrepresented minorities, persons with disabilities, and first-
generation college students through programs at respective institutions will be
carried out. Specifically, Purdue University's Lafayette area school
partnership, Tufts Student Teacher Outreach Mentorship Program (STOMP) for K-12
education, MIT MSRP for underrepresented minorities and women for summer
research and Bridge to Engineering Success at Tufts will be targeted as part of
the educational outreach activities. Multi-institutional multi-disciplinary web-
based open courseware in the area of tissue engineering and BioMEMS will be
developed. International outreach efforts will focus on exchanging ideas and
samples for the development and use of this developed technology in other
medical applications. Research results will be widely disseminated through web
media and print publications and disseminated broadly through Museum of Science,
Boston.