* 1240694
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:   Material Symbolism and Ochre Use in Middle Stone Age East-Central Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Andrew Zipkin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,196.00

Symbolism, including language, is widely viewed as an essential element of
modern human behavior. Documenting the evolutionary origins of such behavior,
however, has proven difficult. Ochre pigments (iron oxides) form a major part of
the evidence used to interpret when humans began communicating through symbols.
Excavations at Olorgesailie, Kenya; Karonga, Malawi; and Twin Rivers, Zambia
have yielded ochre artifacts that may indicate very early occurrences of
symbolism. Yet mineral pigments may also form naturally in archaeological sites,
or may have technological rather than symbolic uses. This project will evaluate
and further develop analytical approaches to the chemical "fingerprinting" of
ochre artifacts and sources from these three African localities. Using Laser
Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry and Instrumental Neutron
Activation Analysis to facilitate the matching of artifacts to source deposits,
the doctoral student Andrew Zipkin (George Washington University), under the
supervision of Dr. Alison Brooks, will demonstrate the extent to which human
ancestors were willing to seek out and transport specific pigments. This project
also will use color quantifying technologies to determine if Middle Stone Age
humans exhibited color preferences in the ochres that they collected and
modified. Color preference potentially suggests symbolic use of ochre since the
meaning given to different colors, such as in national flags, is a well-known
aspect of modern human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation's final
aspect will be an experimental evaluation of proposed non-symbolic uses of
ochre. The leading alternative explanation is that ochre was an ingredient in
plant resin adhesives used to construct compound tools, like stone-tipped
spears. In collaboration with material scientists, the investigators will
measure the effectiveness of different ochre minerals in formulating adhesives
to test if glue production rather than symbolic meaning could explain past ochre
procurement choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to the
development of international collaborations between American, Australian,
Canadian, Malawian, and Zambian researchers, as well as outreach activities for
the general public. The development of new analytical approaches for
"fingerprinting" mineral sources will find broad application in usage not just
by archaeologists, but also by art historians, state agencies investigating the
illegal transport of stolen antiquities, and forensic scientists.