* 1240856
* BP: Collaborative Research: I-ECS: Inclusive Exploring CS Curriculum Enhancement as Face-to-Face and Online Support for Visually Impaired, High School Students
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Karen Mutch-Jones, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 11/30/2017
* USD 157,124.00

The Rochester Institute of Technology, in collaboration with TERC, proposes the
Inclusive Exploring Computer Science (I-ECS) curriculum as a set of curricular
and tool-based enhancements for visually impaired high school students. I-ECS
will be conducted via face-to-face and online support for cohorts of visually
impaired high school students. While innovations have resulted in assistive
technology for people with disabilities, gaps remain in the level of
participation in university-level computing degree programs by the visually
impaired. A significant factor is the lack of precollege preparation in courses
that promote success in computing degrees. Isolation, the lack of role models
and access to resources contribute as well.

The proposed project strives to increase the participation of students with
visual impairments through better preparation and support. The overall goals are
to increase access to an established curriculum (Exploring Computer Science) and
success within the area of computing for students with visual impairments at the
high school level. The development of programming tools and online modules will
provide access where gaps exist in current software. The project team will
assess the degree to which original Exploring Computer Science (ECS) can be made
accessible to high school students who are visually impaired. The comparison in
student achievement and attitudes about Computer Science will also be conducted
between students using the ECS curriculum and those using the I-ECS curriculum
in order to evaluate the similarity of the two curricula. By design, the I-ECS
project intends to increase participation in computing by individuals with
visual impairments at all socioeconomic levels via student and educator support.
The project will involve students, parents and educators from around the nation.

The structured approach, building on the foundation of an existing high school
computer science curriculum, will enable those with visual impairments to have
greater access to the diverse areas of computer science through face-to-face and
online resources that foster continuous learning and community, as the means to
transition to college degrees in computing. The project components are designed
to promote growth by all participants, including parents. The online community
will foster greater accommodation of visually impaired students in the computer
science classroom. Assessment will provide much needed statistical analysis of
both the challenges and successes of students who are visually impaired.