* 1240006
* Partnerships to Prepare Science Teachers for Inclusive, Back-to-nature Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Linda Rayor, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 295,565.00

This Capacity Building project is designed to make the Cornell Teacher Education
Program, which prepares students for New York state certification in K-12
agriculture, secondary biology, chemistry, physics, or earth science, grade 7-8
science, or grade 5-6 science, a viable candidate for a future Noyce Phase I
Scholarship award. The Cornell University team, from the Department of
Entomology, Department of Horticulture, and the Paleontological Research
Institution, are partnering with Moravia Central School District, Tully Central
School District, Brooklyn Academy of Science and the Environment, the Cannon
River STEM School, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell Plantations, Cornell Lab of
Ornithology, Cornell Outdoor Education, and the Mohonk Preserve. Targeted
initiatives are addressing teacher recruitment, teacher preparation, and teacher
induction support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's theme is "science for all"
which summarizes the goal of nurturing creative and passionate scientists while
fostering the development of scientific literacy for everyone to inform their
decision making on issues of personal health, safety and public policy. The
project is organized around the specific idea that local natural environments
are among the best classrooms for learning in the natural and physical science
disciplines. Taking science outdoors is leading to better engagement in science,
for teachers and students, improvements in health, a better understanding of the
"messy" nature of real science, and an appreciation of the power of
interdisciplinary approaches to scientific problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
back-to-nature approach for science education is having a broad impact because
it is accessible and effective for all students, including those living in more
"built-up" areas of the country, and those with disabilities that challenge
their access and success. Of special note for aiding in the success of the
project is the Professional Development School, in which university faculty and
school teachers work together to design and implement learning opportunities for
pre-service teachers and for themselves. Also contributing to project success is
the Cornell New Teacher Support Corps, a group composed of highly effective
retired or part-time science teachers, who are serving as mentors for the
project alums.