* 1240743
* Nonlinear Fokker-Planck Equations and Hybrid Stochastic Deterministic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2011,06/30/2013
* Peter Constantin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 152,601.00

The project is to study variational problems, nonlinear partial differential
equations, and stochastic differential equations that describe the active
interactions between stochastic microscopic systems with finitely many degrees
of freedom and macroscopic deterministic fields. The study of melts of
interacting particles with finitely many degrees of freedom leads to Onsager
equations on metric and pseudometric spaces. A first part of the project is to
elucidate the structure and classify the zero temperature limits of such
systems. The suspensions in fluids of these systems lead to nonlinear Fokker-
Planck equations coupled to Navier-Stokes equations. The PDE analysis of global
existence for these systems is a second part of the project. In addition to this
analysis, the existence of traveling waves, documented numerically, will be
further investigated. The connection between deterministic models and hybrid,
stochastic-deterministic models, nonlinear in the sense of McKean, is the third
aim of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental
problems that arise in the theory and computation of models of complex matter.
Complex matter includes biological fluids such as blood and also synthetic
matter such as foams and gels. Complex matter is characterized by the presence
of complex, interacting networks of very small objects being embedded,
influenced, and in turn influencing a matrix or a solvent. The basic
understanding of these interactions is crucial for progress in applications such
as the manufacturing of materials with extreme properties or the delivery of
drugs at the cellular level. The project is aimed at uncovering fundamental
principles that guide the modeling and computation of such systems. &lt;br/&gt;