* 1240655
* INSPIRE:  STAR: Scalable toolkit for Transformative Astrophysics Research
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Maciej Brodowicz, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 799,682.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Stellar Astronomy and Astrophysics
Program in the Division of Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, by the Software and Hardware Foundations
Program and the Information Technology Program in the Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering, and by the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research in the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a large-scale
computational effort to model the disruption and merger of white dwarf stars.
The major goal is to include significantly improved physical realism than in
current models. White dwarf stars are the low-mass endpoints of stellar
evolution for stars like the Sun. Many of these are found in close binary
systems, and it is well known that such close binaries will merge on time scales
of 1 to 10 billion years. White dwarf mergers have recently been proposed as an
important additional production channel for Type Ia supernovae, which are the
most important probes of the expansion of the universe. The merger process and
subsequent explosion requires that a large number of physical processes all be
modeled at once, including magnetohydrodynamics, nucleosynthesis, radiative
transport, and rapidly-changing gravitational fields. These various processes
have quite different natural length, time, and density scales, and the level of
complexity required for highly realistic modeling of stellar mergers is not
achievable in current codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will require
advances in computational techniques. One of the key goals is to improve
performance of multi-physics simulations on massively parallel architectures,
which is currently limited by problems of scale and overhead in data
distribution and resource allocation. The effort will explore the various
tradeoffs between overhead and parallelism, and will enable improved strategies
in order to enable more efficient and more scalable computation for
astrophysical and other problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected
to have a broad applicability of the project?s computational techniques beyond
the direct problem of stellar mergers. A number of related problems in stellar
astrophysics also require integrating the treatment of fluid dynamics, dynamic
gravity, thermal and radiative transport, and nuclear energy generation. The
group anticipates that the largest direct impact will come in the areas of
supernova explosion modeling, the mergers of stars of various types, and stellar
evolution when tidal effects and rotation are important.