* 1240726
* EAGER-ESOCS: Exploring Sustainability Options for Cyberinfrastructure Services
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 12/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this EArly concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to investigate whether the software-as-a-service model is a viable
option for creating sustainable cyberinfrastructure. While NSF-sponsored
research projects increasingly create innovative software, few, if any,
mechanisms exist to support the ongoing use, adaptation, and maintenance of such
software. The ESOCS project will explore the sociological, technical, and
institutional perspectives of sustainability. It aims to provide insight into:
researcher buying behavior and preferences; the challenges of integrating
payment mechanisms into software and university back office systems; and the
legal and policy implications of operating a non-profit, for-fee service from
within a university. The project will use the Globus system as an exemplar of
providing IT infrastructure to the research community, tapping into the system's
more than 4,000 users as a representative sample of the scientific research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results should be of interest to the many
NSF constituencies who struggle with issues of software sustainability. The
project will shed light on how for-fee software delivery methods can be provided
in a way that is consistent with university and NSF policies, while providing a
frictionless purchasing experience for researchers. Experiments with for-fee
service models will address questions relating to acceptability and adoption
patterns within various research communities. The for-fee service models
deployed will provide valuable data and insights that may be applied to other
large-scale cyberinfrastructure resource providers that face sustainability
challenges when federal agency funding for these projects ends.