* 1240905
* CS 10K: Developing and Supporting Computer Science Teachers Via Strategic Partnering
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2017
* USD 853,814.00

The University of Delaware proposes Partner4CS, a project to design and evaluate
a comprehensive set of professional development opportunities for middle and
high school computer science teachers. Delaware, like many other states, does
not have teacher certification in computer science, CSTA chapters, or a defined
educational path that would prepare computer science teachers. Partner4CS aims
to circumvent these problems. The project brings an interdisciplinary team --
including university faculty and undergraduates from the computer science, math
education, and educational research disciplines -- that has strong engineering
outreach and evaluation credentials. The team will develop (1) a 3-track summer
professional development institute bringing together G6-12 teachers and high
school students for skills development, teaching pedagogy, and community
building; (2) an online learning environment that provides teachers with instant
access to pedagogical and curricular support and means to communicate regularly
with other teachers and university faculty; (3) a new college service learning
1-credit course weekly alternating undergraduate service to teachers in the
classroom with college classroom sessions for planning and reflection; and (4)
quarterly Saturday morning teacher workshops for G6-12 teachers and students to
continue the summer professional development throughout the academic year.
Carefully mentored undergraduates will assist in these programs, in turn gaining
from interdisciplinary collaboration, teaching and lesson planning, and the
opportunity to experience first-hand the potential impact of their computing
expertise in helping others. Their service may also contribute to an improvement
in the participation of underrepresented students in computing at the both the
college and at the high school levels. Partner4CS will build on the CS PIs'
experience in partnering computer science undergraduates in service learning
with middle school teachers and on the Education PIs' established partnerships
with regional schools for education student teaching experiences. It will
leverage both the university's math education major requirement of taking
computer science, and the timing of the University of Delaware replacing its
current CS0 course by CS Principles in Fall 2012.