* 1240160
* Managing Cyberinfrastructure Centers in a Demanding Era: The Development of Science Executives
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Nicholas Berente, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2016
* USD 288,671.00

The goal of this project will be to develop and test a "science executive"
education program. Science executives are the senior scientific personnel
charged with leading the centers that enable large-scale science and
engineering. Centers are broader than projects and must endure within
institutions such as universities, national labs and institutes, government
agencies, and firms. Center leaders are usually scientists or engineers with
strong project management skills who learn how to manage and lead on-the-job,
through trial-and-error, much as entrepreneurs learn. However, they often lack
knowledge that would improve the effectiveness of their centers. In the same way
that entrepreneurial organizations benefit from professional management as they
grow, science and engineering centers will benefit. Such centers are not
"normal" organizations, so typical business executive education models will not
apply. Science and engineering centers are complex hybrids with nested social
networks, transitory roles, ever-changing, "drifting" arrangements, and work
that is increasingly interdisciplinary, collaborative, geographically
distributed, and computation and data intensive. Focused preparation is needed
in organizational governance, innovation management, resource provisioning,
workforce development and turnover reduction, process improvement, and strategic
leadership. This project adapts organization science as embodied in executive
education to the needs of CI center
executives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will involve: (1)
identifying the points of leverage within centers where improved executive
leadership might affect science and engineering outcomes; (2) discovering and
develop a curriculum for disseminating "best practices" based on organization
science to equip science executives with the skills, tools, and techniques; (3)
delivery pilot sessions of effective, focused training to science executives
through a modified "science executive education" strategy; (4) conducting
workshops and tutorials to evaluate and improve the curriculum and to
disseminate knowledge gained throughout the project; and (5) actively promote
and seek the involvement of junior-level personnel and traditionally
underrepresented groups, thus encouraging the career progression of current and
future science executives with an explicit focus on broader inclusion.