* 1240011
* Boise State University Noyce II: Trajectory to Teaching from Recruiting to Career
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Amy Moll, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Tamara Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 799,732.00

This Phase II project is supporting a total of 75 Noyce scholars to become
science and mathematics teachers. Boise State University is partnering with the
Caldwell, Vallivue, Nampa, Joint No.2 School Districts and the Independent
School District of Boise City. The project is providing summer internships to
spark STEM undergraduate majors interest in STEM teaching as a career, providing
scholarships for students completing their teacher preparation curriculum, and
sustaining ongoing professional development to assure Noyce alumni success.
Noyce alumni are being provided with opportunities to attend professional
conferences, tuition assistance for continuing education, peer mentoring, and
access to communities of practice. These project activities are accompanied by a
rigorous plan of research that looks at factors that influence the multiple
stages of STEM teacher education. Building on the Noyce I results with
mathematics education, this project is also exploring the influence that Co-PIs
from chemistry and engineering have on the number of physical science education
majors graduating from Boise State.

The project is providing a model for holistically approaching the multiple
stages of teacher preparation and development. The research and instrument
development are expected to provide both a framework and the tools necessary to
investigate the effectiveness of similar programs.