* 1240138
* RCN:  SedHeat - Building an Interdisciplinary Community to Meet the Science, Engineering, and Educational Challenges for Sustainable Geothermal Energy from Sedimentary Basins
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Herbert Einstein, Texas Christian University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 02/28/2018
* USD 500,000.00

RCN: SedHeat - Building an Interdisciplinary Community to Meet the Science,
Engineering, and Educational Challenges for Sustainable Geothermal Energy from
Sedimentary Basins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John Holbrook, Texas Christian
University, EAR-1240138&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will support a Research Coordination Network that will draw together an
interdisciplinary group of geoscientists, engineers, educators, and economists
dedicated 'to form a central point of unity, exchange, and education to exceed
the science and engineering challenges of sedimentary-basin geothermal energy'
as its central stated goal. The RCN builds off the NSF SEES Workshop -Tracking
an energy elephant: science and engineering challenges for unlocking the
geothermal potential of sedimentary basins,- which was held November 2011 in
Salt Lake City. This workshop included 71 participants, and was convened to
address the question "What are the basic science and engineering questions that
need to be addressed in order to make geothermal energy production from
sedimentary basins practical?" The November 2011 SEES Workshop concluded that
geothermal energy from sedimentary basins has the realistic potential to supply
energy on the gigawatt scales of coal and nuclear. The barriers to sedimentary-
basin geothermal are within the risk and uncertainty of economic extraction.
Addition of sedimentary-basin geothermal to the U.S. energy portfolio would have
a tremendous impact on the sustainability of the energy grid and the economy at
large with negligible environmental impact. The program will strive to develop
an educated community though preparation of course materials and directly
reaching out to students though short courses and student lab visitation
opportunities.