* 1240394
* Workshops for Creating a Community Roadmap for EarthCube Services for Data Discovery, Mining and Access: Data Mining Services
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Sara Graves, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 10/31/2013
* USD 99,394.00

EarthCube, a major new NSF initiative, is focused on community-driven
development of an integrated and interoperable knowledge management system for
data in the geo- and environmental sciences. By utilizing a cooperative, as
opposed to competitive process like that which created the Internet and Open
Source software, EarthCube will attack the recalcitrant and persistent problems
that so far have prevented adequate access to and the analysis, visualization,
and interoperability of the vast storehouses of disparate geoscience data and
data types residing in distributed and diverse data systems. This awards funds a
series of broad, inclusive community interactions to gather adequate information
and requirements to create a roadmap for a critical capability (data mining and
algorithm/data analytic techniques) that will enable the development of
EarthCube. The focus of the community conversations include exploration of
present data analysis approaches and possible new novel approaches; data
filtering; pattern recognition and machine learning as applied to geoscience
datasets; and search algorithm identification and development. Intensive
interaction will also take place with awardees and participants in the other
EarthCube community groups and concept development awards. Broader impacts of
the work include: helping EarthCube realize its potential to dramatically
improve the infrastructure for science, actively engaging early career
geoscience researchers in the process, and supporting investigators at an
institution in an EPSCoR state.