* 1240234
* Instructional Approaches to Access, Accommodation, and Inclusion in the Geosciences:  An International Workshop
* GEO,GEO
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Christopher Atchison, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 04/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

This award is supporting implementation of a special professional development
opportunity for current and future geoscience faculty and teaching assistants
that is aimed at increasing capacity for educating students with disabilities in
the geosciences and engaging them in geoscience education and career pathways.
This program, which will be launched at the 34th International Geological
Congress in Brisbane Australia (Symposium 1.2. Geoscience Education Theme 1:
Geoscience for Society) and repeated at the 2012 Geological Society of America
(GSA) annual meeting in Charlotte, North Carolina. This project is the outgrowth
of a new collaboration between the International Advisory for Geoscience
Diversity (IAGD) and the International Union of Geological Sciences/Commission
on Geoscience Education, Training and Technology Transfer (IUGS/COGE). This
instructional workshop is specifically designed for faculty who may need
assistance in modifying course materials to include and accommodate students
with disabilities. Most faculty members are not adequately prepared to include
students with disabilities but are faced with the immediate challenge of
retrofitting accommodations when such students arrive at their classes. The
highlight of this professional development workshop session will be a first-hand
perspective from students with disabilities involved in the presentation and
workshop activities. Student presenters will discuss their experiences in the
geosciences, and how instructional materials and activities can be accommodated
to include them in every aspect of geoscience education. This workshop is being
offered at no cost to the participants, in order to self-promote the effort of
classroom accessibility and to disseminate the materials and teaching strategies
as broadly as possible.