* 1240957
* CER: Collaborative Research: Computing Education through Collaborative Debugging
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 09/30/2016
* USD 355,000.00

The University of Washington and Oregon State University will investigate how to
teach debugging and computing skills in personalized, social, online learning
settings. The investigators will create an interactive website that presents a
series of debugging puzzles to learners, allowing them learn diagnostic
strategies and computing concepts in a self-paced manner and in collaboration
with their peers. The website will also allow learners to create their own
debugging puzzles to share with friends, family, and the world, resulting in an
online community of social learning. Using this design, the project will
investigate the effect of explicit instruction on debugging strategies on
learners' ability to learn basic programming concepts and the effect of social
learning features on learning outcomes and engagement. The project will also
contribute basic discoveries on how to teach debugging and how such teaching can
be integrated into instruction on other aspects of computing. Evaluations will
include both controlled laboratory experiments, annual summer camps involving
over 200 U.S. teens, and a worldwide deployment of the
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of a larger effort to
increase both computing literacy and interest in computing careers on the part
of U.S. teens. This project's focus on social learning is particularly important
for broadening participation in computing, allowing teens to learn computing in
supportive and collaborative settings, rather than the highly competitive
settings that tend to deter many teens today. Moreover, because the website will
only require an Internet connection and a web browser, and not software
installations or special devices, the project will also improve access to
effective, evidence-based computing education, reaching learners who only have
Internet access at public libraries or at school. These efforts will not only
improve U.S. citizens' global competitiveness for information technology jobs,
but also help the broader citizenry better understand and debug the increasingly
software-based world around them.