* 1240036
* "Communities &amp; Pathways": Cultivating Science Educator Identity for Undergraduates through an Inclusive Physics Learning Assistant Program &amp; STEM Teacher Certification Alig
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* David Donnelly, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* julio soto
* 12/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

This project builds capacity for the Noyce Scholarship track at Texas State
University-San Marcos (Hispanic Serving Institution), in collaboration with San
Antonio College and Austin Community College, two neighboring two-year colleges.
The project fosters a thriving community of undergraduate students who identify
as science educators. The community is built and supported via two major
mechanisms: the "Communities" component, which is an expanding Learning
Assistant (LA) program in the physics department; and the "Pathways" component,
which is the alignment of STEM degrees with teacher certifications. The
elementary education population is of special interest in this project, as
approximately 750 such students take a physics course each semester at Texas
State. These students are included in the LA program, which provides the
mechanism for composing a diverse community of students all concerned with
various aspects of K-16 physics education. The project is contributing to a
growing knowledge base about effective models for teacher preparation by
examining students' formation of identity as STEM educators, and by research
into the impact of a diverse STEM-education community of practice on teacher
recruitment and on the representation and success of underrepresented minorities
in STEM. The project's focus on recruitment and training of K-12 STEM teachers
addresses the national shortage of qualified physics teachers and builds a local
infrastructure in Central Texas for formal, sustained, K-12 physics teacher
preparation and enhancement.