* 1240707
* Collaborative Research: IPY: GAMBIT: Gamburtsev Aerogeophysical Mapping of Bedrock and Ice Targets
* GEO,OPP
* 11/30/2011,05/31/2013
* Mark Fahnestock, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2013
* USD 57,528.00

This award supports an aerogeophysical study of the Gamburtsev Subglacial
Mountains (GSM), a Texas-sized mountain range buried beneath the ice sheets of
East Antarctica. The project would perform a combined gravity, magnetics, and
radar study to achieve a range of goals including: advancing our understanding
of the origin and evolution of the polar ice sheets and subglacial lakes;
defining the crustal architecture of East Antarctica, a key question in the
earth's history; and locating the oldest ice in East Antarctica, which may
ultimately help find ancient climate records. Virtually unexplored, the GSM
represents the largest unstudied area of crustal uplift on earth. As well, the
region is the starting point for growth of the Antarctic ice sheets.
&lt;br/&gt;Because of these outstanding questions, the GSM has been identified
by the international Antarctic science community as a research focus for the
International Polar Year (2007-2009). In addition to this study, NSF is also
supporting a seismological survey of the GSM under award number 0537371. Major
international partners in the project include Germany, China, Australia, and the
United Kingdom. For more information see IPY Project #67 at IPY.org. In terms of
broader impacts, this project also supports postdoctoral and graduate student
research, and various forms of outreach including a focus on groups
underrepresented in the earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;