* 1240734
* A Design Proposal: The Center for Cyber Sensors Networks for Human and Environmental Applications
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Kimberly Kendricks, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 683,915.00

The project entitled - A Design Proposal: The Center for Cyber Sensors Networks
for Human and Environmental Applications - aims to increase the research
capacity of Central State University (CSU) with the goal of developing a focused
research center in two years. CSU is a mostly undergraduate Historically Black
University where 95% of the students are African American. The work will
strengthen the research credentials of the university's faculty as well as the
resources and facilities of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) departments, thereby creating the foundation for the university to become
an institution more competitive in research. The ultimate goal is for CSU to
develop the research infrastructure to establish a research center in the area
of cyber sensor networks. In order to establish such a center, the institution
must have an established research focus with integrated educational initiatives;
demonstrate a long-term plan for research infrastructure improvement; and
develop a comprehensive plan to achieve and maintain national competitiveness in
a defined research area. The outcomes produced by this work will position CSU to
accomplish the following over the next two years: increase the institution's
research capabilities, increase faculty research capacity, improve the research
infrastructure, and increase the research capabilities of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a sharable self-
optimizing and cooperative control cyber sensor network platform for sensor-
oriented applications such as persistent surveillance on human behavior and the
tracking of environmental phenomena. As a multidisciplinary research
collaboration, the project involves image/video processing, algebraic
techniques, statistical physics, data fusion, cooperative control, and
optimization. The educational activities are integrated through an
interdisciplinary undergraduate seminar course in cyber sensors networks. The
course will increase awareness of national problems in the environment, as well
as current studies in human performance, attracting students to research and
continued study in STEM. The research will enhance the institution's efforts in
recruiting and retaining minority students by engaging them in undergraduate
research.