* 1240696
* Collaborative Research: Developing A Complete Membrane-Cytoskeleton Model for Human Erythrocyte
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Ju Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 227,694.00

1067523/1066469&lt;br/&gt;Zhang/Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During its 120-day life
span, a human red blood cell (RBC) circulates a million times in human body and
often squeezes through narrow capillaries, exhibiting an amazing ability of
control over its shape and mechanical properties under external mechanical
stimuli. This collaborative project aims to develop a complete human RBC model
coupling the coarse-grained membrane model and cytoskeleton model and to study
the molecular regulatory mechanisms in RBC deformation. The complete RBC model
is molecularly based, and thus faithful to the underlying nano-scale
architecture of the RBC. Upon validation against existing analytical and
experimental studies, the complete RBC model will be employed to identify
molecular origins of RBC deformation and disorders under combined metabolic
activation and mechanical loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project resides in the development of the first ever computational
whole-cell platform for human erythrocyte. The coarse-grained modeling will
establish a direct link between nanostructural changes and observables such as
fluctuation, shape, and disorders. When integrated with existing microscopic
models of key components in living cells, such as actin and focal adhesion
complex, the computational whole-cell platform established herein will help
foster transformative progress for the analysis of RBC responses in particular
and cell mechanics in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first-ever computational
whole-cell platform built upon a detailed blueprint of all the nanostructural
members of an entire RBC cell at nanometer resolution will have a revolutionary
impact on computational cell biology. The computational platform facilitates
identifying the molecular origins of RBC disorders, presenting another key
impact of the proposed project. The educational program will enhance minority
involvement and participation in science and engineering, and stimulate the
interests of students in Penn State and MIT in the emerging field of multiscale
modeling of cell mechanics.