* 1240251
* Computational Thinking as an Approach to Refining the Critical Thinking and Analytical Reasoning Skills of Undergraduates at an HBCU
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Evelyn Leggette, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,998.00

The project entitled - Computational Thinking as an Approach to Refining the
Critical Thinking and Analytical Reasoning Skills of Undergraduates at an HBCU -
has the goal to expand on a new course in Computational Thinking to ensure that
students who complete this course have enhanced critical thinking and analytical
reasoning skills. The objectives of this project are: to identify and develop
exact measures of Computational Thinking competencies; to develop a curriculum
that successfully integrates critical thinking and analytical reasoning skills
with Computational Thinking skills; and to determine whether Computational
Thinking competencies enhance critical thinking and analytical reasoning skills
for students at Jackson State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the newly evolving area of Computational Thinking. Advocates of
computational thinking believe that it will transform not only Computer Science
education, but K-16 education in general. Ninety-Two percent of the students
enrolled at Jackson State University are African-American. As part of the
institution's core curriculum all students must take a computing course.
Therefore, this project has the potential to impart Computational Thinking,
critical thinking and analytical reasoning skills to a large number of
underrepresented students. This project will ensure that HBCUs and other
minority serving institutions are a part of the evolving Computational Thinking
community. Course modules and a theoretical framework resulting from this
project will be disseminated through traditional means such as publications and
presentations as well as various computing related pathways.