* 1241932
* Predicting Regional Invasion Dynamic Processes (PRIDE)-Developing a Cross-scale, Functional-trait Based Modeling Framework
* BIO,EF
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Songlin Fei, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 725,985.00

Invasions of exotic species pose major threats to many ecosystems and result in
significant ecosystem degradation and economic loss. Research on exotic
invasions has been a major topic in the last two decades and much knowledge has
been gained from research done on small plots. However, current understanding of
the long-term invasion process at regional to continental scales is limited, in
part because long-term and large-scale empirical information is lacking. This
project uses a new research framework constructed using functional traits (for
example, life history information) that includes all three major invasion
components: the invader, the recipient system, and the drivers that facilitate
the invader, all examined across scales of both time and space. The overarching
goal of this exploratory project is to establish a regional network of
scientists and practitioners to develop a regional scale predictive model of
invasion dynamics under this new framework. The specific aims of the project are
(1) to develop an interdisciplinary team for constructing a regional to
continental scale invasive modeling framework, ensuring that it is also relevant
to invasion management, (2) to develop a comprehensive regional database that
includes invader functional traits and current distributions, recipient system
characteristics, and multi-dimensional invasion driver characteristics, and (3)
to develop a new, multi-scale invasion modeling framework based on functional
traits for an invader, an invasion driver, and a recipient system and use the
model to explore cross-scale interactions.

The outcomes of the proposed project will position the research team to develop
a new generation of accurate predictive models for regional scale invasion
forecasting, which will assist researchers and natural resource managers to
examine what-if scenarios in the short term (5-10 years) and long term (50-100
years). The new research framework should also be easily applied to invasive
species study in other regions and on other continents. In addition, the
conceptual framework can be used as a mechanism to advance the field of invasion
ecology by formulating new invasion theories and unifying existing hypotheses.
Results of the proposed research will also have direct societal benefits.
Applications to invasion management will help prevent and mitigate economic and
ecological damages caused by invasive species. The project will have high impact
on education as well. Two postdoctoral fellows and two PhD Fellows will be
supported to conduct related research, along with six undergraduate scholars and
four interns. Emphasis in recruiting will be on underrepresented and female
students.