* 1241895
* Collaborative Research:  Within-host Microbial Communities: Experimentally Scaling Interaction Dynamics Across Sites, Regions, and Continents
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Georgiana May, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,500,000.00

The fungal, bacterial, and viral microbial communities embedded within organisms
are extremely diverse and encode the vast majority of genes in the biosphere.
For example, microbes in a human account for 100 times more genes than those of
their host; similar results are emerging for virtually all free-living
organisms. Disease is the best studied host-microbe interaction, but microbes
inside hosts also are responsible for critical functions such as disease
resistance as well as nutrient uptake and defense against herbivores (plants),
and digestion and reduced inflammatory responses (animals). Yet, in spite of the
tremendous diversity and importance of microbes to free-living organisms, there
is no predictive understanding of the factors controlling within-host microbial
community composition or the spatial scales at which environmental changes
affect host and microbial community interactions and functions. Even as human
activities lead to increased nitrogen and phosphorus inputs and increased rates
of species invasions and extinctions, impacting biological systems at scales
ranging from individuals to continents, we know little of the effects of these
changes on microbial communities within hosts. This award will provide the first
systematic understanding of the responses of plant microbial communities to
these pervasive environmental changes on a global scale and provide critically
important information on the potential role of microbes in plant productivity,
knowledge necessary for feeding a growing human population (9 billion by 2050).
This award provides funds to use experiments of unprecedented scale to examine
the environmental factors controlling a plant host's fungal, bacterial, and
viral microbes at scales ranging from individual plants to regional and global
bioclimatic and soil gradients. Using quantitative models to examine multi-scale
empirical data, the project team's work will answer three questions. 1) What
factors most strongly control microbial communities within hosts across global,
continental, regional, and local scales? 2) How does the within-host microbial
community affect host reproduction and susceptibility to disease-causing
microbes? And 3) how do the symbiotic microbial communities within a host affect
the growth, competitive ability, and successful transmission of microbes? The
research will encompass replicated experiments in 30 grasslands spanning six
continents, representing globally-relevant variation in soil nutrients.
Concurrent collection of data from locally common grass hosts as well as a
planted crop host (barley) within experimental nutrient and herbivory treatments
will be used to discern the effects of symbiotic microbes on plant host health
and to distinguish these from other large-scale factors such as climate and the
specific microbes found in each location. High-throughput sequencing will be
used to determine variation in within-host microbial communities at scales
ranging from meters to continents. Manipulative experiments and data modeling
will clarify the effect of microbial communities on host reproduction,
resistance to microbial disease, and the spread of microbes and disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Grassland communities cover 30% of
Earth's ice-free surface, and occur across greatly varying climatic conditions.
Grasslands are essential ecosystems that provide food and forage for
domesticated and wild animal populations. In this research, grasslands provide
an experimental system with which to understand the ecological processes driving
microbial community composition and its effects on plant host growth and
reproduction. Results of this work have great potential for refining medical and
agricultural applications by illuminating the role of microbial communities in
the health of their hosts, and the scales at which environment, space, and time
most affect host-microbe interactions. Results may identify novel mechanisms of
plant resistance to crop pathogens and will contribute significantly to existing
microbial sequence databases linked to LTER and NEON sites and priorities. The
research group will communicate this work to K-12 children, undergraduates, and
the general public via collaborations with Cedar Creek LTER and the Bell Museum
of Natural History. All microbial data and living culture collections will be
made publicly available, further enhancing research infrastructure and providing
a rich resource for further discovery. As always, the project PIs will
prioritize involvement of underrepresented groups and disseminate results in
peer-reviewed journals.