* 1241059
* Dimensions:   Collaborative Research:  Historical and contemporary influences on elevational distributions and biodiversity tested in tropical Asia
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Frederick Sheldon, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 10/31/2017
* USD 330,378.00

The causes of geographical gradients in biodiversity are not well understood,
and remain a major scientific challenge. Many physical and biotic factors may
influence the evolutionary diversification and species distribution dynamics
that result in these gradients. This study examines an elevational gradient of
tropical birds in Asia, where functional, genetic, and phylogenetic diversity of
organisms are woefully understudied and underlying patterns provide a strong
system for testing hypotheses about biodiversity along elevational gradients.
The proposed research evaluates both traditional (physiological tolerance,
competition, opposing boundaries) and novel (taxon age, adult survival, life
history trade-offs) factors that vary along elevational gradients and integrates
them with dispersal, genetic structure, and phylogenetic history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research partners will share samples and data, and
collaborate in cross-disciplinary training of students, in pursuing tests of the
proposed hypotheses. This integration will lead to a new mechanistic
understanding and conceptual framework for the influence of physical climate
gradients and biotic interactions on species distributions and the evolution of
diversity. The project will provide extensive opportunities for the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, including a unique cross-cultural life
experience as well as hands-on educational and field experience. Public outreach
includes work with high school students and teachers, museum exhibits, and
development of an educational video on tropical bird nesting behaviors. Finally,
this project has critical conservation ramifications, as tropical Asian forests
are being lost at the fastest rate of any tropical forests in the world, and
this research will provide critical information on possible climate change
impacts that are of grave concern to extinction risks.