* 1241735
* An Innovative Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Education Program for Protecting Critical Infrastructure
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Vittal Rao, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,966.00

This capacity track project is developing an interdisciplinary, cybersecurity
education program for engineers that must be aware of critical design issues for
addressing cybersecured control systems for electromechanical devices, more
effective techniques for the integration of secure software and hardware
devices, and associated law and policy issues. The curriculum consists of an
interdisciplinary core that addresses information assurance, cyberphysical
systems, and law and policy, with multiple tracks that can be tailored to
cybersecurity education within a specific engineering
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern control systems for critical
infrastructure such as power grids, transportation systems, and communication
networks are cyberphysical systems consisting of both software-enabled control
systems and hardware execution components. Cyberattacks on these
electromechanical systems can have a significant impact on the secured operation
of the overall control system. The collaboration among computing, engineering,
and law faculty positively impacts the design and implementation of
cybersecurity curriculum that will educate a wider range of professionals that
are needed to more effectively secure our Nation's assets. Community building is
being leveraged in industry, such that cybersecurity is an integrated concept
that is designed into systems by interdisciplinary project teams for more secure
critical infrastructure, rather than as add-on
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results are being disseminated in the
broader forums for education research results, as well as associated conferences
and journals of the collaborating disciplines of this project. Cybersecurity
awareness outreach within the university community and at the K-12 level serves
to educate the public and provide a potential pipeline for cybersecurity
education.