* 1241783
* New thermally and photochemically removable epoxy adhesives for reversibly reparing ceramics and glass artifacts
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Pamela Vandiver, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2016
* USD 389,979.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstruction and repair of ceramic
and glass artifacts has long been a central part of art conservation in museums
around the world. Rejoining fragments into whole artifacts is important to
understanding the original function of artifacts and for providing meaningful
displays with which to educate the public. Polymeric adhesives, such as acrylics
and epoxies, can be successfully used to join fragments together, but are
difficult to remove making correction of reconstructive errors difficult and
leaving polymeric contamination to interfere with future microscopic and
chemical analyses of the artifacts. The objective of this project is to study
the use of thermally- and photochemically reversible epoxies as adhesives that
can be use to bond fragments together, but that can be reworked or even removed
entirely with minimal adverse affects. These epoxies are composed of a liquid
epoxy resin and a liquid curing agent that react to afford a highly cross-linked
polymer with the same mechanical properties of traditional epoxies. However,
whereas traditional epoxies irreversibly cure into an intractable material,
these epoxies will have thermal or photochemical weak-links built into every
resin component that will allow for their triggered conversion with exposure to
heat (&gt; 90 °C) or ultraviolet light back into liquid constituents. The
thermal weak-link will be the Diels Alder cycloadduct of a maleimide and furan
that is known to form at room temperature but reverts to its constituents at
temperatures above 90 °C. The photochemical weak-link will be the cyclodimer of
a coumarin derivative that forms with exposure to long wave ultraviolet and is
cleaved by shortwave ultraviolet light. The epoxy adhesives built with these
weak-links will be used to bond glass or ceramic fragments together. Mechanical
testing will be conducted to compare these materials with commercial epoxy
adhesives then the thermal or photochemical degradation of the adhesive bonds
and the efficacy of removing the oligomeric residues will be evaluated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is directed at development and application of new adhesives that can be used to
repair artifacts or assemble fragments into whole pieces, but can be readily
removed by heating above 90 °C or with exposure to ultraviolet light.
Restoration and preservation of art and artifacts often requires adhesives, but
many are difficult, if not impossible to remove without damaging the artwork
that it was meant to preserve or repair. This project will include the
development of the thermally or photochemically removable adhesives and testing
their application as adhesives to join ceramics and glass and demonstration the
reversibility of the adhesive bonding with the application of heat or light.
Success will provide a new, important tool for conservators and museums for
repairing or reconstructing artifacts. These removable adhesives will also prove
valuable to any application needing a high performance adhesive that can readily
removed or reset, including microelectronics manufacturing, aerospace
composites, and medical prostheses.