* 1241179
* Workshop to Develop an Implementation Plan for the Network Integrated Collections, Reston, Virginia, Sept. 17-18, 2012
* BIO,EF
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Richard O'Grady, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 04/30/2014
* USD 79,699.00

Biological collections are an irreplaceable resource that informs our scientific
understanding of the history and diversity of life on Earth. The value of these
research collections is greatly enhanced when the specimens and data are
digitized and made widely and publically available. The biodiversity collections
community recently united to develop a ten-year Strategic Plan for establishing
a Network Integrated Biocollections Alliance (NIBA), but to date, no detailed
community-informed plan has been developed to guide the implementation of that
Strategic Plan. The American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS) will
conduct a workshop of diverse stakeholders with the specific goal of deriving a
detailed implementation plan for the NIBA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A detailed
community-informed plan will help the scientific community more effectively
curate specimens and data, increase research productivity by improving access to
collection resources, develop innovative tools to capture and validate data,
develop protocols that enhance the efficiency of digital capture, and provide
education and training to develop the biodiversity collections workforce. As
data and specimens are captured and made publically available, there will be new
opportunities for the public to access and learn about biodiversity and Earth
systems, and the plan will recommend methods to promote citizen science
activities to expose the public directly to these scientific resources.