* 1241515
* The Open Cyber Challenge Platform For Teaching Information Assurance, Cyber Security, and Forensics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Victor Fay-Wolfe, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 602,140.00

This project creates an open-source cyber challenge software platform (OCCP) and
accompanying educational and assessment materials that are designed to be widely
disseminated for teaching high school and college information assurance, cyber
security, and digital forensics courses. The project consists of activities to
design the OCCP using free/low cost virtualization software packaged in a
standard way for public release; to create instances of the OCCP for network
defense courses, penetration testing courses, and secure programming courses; to
create supplemental educational materials for use with the OCCP instances in
these courses; to assess the effectiveness of the use of OCCP in these courses;
and to hold workshops and create a web portal for wide dissemination of
educational materials, and for community contributions to the
OCCP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of this project represents a controlled
teaching and assessment environment where students apply information assurance,
cyber security, and digital forensics concepts in orchestrated pedagogically-
sound realistic scenarios. The OCCP is easy and inexpensive to install and as
such provides a starting point that instructors can deploy to save substantial
effort, and yet still tailor to their specific needs. Furthermore, it provides a
framework with a software architecture and "packaging" that is meant to be
shared, modified, extended, and re-used to facilitate the development of an open
source community that uses, supports, and extends the OCCP.