* 1241356
* Workshop cost and travel grants for Large Complex Network Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Mung Chiang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 05/31/2013
* USD 49,000.00

This project supports workshop travel and dissemination of workshop results for
an upcoming workshop on complex engineered networks. Complex engineered networks
are everywhere: power grids, Internet, transportation networks, and others. They
are being used more than ever before, and yet our understanding about them
remains limited. The Internet, wireless networks, and online social networks
have shaped the modern society. Increasingly, critical, engineered, large-scale
systems, such as transportation networks, power grids, and oil and gas
distribution systems, are being enhanced and optimized by state monitoring and
dynamic controls through sensor and cyber mechanisms. These networks have
evolved into complex systems with behaviors and characteristics that are beyond
the characterizations and predictions possible by the traditional modeling,
analysis and design approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring
together experts from the academia, national laboratories, government, and
industries to assess the recent trends, state-of-the-art, and impending
challenges in modeling, predicting and controlling the behaviors of these
complex networks to gain better performance, efficiency, and robustness. The
objectives of the workshop include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Identify
transformative research challenges and directions in the field of large-scale,
complex engineered networks and interconnected physical systems of sensors and
instruments, such as the power grid and communications networks. &lt;br/&gt;-
Assess the state-of-the-art, future trends, and important opportunities and
challenges in the theory, design, analysis, tools, and applications of complex
interconnected systems research in government, industry, and academia.
&lt;br/&gt;- Identify strategies for inter-agency collaborations at the federal
level to enable different communities to carry out joint efforts, leverage
ongoing activities, accelerate new discoveries, and enable technology transfers
to societal impact in the research field of complex networks and interconnected
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Complex systems occupy critical
roles in our society but their performance across a full set of operating
conditions is usually at best poorly understood. Formal mathematical analysis
may give insight into the operation of system components or into the operation
of simplified system models, but is seldom capable of exactly modeling actual
code. Testing of complex systems often misses unexpected and undesirable
behaviors resulting from cross-system interactions. Program module (unit)
testing is effective in checking for gross programming errors across a specified
set of inputs but often fails for inputs generated by these behaviors. Dynamic
whole system behaviors such as oscillations, spreading overloads, and cascading
security failures are not discoverable via unit testing. Exhaustive testing is
often either not possible or prohibitively expensive in terms of time or
resources. Better understanding of how to couple mathematical analysis and
testing for the purposes of rapid and rigorous characterization of complex
systems would have broad societal impact. The workshop is a joint undertaking
between NSF, DoE and AFOSR via the Networking and Information Technology
Research and Development (NITRD) Program and the Large Scale Networking (LSN)
working subcommittee.