* 1241722
* Growth and Enhancement of the Scholarship for Service Program at Mississippi State University
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2019
* Rayford Vaughn, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 4,749,829.00

Mississippi State University (MSU), a 2001/2004/2007/2012 Center of Academic
Excellence in Information Assurance Education (CAE) recipient and a
CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) participating university since 2002
continues to produce SFS students for the government at a rate of approximately
10 new SFS students a year. This project supports approximately 39 students in
one of six technical disciplines over a five year period (17 undergraduates, 20
M.S. students, and 2 PhD students). This program continues to be professionally
organized and administered by those most closely associated with the Information
Assurance program at MSU. The program continues to benefit from over $19M
research funding from DOJ, DOD and NSF as each student funded under this
initiative is required to participate in a research experience. MSU continues a
strong working relationship with other CAEs, other universities, community
colleges, and the law enforcement community. MSU graduates are successful in
government service and new scholarship recipients are sought after by additional
government employers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;MSU has a strong track record of
building strong relationships with schools aspiring to be capable of running a
scholarship program. They have partnered with several HBCUs including Jackson
State University, Mississippi Valley State University, and Tuskegee University,
as well as other schools, such as the University of South Alabama, the
University of Texas at Tyler, and Saint Cloud State University. This project
continues that work to ensure that more schools build IA programs that can
provide graduates to help fill the cybersecurity workforce.