* 1241849
* EAGER: Formal Reliability Enhancement Methods for Million Core Computational Frameworks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 05/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

High Performance Computing is strategically important to national
competitiveness. Advances in computational capabilities involve the use of
unprecedented levels of parallelism: programming methods that involve billions
of concurrent activities. Computational Frameworks allow these parallel programs
to be organized in a modular fashion, achieving higher reliability, scalability,
and better resource management capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
develops formally based reliability enhancement mechanisms when Computational
Frameworks are developed or optimized in response to the arrival of newer
hardware/software technologies. These mechanisms include a formal specification
of the expected behavior of these frameworks, and ways to verify them before
deployment and during live operation. Correctness issues addressed in this
proactive manner will considerably reduce the time it takes to proceed from idea
to science. This project will enable a scientific understanding of which formal
methods are likely to work at the scale of millions of cores, and which formal
methods are best recommended to capture intended behavior versus those that are
best suitable for run-time use. The project will also result in broad impact in
terms of: the incorporation of our verification tools and techniques within
popular tool-integration frameworks; achieving large-scale case studies on the
use of formal methods within a computational framework that is under
development; and training of undergraduate and graduate students on advanced
correctness verification methods. It will also help build talent pool vital to
continued progress in high performance computing with applications to science
and engineering, energy/sustainability, and homeland security.