* 1241460
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: EAGER: Evaluating the Larsen basin's suitability for testing the Cretaceous Glaciation Hypothesis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* David Barbeau, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 189,184.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Recent geochemical, sequence stratigraphic, and
integrated investigations of marine strata from several continental margins and
ocean basins suggest that ephemeral ice sheets may have existed on Antarctica
during parts of the Cretaceous and early Paleogene. However, atmospheric carbon
dioxide estimates for this time are as much as four times modern levels. With
such greenhouse conditions, the presence of Antarctic ice sheets would imply
that our current understanding of Earth?s climate system, and specifically the
interpreted thresholds of Antarctic glaciation and deglaciation should be
reconsidered. The proposed research will compare the quantity and provenance of
Cretaceous sediments in the Larsen basin of the eastern Antarctic Peninsula with
the exhumation chronology and composition of potential sediment source terranes
on the peninsula and in adjacent regions. New outcrop stratigraphic analyses
with improvements in the age models from radioisotopic approaches will be
integrated to determine the amount of detrital sediment fluxed to the Larsen
basin between key chronostratigraphic surfaces. Microtextural analysis of quartz
sand and silt grains will help determine whether the Larsen basin detrital
sediment originated from glacial weathering. These preliminary results will test
the viability of the proposed approach to assess the controversial Cretaceous
Antarctic glaciation hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will partially support a PhD, a MSc, and three
undergraduate students at the University of South Carolina. The PIs will
publicize this work through volunteer speaking engagements and the development
of videos and podcasts. They also commit to prompt publication of the results
and timely submission of data to archives. The development/improvement of the
Larsen basin age model will benefit ongoing research in paleobiology,
paleoclimate and biogeography. Development of the glauconite K-Ar and Rb-Sr
chronometers could be an important outcome beyond the direct scope of the
proposed research.