* 1241282
* AGU Chapman Conference on Hawaiian Volcanoes: From Source to Surface
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Brenda Weaver, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,126.00

Chapman Conferences are topic meetings sponsored by the American Geophysical
Union and are designed to promote opportunities to discuss scientific issues
that are not normally available at larger
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits. Studies of Hawaiian
volcanoes have had a profound impact on the development of volcanology,
especially over the past century. Frequent eruptive activity and ease of access
make Hawaii a natural laboratory for volcanology as epitomized by establishment
of the Hawaii Volcano Observatory in 1912. Since then, Hawaiian volcanoes have
served as a testing ground for models of magma ascent, storage, transport, and
eruption, with results applicable to similar volcanoes worldwide and on other
planets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii is the paradigm for hotspot volcanism, and
is a key element in models of global tectonics and mantle structure. In
addition, activity of Hawaiian volcanoes has spurred technological developments
that have led to outstanding advances in geophysical methods, leading to state-
of-the-art seismic and geodetic networks that have been replicated at many other
volcanoes worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Chapman conference on Hawaiian
Volcanoes will be held August 20-24, 2012, the same year that the Hawaiian
Volcano Observatory marks the Centennial of its founding. This occasion provides
an opportunity to review the state-of-the-art in understanding of how Hawaiian
volcanoes work and to assess the most important problems requiring future
research. The conference will occur over 5 days and will include both invited
and contributed talks, as well as posters. Topical sessions will be organized to
follow a packet of magma from its point of origin in the mantle, through
subvolcanic plumbing systems, to eruption at the surface, as a means of
discussing observations and models of magma origin, ascent, and eruption. The
last day will feature discussion of future research goals in Hawaii, and how
work on Hawaiian volcanoes can drive development of new technologies and
methodologies in the Earth sciences. One day in the middle of the conference
schedule will be devoted to field trips to offer attendees a chance to explore
areas of volcanic interest around the island and interact with colleagues in an
informal setting. Pre- and post-meeting field trips will also be available to
maximize participant exposure to Hawaiian volcanoes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The conference conveners will encourage
broad participation and especially hope to attract graduate students and early
career scientists, because they represent the next generation of Earth
scientists and future leaders in their fields. Interactions between young
researchers and experienced scientists will provide a forum for information
transfer in both directions. The conveners are considering publishing an AGU
monograph entitled ?Hawaiian Volcanoes: From Source to Surface,? that will
summarize the current state-of-knowledge of Hawaiian volcanism. Insights into
the most important research questions about Hawaiian volcanoes will be
summarized in a white paper intended to guide future research on Hawaiian
volcanic processes and to inform funding agencies that evaluate related research
proposals.