* 1241945
* Collaborative Research:  Thermal Controls on Ecosystem Metabolism and Function:   Scaling from Leaves to Canopies to Regions
* BIO,EF
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Michael Goulden, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 147,033.00

Temperature exerts a primary environmental control on biological systems and
processes at a range of scales in space and time. Its influence is fundamental,
ranging from controls on the reaction rates of enzymes, ecosystem biogeochemical
reactions, and large-scale distributions of plant and animal species.
Temperature is also a fundamental characteristic of climate. Indeed, much of the
concern about the impact of climate warming is motivated by the pervasive
influence of temperature on organisms. Although most focus is usually on air
temperature, the skin temperature of an organism, such as a plant, is actually
more relevant in many cases. However, until now measurements of organismal
temperature using thermal images taken from some distance away have been
challenging because of sensor and computational limitations. This research
project addresses this gap in understanding through three goals: (1) to assess
the use of thermal imaging measurements for ecological and agricultural studies,
such as monitoring the response of plant canopies to heat and drought stress;
(2) to demonstrate the continuous deployment of robust thermal cameras for
continuous canopy imaging for a range of ecosystems; and (3) to develop scaling
algorithms to relate sparse measurements at individual canopy sites to the
patterns observed at regional scales by sensors on aircraft and satellites. The
work will combine temperature observations at a range of spatial resolutions
with synthesis activities in an innovative manner. The results will enhance our
understanding of how ecosystem structure and function are related to skin
temperature patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce new
technology and infrastructure for long-term thermal data collection that could
have a large impact on our understanding of ecological functioning across
multiple scales. It will combine the diverse interdisciplinary expertise of
researchers at different stages in their careers in fields including plant
physiology, remote sensing, biogeography, and statistics. Results will directly
inform questions concerning the link between leaf temperatures and carbon
assimilation by ecosystems and the response of natural and agricultural
ecosystems to drought stress. It will address scaling of properties and
processes related to temperature, as is required for predicting responses to
climate change. Particular focus will be on the responses of ecosystems to
drought and heat waves. More tangible outcomes will be advances in understanding
of plant-temperature interactions in natural and managed ecosystems, as well as
the establishment of canopy thermal imaging equipment at three long-term
monitoring sites. Finally, this project will integrate research and teaching
through the training of post-doctoral researchers, mentoring of undergraduate
students, and development of laboratory modules based on the concepts and data
generated by this project for undergraduate and graduate courses in geography,
earth science, ecology, and environmental science.