* 1241315
* Enhancing the Capacity for Information Assurance Education Through Interdisciplinary Collaboration
* EDU,DGE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Rebecca Wright, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 10/31/2015
* USD 292,670.00

This project is increasing Rutgers University's capacity to produce highly
trained information assurance (IA) professionals by developing new
interdisciplinary degree programs at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.
A unique aspect of the effort is that it addresses the dependability of the
information and information services, as well as the big data and cloud
computing infrastructure, in an integrated
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators are developing
three new degree tracks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) A graduate-level
interdisciplinary concentration in IA is being created by leveraging the recent
creation of a Professional Science Master's Program that offers a Master of
Business and Science (MBS) degree. Because it includes business and management
training as well as technical training, the MBS degree is particularly well-
suited for training current and future professionals to ensure that information
assurance is considered at all stages of IT system development and
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) An IA track in the MS program offered by
the Computer Science Department is being created. This track allows students
looking for a traditional CS degree to receive an in-depth education in IA and
to obtain a degree that recognizes this specialized
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) IA tracks in the BS programs offered by the
Industrial and Systems Engineering (ISE) and Management Science and Information
Systems (MSIS) departments are being created. These degrees are well-grounded in
their individual disciplines but also expose students to IA courses from other
departments to ensure that the students develop a broad interdisciplinary
perspective on IA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are organizing several
workshops to disseminate ideas and results of the curriculum-development
activities. They are also hosting a summer camp in IA for high school students,
which provides additional outreach as well as a recruitment opportunity.