* 1241583
* Modeling Avian Responses to Climate Change using Evolving Occurrence Models
* BIO,EF
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Randall Boone, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 141,452.00

The distributions of bird species are limited by factors of the environment.
Different species have different ranges of environmental conditions that they
tolerate. Some of the conditions that birds are constrained by will shift as
climate changes. In fact, some species are already shifting their ranges toward
the poles or to higher elevations. Researchers have used statistical models to
relate spatial environmental data and the occurrence of bird species. They then
change the data to reflect the way conditions may appear in the future and use
the models to predict the ways in which bird species will shift their
distributions as a result. This approach has been criticized because it ignores
the interactions between species, that species can adapt to new environments,
and that some species are better at dispersing than others. A new method that
avoids these limitations will be used in this project. Statistical models will
be used to predict the occurrence and relative abundance of birds across the
United States that build on a long running survey of bird occurrences along with
a suite of spatial data. The models will then be incorporated into a simulation
model using an agent-based framework, where agents are the group of birds of an
individual species that occupy a small part of the landscape. The models that
describe the ways in which birds are distributed will be allowed to evolve in
response to the environments available and the presence of other species. For
example, small changes in the temperature range of a species may occur as it
moves into new landscapes. Adjustments will then be made to the simulation model
until the distribution of birds is similar to their real, current distributions.
Finally, response surfaces that reflect climate change effects will replace
those that represent current conditions and the simulations will be continued.
The distributions of bird species will thus evolve in response to the new
conditions and the results will reflect how bird distributions and communities
may change under a future climate, considering interactions between species and
the ability of the species themselves to adapt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models that
represent how individuals respond to changing environmental conditions are rare
in studies of how species are distributed. The method used here has the
potential to address a variety of questions and to make analyses dynamic, with
patterns of species distributions developing over time during the computer
simulations. The effort will support a PhD candidate who will work with a new
team, with new data sets, and learn new research skills. The results will be
used in university courses and workshops and to train high school students.
Results will be published in journal articles and summarized on a project web
site.