* 1241503
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RESISTIVITY MAPPING OF SUBSURFACE MICROBIAL HABITATS IN THE MCMURDO REGION
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Jill Mikucki, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 61,297.00

Intellectual Merit: The PIs propose to investigate the feasibility of using
airborne Time Domain Electromagnetic (TEM) to map subsurface resistivity in the
Antarctic environment. This method offers a non-invasive way to determine the
distribution of salinity in subglacial and sub-permafrost environments by
distinguishing between high resistivity (glacier ice and bedrock, permafrost)
and low resistivity materials (geologic materials saturated by salty water) to a
depth of 300 m or greater. The TEM system will be helicopter mounted to generate
three-dimensional maps of internal resistivity structure over inaccessible
terrain. Deployment the TEM system will be a proof-of-concept to determine
whether it can be used to map conductivity and depth of waters in Antarctic
subglacial and sub-permafrost environments. These data will help researchers
better understand the global function of subglacial microbial ecosystems the
nature and extent of subglacial habitats. Coupling geophysical surveying with
biogeochemical measurements will provide a unique opportunity to link the role
of hydrology and microbial processes in the subsurface environments. The
scientific goals of this work are to: 1) Develop flow models of the spatial
extent of the brine source and subglacial water movement 2) Measure carbon flux
and biomass from the subglacial brine 3) Determine how and why subglacial brine
is released exclusively at Blood Falls.

Broader impacts: This project will include student training, Antarctic
conservation (Blood Falls is being proposed as a new Antarctic Specially
Protected Area), and formal outreach developed with an outreach coordinator. The
formal outreach plan will be an illustrated book on Antarctic research. To
ensure the success of their broader impact goals, all PIs will work closely with
Dartmouth College and the WISSARD Project Education and Outreach Coordinator.