* 1241094
* Dimensions:   Collaborative Research: The taxonomic, genomic, and functional diversity of soil carbon dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Bruce Hungate, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,489,051.00

Microbial diversity is vast, and recent discoveries place soils as home to the
most diverse of the Earth's microbial communities. The current project will
probe a surprising response of microorganisms to changes in soil carbon
availability: when new carbon enters soil, especially carbon that is easily
assimilated and decomposed by soil microorganisms, a chain reaction occurs
leading to the breakdown of older soil carbon, carbon that would otherwise have
remained stable. Current theory does not explain this chain reaction. This
project will test whether taxonomic biodiversity and the genetic biodiversity it
supports - in other words, who is there and what are they doing - can explain
this unusual carbon cycling phenomenon. Researchers will use long-term study
sites in soils spanning a climatic gradient in Arizona and a variety of
molecular, genomic, chemical and analytical approaches. The work will test the
idea that parts of the carbon cycle are emergent consequences of interactions
among organisms, with biodiversity as a fundamental driver, thereby connecting
genes to communities to ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
addresses important questions both in biodiversity science and the global carbon
cycle, and is important because soil carbon is a major reservoir, storing about
three times the amount of carbon contained in the atmosphere as carbon dioxide.
Microbial biodiversity is the biological template upon which much of the carbon
cycle unfolds, yet evidence of how diversity alters the soil carbon cycle
remains elusive. This project will address this fundamental knowledge gap,
generate information applicable to carbon management, train new scientists at
the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels, and engage the public
through outreach activities.