* 1241069
* Dimensions:   Collaborative Research: Research on Airborne Ice-nucleating Species (RAINS)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Carolyn Weber, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2017
* USD 575,957.00

Microorganisms are abundant in the atmosphere and play an important role in
controlling cloud development, cloud chemistry and ultimately weather patterns.
They do this primarily by producing enzymes that catalyze the formation
(nucleation) of ice crystals at significantly warmer temperatures than would
normally be required for ice formation (-2 C vs. -36 C). Despite the
atmosphere?s fundamental role in their dispersal, the abundance, diversity and
flux of microorganisms in the atmosphere remain largely unknown. The potential
of ice-nucleating microorganisms to significantly impact meteorology and promote
microbial dispersal during precipitation events motivates this research. The
RAINS project will sample rain, snow and air samples at ground level, and in the
lower atmosphere using remote-controlled aircraft. The project will: (1)
characterize microbial taxonomic diversity, including in precipitation that
occurred between 1794 AD and present, and which is preserved in glacial ice; (2)
determine the genetic diversity of microbial assemblages and of individual ice
nucleating bacteria and (3) examine the functional diversity with respect to the
role of precipitation and biological ice nucleation on patterns of microbial
distribution. The work will also determine which microbes carried to the Earth?s
surface via precipitation present possible inoculum sources for diseases that
impact humans, domestic animals, and plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAINS
project will increase understanding of biodiversity in the planetary boundary
layer of the atmosphere, where important meteorological phenomena such as
precipitation occur. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change recommended
developing a better understanding of the effect of aerosols and atmospheric ice
formation in order to improve climate models and forecast the impact of rising
global temperature. The proposed study will increase knowledge on the nature of
the most active ice nucleators in the atmosphere. Microbial ice nucleation may
also allow microorganisms and certain plant pathogens to efficiently cycle
between the atmosphere and surface habitats, and RAINS will contribute to
ongoing efforts to assess the movement of ice nucleating microorganisms across
geographical scales. Outreach efforts will take these advances into high school
and college classrooms in the form of hands-on research experiences for students
at both levels and will serve as the basis for high school educators to develop
unique classroom activities. In addition, an international network of scientists
collecting field data on the relationship between biological ice nucleator
abundance, cropping patterns and precipitation in dry land regions will be
established. RAINS will sponsor an international conference that brings together
10 young career scientists in the network to highlight the advances of these
investigations and identify the outstanding scientific questions.