* 1241031
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: The role of taxonomic, functional, genetic, and landscape diversity in food web responses to a changing environment
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Jason Harmon, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2018
* USD 320,125.00

The proposed research will address how genetic, taxonomic, ecological, and
landscape diversity affect the natural control of agricultural pests by
predators. The study will focus on three crops (corn, alfalfa, and soybean) and
the group of aphid species that attacks them. Aphids are normally kept in check
by roughly 20 common predators. Because these predators move frequently among
fields and other habitats, their ability to suppress aphids depends upon the
diversity of the landscape. Furthermore, aphids contain bacterial symbionts that
give their insect hosts tolerance to high temperatures. These symbionts thus
make it possible for aphids to evolve in response to global warming. The
proposed research will use remote sensing, field experiments, and genetic assays
to understand the roles of ecology and evolution in maintaining the natural
control of aphid pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Corn, alfalfa, and soybean
dominate the agricultural landscape of much of the USA, and predators naturally
suppress many potential agricultural pests. A changing climate, or another
anthropogenic environmental change, could break down this natural control,
leading to greater pest problems for US agriculture. Understanding how
ecological and evolutionary diversity confers resilience against environmental
changes could identify warning signs of potential pest problems, and also
provide possible solutions. The proposed work will not only address this basic
and applied scientific challenge but will also educate the public by enlisting
the help of citizen scientists who will sample aphids and predators across the
USA, bringing hands-on science into citizen's backyards.