* 1241594
* Student Travel Award for SenSys 2012 (International Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems); Toronto, Canada; 6-9 November 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Radu Stoleru, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This awarad provides student travel support for the (Association for Computing
Machinery) ACM International Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems
held in Toronto, Canada, on November 6-9, 2012. The conference is a cross
disciplinary forum for research on systems issues in embedded and networked
sensors. The award allows a selected set of twenty five United States students
interested in research in embedded and networked sensors to travel to this
conference and benefit from talks and other events. To ensure greater
participation and to provide equal opportunity for all interested students to
apply for travel funds, the Student Travel Grant opportunity will be advertised
in newsgroups, emails lists and the conference web page. The selection for the
Student Travel Grants, to be done by the conference Student Travel Award Chair,
will be in accordance with the following: the applicant must be a current
student at a recognized United States institution of higher education; the
applicant?fs field of study must be related to the topics of the conference.
Priority will be given to female and under?]represented minority students,
students pursuing their graduate studies in Minority Serving Institutions, such
as, Historically Black Universities, Hispanic Serving Institutions, Tribal
Colleges and Universities, and institutions that serve Asian Americans and
Pacific Islanders, and persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing
students together with experienced practitioners enriches existing research
projects and creates new collaborations. The opportunity to attend the top
conference in embedded and networked sensor systems can have a long lasting
effect on students in their early careers, motivating them to perform excellent
research, publish in top avenues and become productive members of our society.