* 1241479
* Participation in Flame-IV: Understanding Aerosol Absorption in Biomass Burning Plumes Through Measurements of Single-Particle SSA, Coatings, and Brown Carbon
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Shane Murphy, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 239,038.00

Aerosols impact the radiative balance of the earth directly by scattering and
absorbing sunlight and semi-directly by altering the vertical temperature
profile of the atmosphere and modifying cloud properties. The magnitudes of
these effects are highly uncertain thereby limiting our understanding of and
ability to predict earth's climate. Absorption of sunlight by black carbon (BC)
aerosols is thought to be the largest positive radiative forcing after carbon
dioxide and biomass burning accounts for greater than half of BC in the
atmosphere. A key parameter in describing aerosol radiative properties is the
single scattering albedo (SSA), which is difficult to reliably quantify from
space, thus, making in-situ measurements essential. A suite of instruments will
be deployed to the Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, Montana for a 4-week
investigation (entitled FLAME-IV (the 4th Fire Lab At Missoula Experiment)) of
biomass-burning emissions from globally important fuel types. Emissions will be
characterized with a photoacoustic absorption spectrometer (PAS), a cavity
attenuated phase shift spectrometer (CAPS), a thermal denuder, and the aerosol
scattering to extinction ratio (ASTER) instrument. Aerosol absorption, enhanced
absorption caused by semi-volatile coatings, brown carbon, the SSA of the bulk
aerosol and the SSA of single particles will be quantified. The single-particle
SSA distribution for biomass burning emissions will provide new information
regarding the size, character, and mixing state of particles responsible for
absorption. These detailed optical properties will inform satellite retrievals
and climate models.

Project data will be archived in easily accessible formats and available
publicly for use by modelers and others. Result will facilitate informed public
policy decisions regarding the climatic implications of biomass burning
emissions. The project will support 2 full-time graduate students and provide
opportunities for undergraduate research. This study will foster collaboration
among the Atmospheric Science Department at the University of Wyoming (an EPSCOR
University), the Fire Sciences Lab, and other groups participating in Flame IV.
Results will be reported at national conferences and in the peer-reviewed
literature. Results will also be incorporated into courses offered in the
principal investigator's department, presentations to community groups, and
workshops for both high school students and K-12 teachers.