* 1241440
* Preparing Professionals for Cybersecurity in the Government: Scholarships for Service
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2021
* Diane Murphy, Marymount University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2021
* USD 2,906,243.00

The new CyberCorpsÂ®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program offered by Marymount
University in Arlington, VA educates undergraduate and graduate students in
cybersecurity, preparing them for critical positions in the Federal Government.
Students are taught and mentored by full-time faculty, with a research focus,
and part-time faculty who are working professionals, including SFS alumni. The
program focuses on inquiry-learning with students playing an active role in
developing cybersecurity techniques in the lab and in performing cybersecurity
service-learning initiatives for local non-profit groups. Marymount, with its
proven record of recruiting and educating students from underrepresented
populations, launches students in cybersecurity careers in the Federal
Government. The inquiry-based approach to learning strengthens analytical and
critical thinking skills that are vital to professionals working in the Federal
Government cybersecurity field. By focusing on specific non-traditional
populations like veterans, minorities and women, and community college students,
Marymount will contribute to broadening the pool of cybersecurity professionals
in the federal workforce. Additionally, Marymount faculty and students, drawing
on long established bonds with local high schools, will expose younger students
to the opportunities for future careers in
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SFS project involves the participation
of Northern Virginia Community College.