* 1241582
* EAGER: Fabrication, Characterization, and Implementation of an Ofi Mucilage Nanofiber Membrane System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Sylvia Thomas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 148,438.00

1241582&lt;br/&gt;Thomas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will
significantly enhance the body of knowledge for water remediation, environmental
sustainability, nano porous filtration membranes, and sensing and delivery
platforms using non-toxic natural materials, supporting the basis for the next
generation of economically sustainable devices. Strategies to assess structure,
properties and performance, resulting from this research, will include
determining how precursor type and viscosity, composition, temperature,
catalyst, substrate surface energy constrain fabrication of nanofiber membrane
systems. The scientific goal is to enable the cost-effective production of
nontoxic sustainable biodegradable cactus membranes for two specific
applications: (i) filtering and (ii) sensing. Preliminary investigations by the
PIs have led to a successful experimental fabrication of novel cactus nanofiber
membranes with varied geometry, providing promise for scalability for future
commercialization. The research activities in this proposal will contribute to
scientific breakthroughs for understanding and implementing natural materials as
membrane systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide
fundamental understanding of how current and future natural material membrane
systems can affect water, wastewater, overall environmental quality, and public
health issues. With the knowledge gained from this novel research we will be
able to make a global impact, addressing environmental, social/health care,
economical, and engineering design needs. This research can impact worldwide
water filtration and ultimately lead to further investigations for air and gas
filtration, oil absorption, sensors, tissue scaffolding, drug delivery, enzyme
transporting, food additive, and textiles. In addition, through workshops and
student mentoring with the Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (NSF AMP), Society of Women Engineers (SWE), the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE), and Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers (SHPE), we will broaden the research impact for
underrepresented minority students and faculty. Overall, this novel research
will increase the body of knowledge in the field of electrospun natural fibers
through comprehensive optimization and characterization of this novel nanofiber
and transform how natural products can be utilized by engineers and scientists
for future technology to help sustain separation technology on a global level.