* 1241502
* Workshop on New Directions in Monte Carlo Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* James Hobert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 8,576.00

The workshop will be held January 18-19, 2013, on the campus of the University
of Florida. Although Monte Carlo methods have existed for a long time, the
problems to which they are applied have changed dramatically. Monte Carlo
methods are now routinely applied to very complex problems, for instance
Bayesian regression models with a large number of predictors and Bayesian
hierarchical models involving many levels. To address this increased complexity,
recent research on Monte Carlo approaches has proceeded in several new
directions. For example, because in highly complex models it is no longer
possible to analytically devise Monte Carlo algorithms which are optimal or
near-optimal, researchers have developed "adaptive MCMC algorithms" which, as
they are running, automatically evolve into algorithms which are optimal for the
current problem. Another example involves Bayesian model selection, where
researchers have many models that can be used to explain the data, and they wish
to select the best one. In a Bayesian approach, a prior is placed on the set of
potential models, and the researcher wishes to obtain the posterior distribution
of the models, and the parameters for the models. Because the parameters for the
different models may have different dimensions, Markov chains for estimating
posterior distributions must be "transdimensional." In this workshop, twelve
distinguished individuals who work in Monte Carlo simulation review the current
state of the field and present their recent work. A number of young researchers
will also participate in the workshop and present their work in poster sessions.

Monte Carlo simulation is a methodology that uses random sampling to arrive at
numerical approximations to quantities that cannot be computed exactly. The
methodology allows researchers to use extremely complex statistical models: if a
potentially useful model is so complicated that it is not possible to obtain
exact solutions, the model can still be considered if one is willing to use
approximate solutions provided by Monte Carlo simulation. Recent advances in
computing power have made Monte Carlo simulation increasingly accurate and
useful, but many unsolved problems remain. The workshop provides an excellent
opportunity for established researchers in the field, as well as newcomers, to
discuss the significant developments that have taken place in the last decade;
to discuss what works and what does not; and to identify important problems and
new research directions.