* 1241302
* Workshop: International Meeting on Protein Folding and Dynamics; to be held October 15-17, 2012 in Bangalore, India
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2013
* USD 27,846.00

This award is in support of a two-day meeting entitled "International Meeting on
Protein Folding and Dynamics" to be held at the International Center for
Biological Sciences (NCBS) in Bangalore, India, on October 15-17, 2012. The
purpose of the meeting is to bring together scientists from the USA, Europe, and
Asia to discuss recent advances and future research in the area of protein
folding. In addition, the conference will serve as an inaugural forum for
introducing some of the activities in the newly initiated institutions (NCBS,
Technical University of Munich, and the University of Maryland) into the Physics
of Living Systems (POLS) network. This conference, therefore, takes on the
importance of formally informing the students in NCBS to the activities and
benefits of the POLS network. Among the invited speakers several are also part
of the Network nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About twenty researchers representing
a broad range of expertise and vision will be assembled with the purpose of
assessing the outstanding problems in folding of proteins, and how these are
related to function at larger scales. This workshop will convene about 20
speakers that represent all areas of protein folding as well as areas related to
the assembly of proteins into larger complexes and higher order organized
structures. One of the great challenges in biology is to integrate knowledge and
capabilities at the individual subunit level with the ability to describe how
these interact to affect function at the cellular level. The major aim of the
meeting is to identify major issues that must be addressed in theory,
simulations, and experiments in the next decade so that the roles which proteins
play to carry out the myriad functions at the cellular level, in concert and in
isolation, can be assessed and predicted. The meeting will cover the major
unsolved problems in the area of protein folding, identify common themes, and
chart a course for how to integrate the behavior of individual subunits to
describe phenomena at the systems level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
This workshop is a unique way to assemble some of the leading scientists in the
world to discuss topics that are never discussed in such depth at traditional
meetings. Second, the exchange of ideas will be crucial in identifying new areas
of research, which have to be tackled in the immediate future as we develop a
language and framework for the next phase of quantitative research in biology. A
broad spectrum of scientists with backgrounds in physics, chemistry and biology
will be brought together to define the issues that have to be tackled and to
identify the approaches that are needed.