* 1241701
* Center for NanoBiotechnology Research
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2021
* Vida Dennis, Alabama State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2021
* USD 5,127,713.00

The Center for NanoBiotechnology Research (CNBR) was established at Alabama
State University in 2007 as a NSF Center of Research Excellence in Science and
Technology (CREST). The Phase II Center will expand and strengthen a major
research activity at Alabama State, which has become a model for the development
of research scholarship at a university that only a decade ago was a primarily
undergraduate institution with only a small amount of funded STEM research
activity. The Phase I award (HRD-0734232) trained 26 graduate students, led to
the first 3 PhD students at Alabama State University (all programs), led to the
first patents being awarded to ASU, enabled a world-class research
infrastructure, led to new curricula development, and led to the formation of
national and international collaborations. The nanotechnology infrastructure now
in place is capable of synthesizing, analyzing and applying nanomaterials into
biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase II CREST award will enable
the advancement of nanobiotechnology and nanogenomics, which has the potential
for development of a new generation of therapies and diagnostic tools. The new
research projects that will comprise the scholarly activity of the CNBR will
build on the Phase I activities that established a solid foundation at Alabama
State in nanobiotechnology. The Center will be a leader in the CREST goals to
develop a diverse, advanced STEM workforce and should be positioned within the
next 5 years to compete effectively for major support from NSF, NIH, and other
state and federal agencies, as well as industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is organized around the following
subprojects:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Evaluation of Anti-RSV Multi-functionalized
Nanobiomaterials and Their Effect on Host and Viral
Genomes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project embarks on nanovirology by
exploring nanomaterials to specifically target a virus. Virus specific
biomolecules (anti-peptide and siRNA) with known properties will be used to
functionalize nanomaterials and apply them to inhibit virus
replication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Nanobiomaterials as Anti-bacterial
Agents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project focuses on applications of
nanomaterials against bacteria. Many antibiotics are in the market but are
resistant to many bacteria, necessitating the design of new classes of anti-
bacterials. The research team will develop and apply novel nanomaterials that
can destroy bacteria and stop their growth. The main goal is to understand the
mechanisms by which nanomaterials kill bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Regulation of Immune Cells Using Novel Nanomaterials: Merging Nanoimmunology and
Nanogenomics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third project will explore novel materials
that could non-specifically enhance immune functions and reduce disease
manifestations. Proposed nano-biomaterials will be synthesized, characterized
and tested in biological systems using nanoscience tools and
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Phase II CREST
award will enable the advancement of nanobiotechnology and nanogenomics, which
has the potential for development of a new generation of therapies and
diagnostic tools. The three subprojects have overlapping research objectives.
All three projects will analyze genes from host as well as pathogens and use
bioinformatics tools to analyze data. In addition, proteomics will be used by
all projects which will study the impact of nanobiomaterials at the functional
levels. All projects have common methods for analyzing nanomaterials and
samples. The project relevancy and synergy are based on: 1)
synthesis/characterization of nanomaterials, 2) genomic studies of host and
pathogen, 3) proteomic studies of gene products in response to nanobiomaterials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The CNBR will be a leader in the
CREST goals to develop a diverse, advanced STEM workforce and should be
positioned within the next 5 years to compete effectively for major support from
NSF, NIH, and other state and federal agencies, as well as industry. The Phase I
center support has resulted in the establishment of excellent research
infrastructure to train minority students in nanobiotechnology, thus increasing
the number of well-trained minority students for the scientific workforce. The
Phase II CNBR will continue to increase the number of minorities in the Ph.D.
program and the workforce in nanobiotechnology and nanogenomics. The center will
provide leadership in new curricula development, undergraduate research
opportunities and expose students to entrepreneurship. The center will continue
to impact a large number of constituents in the state of Alabama by providing
opportunities to high school students, hosting dignitaries, and offering
seminars and workshops open to the general public. The center will work with
over 15 U.S. institutions, 4 NSF centers, 6 NSF-funded programs (MSP, RISE,
HBCU-UP, SBIR, C2 RII, PIRE) and will impact a large and diverse number of
constituents. The center will continue to work with global partners to prepare
students and faculty who are globally competitive in emerging scientific
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award has been partially funded through
the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research at the National
Science Foundation.