* 1241487
* A Planning Workshop for a McMurdo Dry Valleys Terrestrial Observation Network
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Diana Wall, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 05/31/2015
* USD 38,217.00

This award will support the participation of US scientists in an international
planning workshop devoted to discussions of how to best facilitate and
coordinate international efforts for terrestrial system studies at the McMurdo
Dry Valleys of Antarctica. To date, various aspects of the different Dry Valley
landscape features (lakes, soils, glaciers, streams) and their biota have been
studied most intensively by US and New Zealand scientists, but these efforts
could significantly improve their explanatory power if they were coordinated so
as to reduce redundancy, decrease environmental degradation and, most
importantly, produce comparable datasets. Additionally, many of the present
environmental management programs are based on the past baseline composition and
location of biotic communities. As these communities become rearranged across
the valleys in the future there is interest in assessing whether today's
management plans are adequate. To efficiently move these research programs
forward for the McMurdo Dry Valleys requires a coordinated, interdisciplinary,
long-term data monitoring and observation network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate objectives of the workshop are to: i) identify the optimal,
complementary suites of measurements required to assess and address key
processes associated with environmental change in Dry Valley ecosystems; ii)
develop standards and protocols for gathering the most critical biotic and
abiotic measurements associated with the key processes driving environmental
change; iii) generate a draft data coordination and development plan that will
maximize the utility of these data; iv) assess the effectiveness of current
McMurdo Dry Valley ASMA (Antarctic Special Management Area) environmental
protection guidelines.