* 1241217
* Dimensions US-China:   Collaborative Research:   An integrated understanding of how polyploidy generates biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Aaron Liston, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2018
* USD 931,466.00

All flowering plants are ancient and/or recent polyploids (possessing two or
more copies of every chromosome as a result of whole genome duplication). This
phenomenon is thought to be a main driver of biological adaptation and range
expansion, yet exactly how polyploidy contributes to biodiversity, and which
genomic mechanisms or functional traits underlie the success of polyploids,
remain unanswered questions. The work will use the wild strawberry genus
(Fragaria) to address long standing questions and test fundamental hypotheses.
Through the use of deep phylogenetic and population genomic sampling combined
with characterization of trait and gene expression under climatically diverse
field gardens, the work will identify where functional/genetic diversity resides
in a polyploid/diploid lineage, and inform efforts to predict the effect of
whole genome duplication on ecological and evolutionary responses to
environmental change in numerous other plant lineages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will accelerate our understanding of how
polyploidy confers success, and how it contributes to biodiversity across
geographic and evolutionary scales by tightly interlinking the ecological and
genomic consequences of polyploidization. Moreover, this deeply integrated
comparative study of the wild relatives of the cultivated strawberry will
provide foundational knowledge on a species of world-wide economic importance.
In addition, the research will contribute unparalleled resources that may be
harnessed in efforts to ensure sustainability of strawberry and related crops
such as cherry, peach, pear and apple, in the face of abiotic stress. The work
will promote training by broad participation and international collaboration,
and novel hands-on science curricula for middle school and undergraduate
students.