* 1241663
* The Cyber Catch Scholarship Program
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Rosemary Shumba, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,260,952.00

The Cyber Catch Scholarship (CCS) program offered by Indiana University of
Pennsylvania (IUP) Center of Academic Excellence In Information Assurance
Education is a CyberCorpsÂ®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program which is
supporting four cohorts of undergraduate students in Information Assurance (IA).
The program awards scholarships to undergraduate IUP students that are either
undecided with interest in cybersecurity or Computer Science majors with IA
concentration, and students transferring from area community colleges into IUP's
IA concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project include: (a)
Providing a strong mentoring system that includes faculty advising, peer
mentoring, scholarship opportunities, and community building activities. (b)
Preparing scholars for IA employment by engaging them in an enriched research
plan and an internship program. (c) Building on existing programs/resources at
IUP. (d) Providing financial/travel support for student mentored projects to be
presented at local and national conferences. (e) Providing students with
opportunities to interact with IA experts from industry and academia through the
established IUP IA day and other conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCS aims
to improve educational opportunities for students, increase retention of
students to degree achievement, improve student support programs at IUP and
increase the numbers of IA-educated, skilled employees in technical areas of
national need. This initiative provides for the identification and recruitment
of area community college students who are interested in pursuing an IA
concentration at IUP, as well as campus students who have interest in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continual development of an infrastructure that will
support and encourage an increase in the number of students entering the IA
program, now and in the future, is a focus of the project. This infrastructure
will strengthen already established linkages through which the pool of student
talent at community colleges gains access to continued study at a four-year,
liberal arts institutions like IUP.