* 1241017
* Student Travel Support for the 2012 ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2012).
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Jennifer Neville, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

The annual ACM SIGKDD conference is the premier international forum for data
mining researchers and practitioners from academia, industry, and government to
share their ideas, research results and experiences. KDD 2012 will feature
keynote presentations, oral paper presentations, poster sessions, workshops,
tutorials, panels, exhibits, demonstrations, and the KDD Cup competition.
KDD-2012 will be held at Beijing, China from August 12 to 16, 2012. Strong
student participation is a long running tradition of the KDD conference. This
project seeks to encourage and support graduate students enrolled in doctoral
programs at US institutions to participate in KDD. Approximately 20 Student
Travel Awards will be made to enable the students to attend KDD 2012 and
participate in a Doctoral Forum.

Intellectual Merit: The field of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining has grown
rapidly in recent years. Massive data sets have driven research, applications,
and tool development in business, science, government, and academia. The
continued growth in data collection in all of these areas ensures that the
fundamental problem which KDD addresses, namely how does one understand and use
one's data, will continue to be of critical importance across a large range of
organizations. Due to the recent data explosion in many applications,
governments and companies can easily collect data spanning terabytes, petabytes
or more. Several traditional data mining algorithms need to be replaced, or
drastically re-designed, to handle such volumes. SIGKDD conference focuses on
innovative research on all aspects of knowledge discovery and data mining.
Examples of topic of interest include (but are not limited to): association
analysis, classification and regression methods, semi-supervised learning,
clustering, factorization, transfer and multi-task learning, feature selection,
social networks, mining of graph data, temporal and spatial data analysis,
scalability, privacy, security, visualization, text analysis, Web mining, mining
mobile data, recommender systems, bioinformatics, e-commerce, online
advertising, anomaly detection, and knowledge discovery from big data, including
the data on the cloud. Papers emphasizing theoretical foundations, novel
modeling and algorithmic approaches to specific data mining problems in
scientific, business, medical, and engineering applications are particularly
encouraged. It is important to attract students working on these topics to
become the future leaders of the field.

Broader Impacts: The student travel awards will support will enable US students
to participate in one of the leading data mining conferences, and encourage them
to pursue research on topics that are at the forefront of the current state of
the art. The awards will help broaden the participation of female and minority
students who are currently under-represented within the data mining research
community.