* 1241943
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Patterns of Consumption: Ceramic Residue Analysis at Liangchengzhen, Shandong, China
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Robert Tykot, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 24,210.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Robert Tykot and in collaboration with the Sino-
American archaeology team of Shandong University, Rheta Lanehart will
investigate the presence of lipid residues in various types of ceramic vessels
from ancient China in order to identify foodstuffs such as protein, grains, and
other plants. The goal of the research is to identify different patterns of food
consumption across space and time. Based upon the residue results, it will be
possible to provide interpretations about social and ritual activities in
relation to social change at the site of Liangchengzhen in southeastern Shandong
province. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;China is an area long associated with the social
importance of food consumption and the investigation of vessels from
Liangchengzhen presents a rare opportunity to examine food consumption at a
large regional Longshan period (ca. 2600-1900 BC) center. There is limited
information about the nature of activities at Longshan period regional centers,
although social and ritual activities have been inferred. The Liangchengzhen
excavation team uncovered a series of occupation levels containing over 400
pits, numerous house foundations, and several burials. The pits in particular
contain large quantities of ceramic vessels, the main source of data for the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide a systematic analysis
of the residues from a variety of ceramic forms excavated from pits that are
promising for evidence of different kinds of social relations, competitive or
integrative. A gas chromatography/mass spectrometry technique will be employed.
Alkane biomarkers, previously identified in a pilot study, will be used to
identify food sources in the pottery residues. Interpretations will be made
about the nature of consumption activities over time on the basis of vessels
deposited in pits that are hypothesized as offering pits and storage or trash
pits. In addition, consideration will be given to spatial and chronological
variation at the center with respect to the consumption of hypothesized
preferred foods (meat, rice). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a
foundation for broader applications of lipid residue research to the
interpretation of consumption and will foster international collaboration.
Findings from the research will be reported to Chinese authorities and published
in professional journals as well as in venues for the general public, both
Chinese and American. Presentations of the research will be given while in China
and also to undergraduate and graduate students at the University of South
Florida and elsewhere. Online access to the research will be available through
Open Context and a website created by the researcher.