* 1241937
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Northern Peatland Methane Dynamics by Synthesizing Measurements, Remote Sensing and Modeling from Local to Regional to Continental Scales
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Changsheng Li, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,647,192.00

Wetland ecosystems are the largest natural source of methane, a potent and long
lasting greenhouse gas, to the atmosphere. Wetland soils in northern latitudes
are warming faster than those in temperate and tropical regions. An
understanding of the influence and feedback that these northern wetland
ecosystems play in the present and future climate is needed. Accomplishing this
may only be done through linking newly developed technologies that measure and
quantify the processes of methane emissions on a local scale with modeling
efforts that scale from local studies to the region and continent. This project
will collect new measurements and leverage long-term existing data on methane
emissions from five well-studied research sites that span four northern climate
zones. In addition, the project will use environmental and climate variables
developed from remote sensing data collected by several satellites over vast
areas of the far north. Using a unique scaling approach, the emissions from
northern wetlands will be determined so that a global analysis can be performed.
This project will implement new measurement technologies and enable more
accurate representation of methane emissions on a global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scientific impacts of this
project, it will also provide professional development opportunities for both
undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers. These postdoctoral
researchers will grow, not only as interdisciplinary scientists, but also as
mentors and engaged community partners. Through a series of opportunities, the
postdoctoral researchers will develop research, communication, leadership and
mentoring skills. A partnership with the Northern Ecosystems Research for
Undergraduates program (an NSF REU site) will enable the postdoctoral
researchers to mentor two undergraduates in summer research experiences, under
the guidance of the program director.