* 1241253
* Dimensions:   Collaborative Research:   A community level approach to understanding speciation in Hawaiian lineages
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* John Harte, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patrick Abbot
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,209,810.00

Recent advances in biodiversity research have led to progress in two separate
directions that focus first on how organisms change over time, and second on
spatial patterns of biodiversity at a given time. The proposed research brings
together these two approaches to understand biodiversity in a dynamic context.
Fundamental research questions are: (1) how are the rate and order of
diversification in different groups of organisms determined by the community in
which they live, and (2) how does the sequence of diversification dictate the
resulting community composition? The research focuses on insects and spiders and
uses the known dynamic geology of the young islands of the Hawaiian archipelago,
where different contemporary sites represent stages in a geological sequence, as
a system for examining feedbacks between adaptation, population divergence, and
associated community succession. Methods include: (1) genomic and other
molecular tools to measure active diversification of interacting groups of
species that are recent arrivals to these novel habitats, and (2) ecological and
computational approaches to measure changes in species composition over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will determine the importance of
changing roles of species within communities as populations diverge over time
and assemble in space, and the role of that dynamic community in fostering
diversification. The work also informs applied areas of invasion and
conservation biology, and restoration ecology, by testing the importance of
priority, sequence, and associated interaction strengths. The project will train
multiple undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdocs in research at
the intersection between evolutionary biology and ecology.