* 1241848
* Collaborative Research:   Quantifying Climate-forced Extinction Risks for Lizards, Amphibians, Fishes, and Plants
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Barry Sinervo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2018
* USD 898,862.00

Climate change due to increases in anthropogenic carbon is altering global
patterns of temperature and rainfall. These environmental changes are
transforming plant communities, which in turn may be causing local extinctions
of many vertebrate species. For example, when faced with prolonged heat waves
and droughts, trees may be unable to draw sufficient water from the soil and
drop most of their leaves. Diminished leaf cover allows more sunlight to reach
the ground, amplifying local warming trends and increasing heat and water stress
for plants themselves and for many vertebrate species. The goal of this award is
to evaluate how climate-driven changes to plant communities are increasing
extinction rates for certain "cold-blooded" vertebrate species (i.e., lizards,
frogs). This study hypothesizes that many such vertebrate species are going
extinct in part because rising temperatures are directly stressful to them, and
in part because rising temperatures also damage plant communities, upon which
animals rely for food, water, and shelter. Intensive studies will be made at
specific localities on five continents where targeted animal species have
recently gone extinct. At these sites, researchers with expertise in plant and
animal physiology and ecology will collaborate to quantify the extent to which
recent droughts and warm-spells have altered plant communities, which in turn
have increased heat and water stress on animals. These local studies will then
be linked (via remote sensing methods and online databases), to create a
worldwide data set that integrate information on temperature, rainfall, plant
die-offs, and the physiological limits of targeted animals to heat and water
stress. Such data will enable scientists to predict and test, with unprecedented
accuracy across regions and continents, how extinction rates among targeted
vertebrate species relate to current and expected changes in rainfall,
temperature, and plant communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous models of
climate-warming impacts have focused on plants or animals, but not both. For
example, many climate change scientists study animal systems in isolation of
plant systems, thus emphasizing only the role of changing climate per se on
animal taxa (e.g., rising temperatures limit lizards from foraging in direct
sunlight). This project differs by a) modeling how climate-driven changes to
plant communities increase warm spells and drought conditions, and b) showing
how changes to plant communities alters the environment available used by the
targeted animals species and push their physiological limits, speeding their
extinction rates. This model will be grounded by field studies that test for
non-climate related causes of animal extinctions; this will enable scientists to
determine the factors that explain the ever increasing extinction rates among
targeted animals. New web-based products will be developed that use remote
sensing technology to predict current and future degradations in ecosystems
across the globe. A project of this scope requires collaboration among
scientists with expertise in climatology, physiology, biodiversity, and remote
sensing. An international team from 20 countries will work together on this
project; a new generation of postdoctoral research fellows and hundreds of
graduate students will be trained in the latest physiological and mathematical
methods in climate change studies.