* 1241290
* ISMB 2012 Conference Support for Students &amp; Young Scientists-in Long Beach, CA, July 15-17, 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Theresa Gaasterland, International Society for Computational Biology
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 05/31/2013
* USD 30,000.00

The International Society for Computational Biology is awarded a grant to
support student and early-career researcher participation in the annual meeting
on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology in Long Beach, CA, July 15-17. The
conference holds thematic sessions for invited presentations, tutorial programs
on related subjects, and special interest group workshops. Cutting-edge
bioinformatics areas presented at the conference include bio-imaging and
visualization, databases and ontologies, evolution and comparative genomics,
gene regulation and transcriptomics, mass spectrometry and proteomics,
population genomics, protein interaction, and molecular networks and structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will assist students and postdoctoral
researchers, particularly under-represented minorities, at a critical but
resource-limited stage in their careers by partially funding the travel and
expenses associated with attending the conference. Through their participation,
these students will have the opportunity to be exposed to leading edge research
and methods, gain introductions to international and world-renown keynote
speakers and senior level scientists, seek out prospective postdoctoral and
collaborative opportunities, and meet their peers from all over the world.
Results will be disseminated as published proceedings indexed in MEDLINE and
Current Contents, and video recordings of selected presentations will be
available online.