* 1241529
* Planning a Partnership Model for a Giant Segmented Mirror Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Edward Stone, TMT Observatory Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,250,000.00

The Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) Project is designing and planning to construct
and operate a 30-&lt;br/&gt;meter diameter optical/infrared telescope with fully
integrated adaptive optics to lead the next generation&lt;br/&gt;of telescopes
with observation at the diffraction limit of its large aperture. TMT science
goals address the&lt;br/&gt;recommendations of the last two US decadal surveys
of astronomy and astrophysics that gave high priority to the science that can be
accomplished by a giant segmented mirror telescope. Sited on Mauna Kea, Hawaii,
TMT will be the only such telescope in the northern hemisphere. TMT is a
collaboration of California Institute of Technology, University of California,
the Association of Canadian Universities for Research in&lt;br/&gt;Astronomy,
the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, a consortium of Chinese
institutions led by&lt;br/&gt;the National Astronomical Observatories of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, and institutions in India&lt;br/&gt;supported by
the Department of Science and Technology of India. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
five-year planning activity supported by this award will lead to a US astronomy
community science plan, an integrated science and education plan, proposals for
US groups to collaborate in TMT science instruments, a US operations plan, and a
US TMT data management plan. Activities under this award will include a series
of joint TMT US-international Forums and annual workshops and Town Halls at the
annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society. Three representatives of
the NSF-supported astronomy community will become members of the TMT
Collaborative Board, assuring a US role in shaping the project and its
implementation. A US TMT Science Advisory Group will engage the US community in
developing the science plan, and three members of the Group will join the TMT
Science Advisory Committee, assuring input by the US community in guiding the
TMT science program and interaction with other TMT astronomy communities. A TMT
Education and Public Outreach Advisory Board will focus the broad expertise and
interest in stakeholder communities in developing an integrated plan to leverage
TMT science in education, work force development and other broader impacts of
TMT in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TMT will engage the US astronomy community
in their formulation of plans to exploit TMT scientific&lt;br/&gt;opportunities
and to integrate TMT into the US optical/infrared observing system. By joining
with TMT,&lt;br/&gt;the US astronomy community will be able to build on the
substantial scientific synergy of national and&lt;br/&gt;international
observatories already located on Mauna Kea and enjoy new opportunities to
collaborate with&lt;br/&gt;the international astronomers participating in TMT.
TMT will also benefit from the expertise of the US&lt;br/&gt;astronomy community
in defining TMT technical systems and future science
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a leading national science resource,
TMT will contribute excitement to its host community in&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii, as
well as national significance in catalyzing public interest in astronomy,
science and&lt;br/&gt;technology. Building upon the project's existing plans in
Hawaii, TMT will engage the US community&lt;br/&gt;and education stakeholders in
planning a broader US education and work force development
program&lt;br/&gt;under the guidance of an Education and Public Outreach
Advisory Board. Sited in the center of the Pacific Ocean, TMT's unprecedented
observational power will serve as a catalyst for collaboration among scientists
in the Pacific Rim astronomy communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to
solicitation NSF 12-526, NSF will engage with the TMT Project to plan a
partnership model for the TMT Observatory which, depending on circumstances, the
NSF may join at some later date.