* 1241293
* Supporting Institutional Change in Undergraduate Biology Education:  American Institute of Biological Sciences? Role in the PULSE Project
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Richard O'Grady, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 04/30/2013
* USD 75,444.00

The American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS) is awarded a grant to work
with the collaborating organizations in the Partners in Undergraduate Life
Science Education (PULSE) initiative: National Science Foundation (NSF), the
National Institutes of Health-NIGMS (NIH), and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute (HHMI) and the PULSE working partner, Know Innovation (KI), to achieve
the goal of coordinating systemic change in undergraduate life science
education. AIBS core strengths in working with the community and facilitating
high quality peer advisory and review services are a strong addition to this
unique and exciting program designed to mobilize change in undergraduate life
sciences education. The award fits the EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research because of its high potential for producing an implementation framework
for transforming biology departments within the nation?s colleges and
universities.

AIBS will work with the program partners throughout its lifespan by 1) working
to raise awareness of the PULSE project among the community and encouraging
participation in the project and 2) facilitating the selection of the Vision and
Change Fellows in the initial phase.

Both the selection of Fellows and promotion of the project to the broad biology
education community are integral to the success of the PULSE project. AIBS is
extremely well qualified to carry out both of these activities. The Institute
has years of experience successfully conducting high quality peer-review for
private foundations, government agencies, and other clients. AIBS has been very
successful in reaching intended audiences through its public policy and media
relations work. The proposed strategy for developing and promoting a press
release about the Request for Applications and Selection of Fellows is based
upon expertise gained over the years and knowledge about the focused effort
required to effectively reach an intended audience. Other scientific disciplines
will learn about the outcomes of the PULSE project because AIBS is actively
involved in collaborations and coalitions across the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines.

The results of AIBS?s work will ensure that the top individuals in the country
are poised to work with the leaders in life science research and education, NSF,
NIH, and HHMI, to move institutional reform efforts forward. The proposed
activities are expected to make a significant contribution to an unprecedented
transformation of the undergraduate biology education community's understanding
of institutional barriers to change and of strategies for overcoming them.