* 1241668
* Multi-Disciplinary Preparation of Next Generation Information Assurance Practitioners - Renewal
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Agnes Chan, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,962,084.00

Northeastern University is a Center of Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance Education and Research. It is also one of the four schools recently
designated by the National Security Agency as a Center of Academic Excellence in
Cyber Operations. Northeastern has produced 20 SFS students over the past 3
years. All of the graduates are placed in positions within the Federal
Government and Federally Funded Research and Development Centers. One of the
unique elements of the program is the diversity of students in the program. Of
the 20 students, 5 are in Computer Science, 6 are in Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and 9 are in Information Assurance. These students come with
different backgrounds that vary from political science and criminal justice to
computer science and engineering. The University, with its nationally-recognized
Cooperative Education, is well-positioned to attract and educate strong students
in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SFS program at Northeastern succeeds
in recruiting a diverse group of under-represented students to the program, and
is committed to sustaining this level of diversity in future recruiting.
Northeastern University is also reaching out to the broader community by leading
Capture-the-Flag and Collegiate Cyber Defense competitions, and by actively
participating in the New England Advanced Cyber Security Center, an organization
composed of academia, industry, and government entities.