* 1241889
* The Influence of Temporal and Spatial Scales on Drivers of Host-Parasite Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Barry Sinervo, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2019
* USD 978,294.00

The distributions of virtually all organisms are dictated by abiotic and biotic
factors and dispersal or propagule pressure (number of individuals colonizing a
non-native region). Nevertheless, there are few theoretical and empirical
studies that a) simultaneously consider the impacts of these three processes on
species interactions and distributions or b) investigate how the relative
influence of these factors change across spatial and temporal scales. Host-
parasite interactions are species interactions of particular concern because
human and wildlife diseases are emerging at an unprecedented rate. Funds are
being provided to address this knowledge gap using a theoretical framework to
test how spatial and temporal scales affect host-parasite interactions.
Spatially, abiotic factors, such as climate, might be most important at large
spatial scales, but biotic and propagule pressure factors might be more
important at small scales where climate is generally more homogeneous.
Temporally, unpredictable climatic shifts, which are increasing with global
climate change, might increase infections because parasites should acclimate to
temperature shifts more quickly than their hosts due to their smaller sizes and
faster metabolisms. The overall goal of this grant is to use a combination of
experiments, modeling, and local-to-global analyses to test these and other
hypotheses for how spatiotemporal scales affect host-parasite interactions and
disease emergence. Amphibian-parasite interactions will be the model study
system because there are several spatiotemporally-explicit datasets on amphibian
distributions, amphibian pathogen prevalence, and pathogen-driven amphibian
declines and extinctions. The specific objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;A. Determine
how the temporal scale of climatic shifts affects host-parasite
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;B. Evaluate how spatial scale affects the relative
importance of abiotic, biotic, and propagule pressure factors to host-parasite
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;C. Develop validated predictive models for extinction
risk driven by climate change and disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
engage individuals of ethnicities or abilities that are under-represented in
science and will broadly educate the public on the biology of environmental
change, providing a positive legacy that will persist beyond its funding. The
proposed research will be thoroughly integrated with a new graduate course on
the importance of spatiotemporal scales in ecology and will provide research
opportunities for undergraduates that are female and of ethnicities or abilities
that are under-represented in science. Additionally, in coordination with the
Hillsborough County School District and the University of South Florida's
College of Continuing Education, the research team will offer summer workshops
(as continuing education credits) on the biology of environmental change for
high school biology teachers. At least one-half of the teachers will be chosen
from schools with a primarily minority enrollment. Finally, the scientific
research itself will have widespread public benefits because it will enhance
forecasts of the effects of natural and anthropogenic environmental change on
disease risk across spatiotemporal scales.