* 1241292
* Impacts of Enhanced Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN) on the Organization of Convection for Monsoon Depressions
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* T. Krishnamurti, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2017
* USD 325,341.00

This project seeks to understand the effect of aerosol pollution on monsoon
depressions. Monsoon depressions are synoptic-scale systems (2,000km to 3,000km)
with baroclinic (or tilted) vertical structure which propagate westward, forming
in the Bay of Bengal and producing as much as 150 to 200 mm of rainfall during
their passage over any location. They occur during the monsoon season, when the
vertical shear of the zonal wind is strong enough to inhibit the formation of
hurricane-strength tropical cyclones, and they are distinct from weaker but
similar systems called "monsoon lows", which have a barotropic (or upright)
vertical structure. The Principal Investigator argues that the heavy aerosol
pollution found over the Indian sector causes a reduction in the frequency of
occurrence of monsoon depressions. This claim is based on several lines of
evidence: first, there has been a dramatic reduction in the occurrence of
monsoon depressions, from an annual average of 7 to 8 historically to 1, 0, and
2 in the years 2009, 2010, and 2011. Second, aerosol pollution has increased
dramatically over the Indian sector in recent years. Third, global forecast
models, which presumably do not account for the change in aerosol pollution,
have overpredicted monsoon depressions in the recent years with few depressions.
Fourth, preliminary experiments with the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
model show that the strength of monsoon depressions, and the intensity and
organization of precipitation within them, can be dramatically reduced by
increasing the aerosol burden from relatively pristine (5x10^8 particles per
cubic meter) to heavily polluted (5x10^10 per cubic meter) values. The research
is based on the hypothesis that aerosols suppress monsoon depressions because
they slow the formation of rainfall, as more aerosols lead to more cloud
condensation nuclei (CCN), which produce a greater number of smaller cloud
droplets, which take longer to coalesce into raindrops. Monsoon depressions form
through a mutual interaction between the baroclinic/barotropic instability of
the large-scale flow and the latent heat of condensation accompanying
precipitation within the depression. This mutual interaction can be suppressed
by the excess aerosols, which increase time required for the development of
precipitation by roughly a factor of two, and thus produce a mismatch between
the timescales of the hydrodynamic instability and the organization of
precipitation and accompanying latent heat release. Work performed under this
award tests the hypothesized suppression of monsoon depressions by aerosol
pollution using more sophisticated and realistic simulations, and also performs
analysis of aerosol forcing, based on satellite data, during periods when
monsoon depressions form and when they are absent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
suppression of monsoon depressions addressed in this research is of both
scientific and societal interest, given the large population that is affected by
them. If successful, the results of this work could be directly applied to
operational forecasting systems used to predict these weather systems. In
addition, the project provides support and training for a postdoc and a graduate
student, thereby providing for the next generation of scientists in this
research area.