* 1241032
* INSPIRE: Photonic Quantum Heat Engines Including: Lasers without Inversion, Photo-Carnot Engines, Quantum PV Cells and Quantum Coherence Effects in Photosynthesis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Marlan Scully, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Atomic, Molecular and Optical
(AMO) Physics Program in the Physics Division of the Mathematical and Physical
Science Directorate and the Energy, Power, and Adaptive Systems (EPAS) Program
of the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the
Directorate for Engineering.

Can coherence in a photocell be induced by "hot" solar radiation? Can noise in a
system obeying quantum mechanics explain appearance of coherence in
photosynthesis? Affirmative answers to these questions would lead to wide
ranging applications in energy technology. The multi-institutional team
assembled by PI Marlan Scully seeks to probe the underlying physics that will
enable these questions to be answered. Specifically, this investigation will
advance understanding of operation limits of photovoltaic cells and lasers while
illustrating the ways to improve their performance. This project will also yield
insights into how quantum coherence can be induced by noise and its role in
light harvesting biological systems. While by nature high risk, the payoffs of
this project could be large; a total transformation of the way energy is
generated and stored is one of the many possible long-term outcomes.

Solar cells are quantum heat engines that are promising and ecologically safe
candidates for alternative energy sources. Their operation is governed by the
laws of thermodynamics. It has been realized in the past decades that quantum
coherence can improve operation of photonic quantum heat engines and yield
fascinating effects, e.g., lasing without population inversion, by breaking the
detailed balance between photon emission and absorption. More recently, it has
become apparent that quantum coherence can be used to break detailed balance in
a photocell, thus suppressing unwanted electron-hole recombination and
increasing light absorption. In principle, this can enhance photocell power.
This issue is at the core of the project lead by PI Marlan Scully. His main
objectives are (1) to investigate possibility of laser and photocell power
enhancement by injected signal and by noise induced coherence, (2) to carry out
a proof of principle experiment in lasers and photocells showing that their
performance can be improved by radiatively induced coherence, (3) to investigate
possibility of narrowing of broad solar spectrum by stimulated coherent Raman
processes, (4) to study effects of coherence on energy transport to the
photosynthetic reaction centers and charge separation efficiency in light
harvesting biological systems. This work is interdisciplinary and high risk but
potentially transformative.