* 1241647
* SFS Scholarship Track: HOLISTiC - Human &amp; Organizational Learning - Integrated STudies in Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Julie Ryan, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 583,885.00

As the cyber threat continues to grow at an exponential pace, the US is
challenged to find cybersecurity leaders who are equipped with technical
cybersecurity knowledge and an understanding of the organizational phenomena
that impact the successful implementation of cybersecurity initiatives. The
HOLISTiC (Human &amp; Organizational Learning - Integrated STudies in
Cybersecurity) program is meeting this challenge by piloting a doctoral-level
Cybercorps program to develop cybersecurity leaders who are able to effectively
navigate the complex and unpredictable cybersecurity environment. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;HOLISTiC is being implemented within the George Washington University
(GW) Executive Leadership Doctoral Program (ELP) in Human and Organizational
Learning (HOL). Working closely with the ELP program faculty and advisors, and
through the integration of dissertation research from program entry, students
are working toward the completion of doctoral degree requirements in 3 years.
The HOLISTiC program is producing 6 cybersecurity leaders who have a strong
technical foundation and expertise in key areas such as risk analysis,
information management, and organizational change; a portfolio of advanced
research and analysis skills; establishing a community of practice that engages
students and cybersecurity experts in collective dialogue, and; driving the
development of practically-based, rigorous research on cybersecurity challenges
that span technical and non-technical areas.