* 1241576
* UMBC Cybersecurity Scholarship for Service Program and Innovations in Cybersecurity Education Workshop Series
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Alan Sherman, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,885,022.00

To meet America's cybersecurity needs, the University of Maryland Baltimore
County (UMBC) is developing educated professionals in this interdisciplinary
field by offering scholarships for students to study cybersecurity and
Information Assurance at UMBC under the CyberCorpsÂ®: Scholarship for Service
(SFS) Program. Scholars pursue BA or BS, MS, combined BS/MS, MPS, or PhD degrees
through existing programs in Computer Science, Computer Engineering, and the
Masters in Professional Studies: Cybersecurity in the Department of Computer
Science and Electrical Engineering. Qualified students from related fields also
are welcome, including Electrical Engineering, Information Systems, Mathematics,
Physics, Education, and Public Policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students at the UMBC
Center for Information Security and Assurance engage in mentored research
projects at partner organizations, including Northrop Grumman, JHU Applied
Physics Lab, Convergent Technologies, DoD Cyber Crime Institute, Parabal, and
the UMBC Office of Information Technology. Research opportunities exist at many
UMBC labs, including at the UMBC Cyber Defense Lab, where current projects
include digital cloud forensics, forensics visualization, high-security voting
systems, and delay- and disruption-tolerant networks for a solar system
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is increasing the number of
qualified professionals in cybersecurity, which strengthens American security
and competitiveness. To enhance quality in cybersecurity education, in years 2-4
of the project, UMBC is hosting a one-day regional public workshop focusing on
innovations for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate cybersecurity education. To
attract and retain minorities and other underrepresented students, UMBC's SFS
effort cooperates closely with UMBC's nationally recognized Meyerhoff Program,
Center for Women in Technology, and other university organizations.