* 1241530
* IPG: Collaborative Research: A high-resolution analysis of unique paleoenvironmental data from key hominin sites in East Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Erik Brown, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2017
* USD 114,997.00

The possibility that human evolution in Africa has been strongly influenced by
Earth's climatic and environmental history over the last several million years
has been an important question at the forefront of paleoanthropological
research. One fundamental question is: can any of the potential envionmental
drivers of evolutionary change be reconstructed with enough precision to allow
us to relate them with confidence to the episodes of speciation, extinction and
cultural evolution known to anthropologists, and thereby test their
relationships in time and space?

This team of paleoanthropologists and earth scientists plans to analyze climate
and other environmental histories to provide direct tests of key hypotheses
linking environmental history and mammal (including early human) evolution by
collecting and analyzing detailed paleoenvironmental data at three key
anthropological sites in Africa. They will collect continuous paleoenvironmental
records by drilling long sediment cores from ancient lake beds in the northern
Afar, Ethiopia (~3.8-2.9 million years ago-Ma), the Baringo Basin, Kenya
(~3.2-2.35 Ma), and the Turkana Basin, Kenya (~2.3-1.42 Ma), and relate these
records to the outcrops in the same basins that contain early human and other
mammal fossils, as well as stone tools in the younger time periods. As a group
these basins contain some of the most critical evidence for human evolutionary
history in Africa. Although past investigators have reconstructed climate and
other environmental histories from the outcrops in which the fossil humans and
artifacts have been found, such environmental records are highly discontinuous
due to the nature of the sediments where the fossils occur, and are unsuitable
for many of the most informative geochemical records available today because of
the weathering that has affected outcropping sediments. Drilling lakebeds near
the fossil sites gets around these problems, because lake sediments accumulate
much more continuously, and because drilling into the subsurface allows
unweathered samples to be collected Funding for the drilling costs for this
project has been secured from other sources: with the IPG funds the team will
analyze the cores to generate quantitative and high resolution records of
changes in temperature, precipitation, vegetation, fire and volcanic activity
and other factors which may have influenced human evolution.

The primary research goal is to obtain long cores from these basins, each of
which span critical intervals in human evolution and are close to hominin fossil
and archaeological sites. The researchers will apply state-of-the-art
paleoenvironmental and paleoclimate methods to these cores to assemble high
resolution records covering much of the past four million years of East African
environmental history. The team will then evaluate existing hypotheses and
generate new hypotheses linking climate history to early human physical and
cultural evolutionary adaptations. The paleoenvironmental and paleoecological
data collected from the drill cores will be linked directly in time and space to
the nearby fossil human, mammal and stone tool records by way of the numerous
volcanic ashes present in both the cores and outcrops, along with other dating
techniques. By comparing the new records to similar records from nearby ocean
sediment cores the researchers plan be able to distinguish local from global
drivers of environmental change and in the process test a series of hypotheses
linking key events in human evolution with climate and other aspects of
environmental history. Finally, the team will use these new, combined
paleoenvironmental and paleoanthropological data sets, combined with novel
modeling techniques to better understand how landscape and climate change across
various scales of time and space may have affected the availability and
predictability of critical ecosystem resources upon which early humans would
have depended.

This project will greatly expand our understanding of African climate history
and will be an opportunity to invigorate interest in human evolution and its
relationship to climate with the US and African public. The project will train
many American and African students during its field, analytical and
internship/synthesis phases, and will generate numerous informal science
learning opportunities through our collaborations with the National Museums of
Kenya and Ethiopia and the Smithsonian Institution.