* 1241653
* ASPIRE:   An SFS Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education  (Renewal)
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Phyllis Gail Frankl, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 5,029,825.00

This project aims to build on and extend the success of the current Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program at Polytechnic Institute of New York University (NYU-
Poly) and take it on a path towards self-sustainability. It leverages and
improves the resources and infrastructure generated by the current SFS program
to prepare a cadre of SFS scholars who can tackle security and privacy problems
from multiple viewpoints. The program instills a cybersecurity mindset that
looks beyond just technology while approaching problems. The project supports an
educational program that relies on a number of high-quality courses in the area
of information assurance (IA), participation in research projects supervised by
faculty, hands-on experience both at NYU-Poly and during summer internships, and
state of the art infrastructure for IA research. In addition to providing
technical skills and research experiences, the program nurtures and develops
leadership and communication skills, and good citizenship. The proposed project
has an important mission of preparing cybersecurity professionals for positions
in agencies of the Federal, state, local and tribal government. Using knowledge
and skills obtained in the program, the graduates are well prepared to meet
challenges of protecting the information and infrastructure resources of our
Nation.