* 1241624
* Capacity Building in Cybersecurity
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Barbara Endicott-Popovsky, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,842.00

This project is a collaborative effort involving Whatcom Community College,
Western Washington University, and the University of Washington. The
investigators are taking a comprehensive approach to growing an educated and
skilled workforce in a field critical to the U.S. economy and national security.
The approach includes the development of new information assurance/cybersecurity
degree pathways that are replicable statewide, coupled with outreach to recruit
students (including underserved populations) into the pathways. Forty faculty
are participating in the project over a three-year period, and the project is
likely to reach over 500 students during that time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
goals and activities include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* increasing the capacity for
educating information technology professionals in cybersecurity-related
disciplines by creating new two-year and four-year degrees in information
assurance/cybersecurity at the three partnering institutions of higher
education;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* increasing the number of professionals in
cybersecurity-related jobs by offering opportunities for students (traditional
students, nontraditional students, veterans, and career-changers) to complete
new, streamlined educational pathways;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* increasing
interest in information assurance/cybersecurity careers and education among K-12
and college students by hosting information sessions and workshops for secondary
students, and industry tours and guest speakers for college students and college
mentors;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* strengthening partnerships between institutions
of higher education through collaboration on curriculum development and
articulation agreements;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* strengthening partnerships with
local industry and employers by convening advisory committees, arranging student
tours and internships at industry sites, and inviting industry speakers into the
classroom;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* developing new teaching expertise in
information assurance/cybersecurity, especially in high schools;
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* increasing the diversity of the cybersecurity
workforce by recruiting women, veterans, Native American students, and
economically disadvantaged students.