* 1241316
* 2012 International Conference on 3D Materials Science; July 8 - 12, 2012; Seven Springs, PA
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding to
partially support the 2012 International Conference on Three Dimensional (3D)
Materials Science to be held July 8-12, 2012 in Seven Springs, PA. This
specialty conference is organized by The Minerals, Metals &amp; Materials
Society (TMS), in collaboration with the lead conference organizer Alexis Lewis
(US Naval Research Laboratory), the principal investigator (and co-organizer)
George Spanos (TMS), co-organizer Marc De Graef (Carnegie Mellon University),
co-organizer Henning Poulsen (Risoe National Laboratory and DTU), and co-
organizer Jeff Simmons (US Air Force Research Laboratory). Additionally, an
International Advisory Committee (IAC) has been assembled which includes notable
scientists from eleven different countries who are working to promote the
conference in their respective countries. The organizers of this conference seek
to provide the premier forum for presentations of current interest and
significance to the growing 3D materials science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The format of the conference is highly conducive
to interactions among students, faculty, and professional researchers, and ample
time is provided in the schedule for rich discussions amongst the attendees. An
important component of the conference will be the student poster session.
Additionally, the conference program has been designed to maximize interaction
among modelers, computational and image processing scientists, and
experimentalists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding to partially
support the 2012 International Conference on Three Dimensional (3D) Materials
Science to be held July 8-12, 2012 in Seven Springs, PA. The format of the
conference is highly conducive to interactions among students, faculty, and
professional researchers, and ample time is provided in the schedule for rich
discussions amongst the attendees. An important component of the conference will
be the student poster session. Additionally, the conference program has been
designed to maximize interaction among modelers, computational and image
processing scientists, and experimentalists.