* 1241721
* Building the National Cyber Workforce:   New SFS Program at Kansas State University
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Xinming Ou, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2019
* USD 2,370,440.00

This project launches the CyberCorpsÂ®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program at
Kansas State University (K-State), designated by NSA and DHS as a National
Center of Academic Excellence of Cybersecurity Research (CAE-R). The new SFS
program at Kansas State University provides highly valuable and timely education
and career opportunities for a large student body interested in cybersecurity
and information assurance. It builds upon existing strong research and education
programs at K-State, and is intended to attract a steady stream of about six
incoming SFS scholars per year. The project builds a scholarship program that
emphasizes personalized programs of study and individual, one-on-one mentoring
throughout students' academic careers, including job search and placement. The
project team leverages their ties with other regional schools and proximity to
military bases like Fort Riley and Fort Leavenworth to recruit students of all
ages and backgrounds, targeting a uniquely diverse, under-served, and
underrepresented population. A major feature of the program design is an
emphasis on close faculty/student interaction. Each student has an SFS faculty
mentor who works closely with the student to develop an individualized study
plan, monitors progress, helps the student formulate a career plan and provides
advice and assistance in looking for employment both for internships and final
placement after graduation. This hands-on, personalized approach helps ensure
retention and quality learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SFS project involves
the participation of the Manhattan Area Technical College.