* 1241099
* Dimensions: Animal-microbial interactions as an engine of phyletic and functional diversity: insights from interactions between drosophilids and their resident microbiota
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* John Jaenike, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,993,786.00

The cooperative relations between animals and their symbiotic bacteria make a
crucial contribution to global diversity, but there remains a major gap in our
understanding of how the taxonomic diversity (number of species etc.) relates to
its functional diversity (what organisms do). In this project, genetic measures
of diversity will be applied to quantify the taxonomic and functional diversity
of bacterial communities in fruit flies and their relatives. A century's worth
of genetic research on fruit flies makes these species a particularly amenable
study system. This project will use several fly species, including an emerging
agricultural pest that feeds on fruit and mushrooms, to investigate how taxonomy
and function of the bacteria are coupled both to each other and to the
functional diversity of the flies. The impact of these interactions on the
capacity of the flies to utilize and damage fruits, their competitive
interactions, and their resistance to parasites, will also be investigated. The
research will also use genomic methods to obtain an integrated understanding of
how animal-bacterial interactions shape the taxonomic and functional diversity
of both the animal and its microbiota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide research education in biodiversity science for two postdoctoral
associates and graduate and undergraduate students, and will be communicated to
the general public by Science Saturday meetings, including talks and hands-on
demonstrations, at the Rochester Museum and Science Center. A photographic
exhibition communicating the beauty, complexity and diversity of animal-
microbial associations will be organized at Cornell University for the general
public. Both these complementary initiatives have plans for traveling
exhibitions, for wider dissemination of the importance of biodiversity. The
insects studied in this project include an invasive pest, the spotted-wing
drosophila. The researchers will enhance ongoing extension activity via
meetings, newsletter articles, and interviews with local media to describe how
the findings of this research may help to mitigate the damage of this insect to
crop production and food quality.