* 1241738
* Security Injections: Promoting Responsible Coding and Building a Community of Security Ambassadors
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Blair Taylor, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 451,879.00

Information Assurance (IA) requires pervasive action to prepare all computing
graduates to meet the current and future cybersecurity challenges. The
challenges to this are significant: instructors who are untrained in computer
security, lack of teaching resources, and introductory classes overloaded with
course material. The Security Injections@Towson project includes over 40
security injection modules that target key security concepts including integer
overflow, buffer overflow, and input validation to be used in introductory
computer science courses. Research results show that these security injection
modules lead to an increase in the ability of students to remember, comprehend,
and apply secure coding principles. This project builds on the success of the
security injection modules. The project team and its partners (from the ACM
Committee for Computing Education in Community Colleges, three NSF Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) centers, and several diverse institutions) focus
on community building and effective national dissemination to reach more
students and faculty. Community building efforts include 1) a Security
Ambassadors program with faculty who teach and encourage others to teach
responsible coding, 2) a Build-A-Lab program to grow teaching resources and
increase faculty engagement, knowledge, and sense of ownership, and 3) Short IA
pedagogy courses at ATE centers and educational conferences. Project
dissemination is synergistic with community building efforts, using short
courses at conferences, workshops, outreach through ATE centers, and the
security ambassadors to facilitate module adoption at two and four year
institutions. All resources will also be submitted to the NSDL Computing Pathway
- Ensemble and other venues. The community-building and disseminating strategy
uses discrete one-time workshops (short courses), long-range professional
development (Build-A-Lab), and the involvement faculty as the source of change
through the Security Ambassador program. The team brings strengths in
undergraduate curriculum development, education research, capacity-building
experience, and the perspective of diverse institutions, including a
historically-black university and community colleges.