* 1241046
* Dimensions:   The role of biodiversity for microbial adaptation to anthropogenic perturbations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Jim Spain, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,867,860.00

Microbes represent the largest reservoir of biodiversity on Earth, drive the
biogeochemical cycles that sustain life in most habitats, and cause or control
diseases in humans, animals, and plants. Yet, fundamental aspects of this
astonishing biodiversity remain poorly understood. For example, thousands of
bacterial species inhabit a typical gram of soil or liter of seawater, each
encoding a few hundred genes of unknown function. What this diversity means and
how useful it is remains poorly understood. This project will employ advanced
genomic techniques and mathematical modeling to study the genetic mechanisms
that create diversity within aquatic habitats and to identify new,
biotechnologically important genes and pathways for cleaning up environmental
pollutants such as pesticides and petroleum-based hydrocarbons. The findings are
expected to lead to a more predictive understanding of the role of microbial
biodiversity for ecosystem function and resilience to natural as well as
anthropogenic perturbations, and could have important health and economic
benefits.

New multi-disciplinary technologies to study microbes and their communities will
be developed and made publicly available. These technologies will have
applications across the fields of microbiology, ecology, evolutionary and
systems biology, and environmental engineering. Graduate and undergraduate
students, including minority students from the University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez, will be trained at the interface of microbiology, computational
systems biology and engineering, a pivotal, interdisciplinary area of
contemporary research that is not adequately covered in traditional academic
settings.