* 1241823
* Workshop: Educate to Innovate - What and How?
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Debasish Dutta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine P. Easter
* 09/30/2015
* USD 291,779.00

Educate to Innovate?What and How? will develop an evaluation framework for
innovation training by interviewing leading innovators to learn what experiences
prepared them and what training they would recommend. It addresses the questions
of what are necessary skills for innovation and how should graduate students be
trained in these skills; and then it proposes to use the results of the workshop
to develop an instrument to be used as a rubric to describe and assess
innovation training in NSF Integrated Graduate Education and Research Training
(IGERT) graduate projects. In 2012, the IGERT program added a new thrust
requiring projects to prepare graduate students for successfully working in
innovation ecosystems. The project will interview highly successful innovators
in a variety of STEM fields and the arts to understand how they became
innovators and what can be translated to create innovation environments for
preparing future innovators. A consensus workshop will follow where 50
participates will review findings and determine what skills are necessary for
innovation. Using the findings from the workshop, focus groups will inform a
process for determining how these skills can be taught and what pedagogical
strategies should be pursued. The results of this process will be the creation
of a draft assessment instrument to examine interdisciplinary STEM graduate
projects that train students to be innovative and to see if they align with the
findings of the workshops. The IGERT program will serve as a test environment
because of its long-term focus on innovation, and in the past year its
additional funding stream for Competitive Incentive Innovation funding to each
new project for the purpose of underwriting innovation training activities. The
instrument will provide a rubric for describing innovation training activities
and for comparing activities and results between older IGERT projects and the
newly funded cohort. The results of this descriptive evaluation will help inform
the NSF and graduate educators about what techniques are being pursued and what
produces innovation results.

For the U.S. to remain a global innovation leader, it must significantly enhance
the capacity and ability of individuals and organizations to innovate. This has
become a high national priority. Our universities are excellent at teaching the
basic sciences and technologies which are essential for innovation, and several
university programs focus on entrepreneurship, which helps translate innovation
into marketable realities, but there is often a gap between the basic courses
and entrepreneurship training. The results of this workshop will guide
university efforts to improve innovation training by concrete examples of what
works and a rubric for assessing their programs.