* 1241703
* IIASA Young Scientists Summer Program: Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Water, Energy, Food, and Climate Relationships in a Decision Making Context
* GEO,ICER
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2012
* Debra Perrone, Perrone                 Debra
* Fellowship Award
* Maria Uhle
* 11/30/2012
* USD 8,000.00

The proposed work as an International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA) Young Scientists Summer Program (YSSP) participant would expand the
current work of the researcher which is currently focused on developing a
comprehensive understanding of the complex tradeoffs and risks involved in
water, energy, and food management. The proposed work for IIASA will focus on
estimating how demand side management of U.S. water resources may be affected by
anthropogenic induced climate change. Historical data on and assumptions
regarding future trends of population, economic growth, technological
development, and resources will be used to make a portfolio of scenarios. These
scenarios will be used in conjunction with climate scenarios to estimate how
water demands from thermoelectric, agricultural, industrial, domestic, and
public sectors, as well as water requirements for ecosystem services, may change
over the next seventy years.

Increased population and patterns of population density, economic growth, and
development all increase water, energy, and food demands. The impacts of a
changing climate will exacerbate competition for these resources, especially
given the strong interrelationships among water, energy, and food. Although
demand for individual resources has been studied, a systematic evaluation of
readily available data has not been undertaken to evaluate water-energy-food
linkages. Although these estimates cannot possibly consider the full range of
plausible futures, they will expose uncertainties and promote further
understanding of the impacts of linkages among climate change, resource use, and
socio-economic and environmental drivers. The results of this work will be used
with a multiattribute utility analysis (MAU) that will be designed to serve as a
stakeholder based decision-support framework; such a framework will allow U.S.
stakeholders to co-manage water, energy, and food resources in a more informed
manner.

Dissemination of the anticipated results is a key aspect of this work, as the
results are intended to be used to support decision makers and their
informational needs. All results posed in this proposal will be published in
peer-reviewed journals, presented at national conferences, and available on the
Vanderbilt Institute for Energy and Environment webpage. In addition to gaining
important research skills, conducting research at IIASA will expand the
researcher?s knowledge base and allow her to gain additional perspective on
global environmental, economic, social, and political issues. The opportunity to
network with peers who have similar interests will foster future partnerships.
Resource security and decision-making are multifaceted and complex research
areas; experience and training gained with respect to interdisciplinary and
international collaboration will strongly contribute to the researcher?s career
goals.