* 1241708
* Joint US/Chinese Cellular Biomechanics Summer Institute for Young Investigators to be held from August 15-17, 2012 in Xi'an, China
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Guy Genin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

1238490&lt;br/&gt;Genin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support requested from the US
NSF is to co-sponsor the first of an ongoing series of international summer
institutes for young investigators on the subject of cellular biomechanics. The
institute will be held in Xi'an, China, and the event will capitalize upon two
major opportunities. The first is the opening of a major interdisciplinary
center at Xi'an Jiaotong University, with a 20 million RMB in-vestment by the
Chinese NSF. The second is the International Congress on Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics (ICTAM) to be held the following week in Beijing. This will allow us
to attract participants, al-ready visiting China, at a fraction of the usual
cost. The workshop will aim to prepare young investigators for the ICTAM both in
terms of science, by presenting recent developments and ongoing research themes
in cellular biomechanics, and in terms of networking, by enabling meaningful
interactions between young US investigators and both their Chinese counterparts
and senior investigators. Careful evaluation of the institute will be performed
to optimize offerings and program structure for future
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;Much of modern
medicine builds upon successes in understanding the cell as a biochemical
system. The marriage between cell biology and engineering principles is much
newer, and the identification of governing principles underlying physiological
and pathological function of cells represents a grand challenge that may lead to
a new generation of medical treatments. Prominent examples of cellular
pathologies that are biophysical as well as biochemical in origin include
fibrosis, asthma, many metastatic cancers, cardiac arrhythmia, and cystic
fibrosis. This workshop will bring together established experts and young
investigators from around the world to present both a short course and the
latest research on topics of central importance to this emerging field. The
successes and failures of the workshop to achieve this goal will be assessed
carefully through a survey to be completed by both US and international
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this summer institute lie in the development of students and young
investigators. The summer institute aims to inspire and motivate students and
young investigators to gain expertise in and make contributions to this
important area. The summer institute will afford ample opportunity for students
to interact with internationally leading professors both scientifically and
socially. The summer institute is timed to allow visiting students and young
investigators to make connections in China, and to build upon these connections
in a meaningful way not only over the course of the summer institute but also
over the following week for those who travel to Beijing and attend the
International Congress on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics. The summer
institute aims to help young investigators maximize career development
opportunities at this conference by providing them comfortable foundations of
both scientific background and networking.