* 1241631
* Capacity Building: Development and Dissemination of the Drexel University Cybersecurity Program
* EDU,DGE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Constantine Katsinis, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 10/31/2016
* USD 888,491.00

The new interdisciplinary Master of Science in Cybersecurity degree program at
Drexel University is educating a new breed of engineers and scientists trained
to initiate and participate in multi-disciplinary and team-based research
projects. The program is developing a new interdisciplinary cybersecurity
curriculum, leveraging Drexel's National Security Agency (NSA) Center of
Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education along with faculty
expertise from the Drexel College of Engineering, Goodwin College of
Professional Studies, and the College of Information Sciences and Technology.
The program is defined not only by the development of new courses, but also by
minority student recruitment, integration of cooperative education, continuing
education for both students and faculty, and the integration of research and
teaching. The program addresses workforce driven needs as identified by the NSA
to increase the number of graduates with deep technical cyber-skills. Teams of
students participate in the innovative rotation-based research program, inspired
by rotations in medical school, working on research projects in multiple sub-
disciplines, cutting across conventional college/departmental barriers and
traditional research groups. Students in the program also participate in
Cybersecurity-related co-op opportunities and community service projects. Both
the co-op program and the community service projects leverage on-going
activities at Drexel. Drexel University serves as the lead institution of a
consortium of universities as part of the Greater Philadelphia Region Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation. The project uses these connections
to help with student recruitment and dissemination of Cybersecurity-related
teaching materials.