* 1241413
* CRPA: Antarctic Quest: Racing to Understand a Changing Ocean
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/2012,10/31/2015
* Oscar Schofield, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 10/31/2015
* USD 149,972.00

The Rutgers Film Bureau in collaboration with the scientists of the LTER (Long
Term Ecological Research) project at Palmer will produce a multi-platform
documentary project, Antarctic Quest: Racing to Understand a Changing Ocean.
This Connecting Researchers to Public Audiences proposal will focus on the
scientists who are studying ocean physics, chemistry, biology, and ecology in
the West Antarctic Peninsula (WAP), which is the fastest winter warming location
on earth. The aim of the project is to promote scientific knowledge about the
world's oceans and climate change, inspire interest in scientific careers, as
well as train a cadre of next generation film students in the craft of science
documentary filmmaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will articulate the
research of the Palmer LTER's quest to understand the impact of climate change
on the marine ecosystems of the WAP, while involving university students in the
filmmaking process. Deliverables include an hour television documentary intended
for PBS television broadcast, an online "Antarctic Quest community" created
through interactive and interconnected social media, three five-minute
educational videos produced for the PBS Learning Media website, and a Digital
Media Library to assist Earth science educators. The production team will employ
a diverse group of twenty film students from Rutgers University to be involved
in the many phases and components of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is designed to advance the public's environmental literacy. The project
will raise awareness of the changes being observed in the world's oceans by
illustrating how small changes in the physical conditions in the WAP can have
profound impact on marine ecosystems and potentially the entire ocean system.
The project will also highlight the significance of innovative new technologies
that are revolutionizing research methods as well document the importance of
scientific collaboration to understand a complex interdisciplinary problem and
the challenges of working in extreme environments. The summative evaluation of
the project will assess the effectiveness of the project in meeting its
educational goals. By communicating significant scientific research to the
public while training a cohort of next generation of science documentary
filmmakers, the project will also contribute to capacity-building in the
Informal Science Education field.