* 1241344
* EAGER: Coherent control of quantum dot spin states by simultaneous optical and microwave excitation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 01/31/2014
* USD 157,396.00

The objectives of this research are to study and control the spin properties of
semiconductor quantum dots using simultaneous optical and microwave field
excitation. The approach is to use optical fields to create atomic transitions
while simultaneously using a microwave field to induce spin flips, allowing
access to atomic transitions that are normally forbidden due to spin selection
rules. This method will be used to achieve coherent control of dark excitons in
an indium arsenide quantum dot .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
proposed research will enable the study of fundamental spin properties in
semiconductors, which is of central importance to a broad range of research
fields including condensed matter physics, quantum optics, quantum information,
and spintronics. It will also allow the probing and control dark of exciton
states whose properties are poorly understood. Control of dark excitons further
provides a method for storage and re-release of single photons, and can serve as
a quantum memory for future quantum computers and quantum networks, as well as
new opto-electronic and magneto-optic devices that use quantum properties to
achieve improved functionality&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This
research will advance scientific knowledge in a broad range of fields that
include optics, microwave engineering, and atomic physics. It could pave the
wave for future exponentially faster quantum computers and unconditionally
secure quantum networks. It will also provide research and educational
opportunities for graduate students, and promote undergraduate and high school
research through participation in the Summer Research Program at the Institute
for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics.