* 1241328
* INSPIRE: Modeling and optimization of DNA manufacturing processes
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Kimberly Ellis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2016
* USD 999,531.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Advances in Biological Informatics
Program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, the Manufacturing Enterprise Systems Program in the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate
for Engineering and the Networks and Regulation Cluster in the Division of
Molecular Cellular Biology in the Directorate for Biological Sciences. Virginia
Polytechnic University is awarded a grant to evaluate the feasibility and
benefits of analyzing DNA fabrication processes by using techniques from
Industrial and Systems Engineering (ISE). The premise is that these techniques
can be used to better design, plan, execute, and control DNA fabrication
processes and that this change of paradigm will help identify preferred
manufacturing strategies for DNA fabrication. Adapting approaches used in other
industries will lead to new strategies for process planning, monitoring, and
control that meet the need of DNA fabrication. The project has four
complementary objectives: (1) explore the goals and requirements of the process,
conduct functional analysis, and investigate resource and workflow strategies
for DNA fabrication; (2) implement laboratory pipelines to generate different
types of constructs illustrating a broad range of fabrication problems and
biological domains; (3) evaluate algorithms to estimate high-error rates in low
volume processes, implement monitoring strategies, and compare the performance
of different manufacturing strategies applicable to specific DNA manufacturing
problems; and (4) provide cross-training opportunities in molecular biology and
ISE for undergraduate students, graduate students, and post-doctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA fabrication is the process of combining
natural and chemically synthetized DNA fragments together in order to make
larger DNA molecules that conform to computer-designed sequences. DNA
fabrication includes gene synthesis, the process of assembling chemically
synthesized oligonucleotides into double- stranded DNA fragments. DNA
fabrication also includes more traditional activities, such as the development
of mutant collections, plasmid libraries, and refactored genomes. In this broad
perspective, most biologists practice DNA fabrication, although they are more
likely to call it molecular biology or genetic engineering. DNA fabrication
projects rely on low-cost instruments and laboratory infrastructure commonly
available to life scientists. Unfortunately, the lack of a suitable framework to
analyze DNA fabrication is limiting its effectiveness, requiring tools to manage
the complex flows of information and materials typically needed in these
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no evidence of previous application of
ISE methods to the fabrication of DNA or other laboratory processes in the life
sciences. This new interdisciplinary opportunity reprises the revolution that
hit the life sciences 15 years ago with the emergence of systems biology.
Biologists have traditionally assumed that biological processes were too
complicated to be modeled mathematically like physical systems. Challenges to
this assumption among physicists and engineers has catalyzed a renewal of
biological interest in analyzing laboratory processes with ISE tools. The goal
of this project is to anticipate, and prepare for, the next 15 years when
biologists will use engineering methods to perform experiments orders of
magnitude larger than is possible today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving quality,
avoiding delays and errors, and substantially decreasing the time to
implementation of biomedical discoveries are prime objectives of the National
Institutes of Health Roadmap for Medical Research. DNA fabrication processes are
representative of processes across many life science specialties that will
benefit from the results of this project. The reward of this project is a much-
needed increase in productivity of the life science research enterprise. The
national R&amp;D infrastructure needs to be more fiscally responsible in these
times of constrained budgets; in order to enhance U.S competitiveness, it is
necessary to find ways of producing more data, more discoveries, and more
applications with stable or shrinking resources.