* 1241264
* "RAPID" A Critical Audiovisual Documentation of Endangered Ayook (ISO-939-3 MTO) Maize Cultivation Practices and Language with Dual Linguistics and Genetics Applications
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Benjamin Levine, Speaking Place
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 01/31/2014
* USD 64,393.00

An interdisciplinary team of linguists, filmmakers and plant geneticists will
conduct endangered language documentation of agricultural practices associated
with Ayöök maize over the course of one planting season in the county of
Totontepec, Oaxaca, Mexico. There are two objectives: 1. Apply language
documentation methods to revive memory of a near extinct domain of cultivation
of one of the world's most productive and nutritious corn varieties; and 2.
Apply the linguistic data to guide a genetic analysis that can lead to improved
corn varieties worldwide.

Linguists and filmmakers will employ a methodology adapted from documentation of
Passamaquoddy (SIL code PQM) that uses documentary techniques, speaker
facilitators, and video feedback routines to record natural group conversation
and activity, including memories, oral histories, practices and associated
language use. This data will inform the geneticists as to motivations and
activities that selected for attributes that shaped Ayöök corn varieties.
Understanding these practices in the context of a life system that used all
parts of the plant for clothing, building materials, and medicine, as well as
nutrition, can clarify how desired traits were molecularly structured in the
genome through agricultural practices. This can lead in turn to the ability to
introduce these attributes into corn grown elsewhere.

The documentation will also help younger farmers who desire to return to
traditional practices after a generation of chemically-based agriculture caused
extensive ecological damage and interrupted transmission of associated language.
Finally, the project will lead to an expandable visual and linguistic archive of
practices and language that will guarantee the preservation of valuable
indigenous agricultural knowledge, representing an example of the revival of
endangered domains and associated language.