* 1241779
* Laser mass spectrometer microscopy for analysis of cultural heritage objects
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Catherine Patterson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,251.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, a new collaborative
project between Professor de Vries and his group at the University of
California-Santa Barbara (UCSB) and researchers at the Getty Conservation
Institute (GCI) in Los Angeles will develop a new technique capable of
unambiguously identifying organic components in cultural heritage objects. The
new method is based on a specialized form of laser mass spectrometry, combined
with microscopy in a unique instrument. This approach will have the spatial
resolution necessary to isolate small quantities of organic material in discrete
layers of tiny mounted samples from paintings (called cross sections), and the
sensitivity to provide molecularly specific identification of materials present
in very low concentrations. The unambiguous identification of artists' materials
at a molecular and microstructural level can elucidate historic geological or
biological material sources, manufacturing processes and trade routes. An
understanding of works of art additionally assists conservators and curators
develop the storage and exhibition protocols necessary to protect and preserve
works of art, and assists art historians in their investigations into the
relationships between an object, the artist, and the historical and cultural
environments in which it was created. The R2PI-uMS technique developed in this
work is also expected to enhance scientific research in a number of diverse
fields other than art conservation, ranging from organic surface analysis in the
electronics industry, to analysis/testing in the modern paint industry, to the
study of spatial distributions of metabolites in cells in botanical or
biological studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The graduate students that are
involved in the project will have the unique opportunity of working in both
academic and cultural heritage research environments, helping to foster the next
generation of scientists engaged in cultural heritage science. In addition to
training graduate students, the researchers will involve undergraduate and high
school students in the framework of UCSB sponsored outreach programs to minority
students and high schools and the Getty's Graduate Intern and Multicultural
Undergraduate Internship programs. In an additional collaboration, students from
Jackson State University, a historically black college, will also participate in
the project. By involving such a diverse group of researchers, the PIs will work
to increase participation of minority students in STEM fields.