* 1241987
* EAGER: Digital Yet Deliberately Random -- Synthesizing Logical Computation on Stochastic Bit Streams
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Kia Bazargan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2015
* USD 314,211.00

Most digital systems operate on a positional representation of data, such as
binary radix. This project advocates an alternative representation: random bit
streams where the signal value is encoded by the probability of obtaining a one
versus a zero. This representation is much less compact than binary radix.
However, complex operations can be performed with very simple logic. In
particular, arithmetic functions, consisting of operations like addition and
multiplication can be implemented very efficiently. Complex functions, such as
exponentials and trigonometric functions, can be computed through polynomial
approximations. Because a stochastic representation is uniform, with all bits
weighted equally, it is highly tolerant of soft errors (i.e., bit flips).
Computation on stochastic bit streams offers tunable precision: as the length of
the stochastic bit stream increases, the precision of the value represented by
it also increases. Thus, without hardware redesign, one has the flexibility to
tradeoff precision and computation time. In contrast, with a conventional
binary-radix implementation, when a higher precision is required, the underlying
hardware has to be redesigned. This project will develop and apply a unified
framework for synthesizing such computation from the circuit level to the
architectural and system level. Techniques for transforming probability values
with combinational logic will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of
this grant, a new course on "Circuits, Computation, and Biology" offered jointly
through the ECE Department and the new Biomedical Informatics and Computational
Biology Program at the University of Minnesota. The researchers will try to
incorporate stochastic ideas in computer design curriculum, The PIs will focus
on building upon current research efforts that include female and
underrepresented students.