* 1241212
* Dimensions:   Community assembly and decomposer function of aquatic fungi along a salinity gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* James Dalling, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2018
* USD 802,578.00

A diverse group of fungi decompose wood in water, providing a significant
fraction of the energy and nutrients that support some freshwater and saltwater
foodwebs. It is not known what fungi may colonize and then persist on submerged
wood, whether particular species are important for decomposition, or whether
particular genes that may be necessary for decomposition are shared among many
species, making those species somewhat interchangeable. Wood decomposition will
be studied in freshwater-estuarine river systems in Pacific coastal Panama. Wood
samples will be immersed at four salinity levels and the diversity and species
composition of fungi will be compared to the activity of genes associated with
wood-degrading enzymes and to changes in wood chemistry through the
decomposition process. Conducting this experiment at four salinity levels will
reveal how salinity influences fungal gene expression, fungal species
interactions, and substrate use. Results from this study will contribute to our
understanding of fungal community ecology, will tell us how a decrease in fungal
diversity may affect wood decomposition, and will indicate whether particular
fungal groups are critical for decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide unique, cross-disciplinary training in tropical ecology, bioinformatics,
and fungal biology at the undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral levels and
will support research and publication by U.S. and Latin American students. This
project may also reveal novel genes and genetic pathways that have evolved in
aquatic fungi and that have application for cellulosic biofuel research and
bioremediation. Culture-grown fungi will also be contributed to a bio-
prospecting project that screens for activity against cancers and tropical
diseases.