* 1241221
* Dimensions:Collaborative Research: Oligotrophic phytoplankton community response to changes in N substrates and the resulting impact on genetic, taxonomic and functional diversity
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Jonathan Zehr, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,286,748.00

Intellectual merit. Marine phytoplankton are a diverse group of Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic unicellular organisms that account for approximately 50% of global
carbon fixation. Nitrogen (N) is an essential element for microbial growth, but
concentrations of bioavailable nitrogen in vast regions of subtropical ocean
gyres are extremely low (submicromolar to nanomolar concentrations), and
generally limit phytoplankton growth. Phytoplankton taxa differ in their genetic
capabilities to take up and assimilate nutrients, and thus competition for
different chemical forms of N (NH4+, NO3- and urea) and supply of these
N-containing compounds are important controls on phytoplankton growth,
productivity, and ultimately ecosystem function. The form and supply of N to
phytoplankton have already been altered by anthropogenic activities, and with
increasing environmental perturbations the effects will accelerate. To date
however, there is limited information on how the N forms and fluxes impact the
marine phytoplankton community composition and primary production. Similarly,
determining the mechanisms of the response are crucial to assessing how ocean
ecosystem function will respond to global climate change. This project seeks to
determine how taxonomic, genetic and functional dimensions of phytoplankton
diversity are linked with community-level responses to the availability of
different N substrates (NH4+, NO3-, and urea) in one of Earth's largest aquatic
habitats, the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. The project will characterize
phytoplankton community composition change and gene expression, photosynthetic
performance, carbon fixation, and single-cell level N and C uptake in different
taxa within the phytoplankton assemblage in response to different N compounds.
The research project is unique in investigating community-to-single-cell level
function and species (strain)-specific gene expression patterns using state-of-
the-art methods including fast repetition rate fluorometry, nanoscale secondary
ion mass spectrometry and a comprehensive marine microbial community microarray.
The results will provide predictive understanding of how changes in the
availability of key nitrogen pools (N) may impact phytoplankton dynamics and
function in the ocean.

Broader impacts. This project seeks to understand the ecological basis linking
the metabolism of N to phytoplankton biodiversity in the open ocean. The
underlying concept that links ecological competition for nutrients (in this case
N) to phytoplankton diversity will provide a universal framework for
understanding how ecosystem functions are linked to biodiversity. By applying
state-of-the-art molecular and genetic methods to address ecological questions,
the project seeks to develop an innovative workflow to assess eukaryotic and
prokaryotic gene functions in the environment, and provides modern analytical
and bioinformatic training for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
The microarray tool has been designed by involving the larger marine
microbiology community and is available to the greater scientific community, and
this project is one of the first implementations. The fundamental concepts of
microbial ecology and genomics will be used in educational activities in
undergraduate and graduate-level classes as well as research training for
undergraduates and graduates. Students and the postdoctoral researcher supported
by this project will be engaged in development of microbiological and molecular
biological displays and presentations at the Exploratorium, a science museum in
San Francisco, California. Project personnel will collaboratively develop
modules for the Exploratorium. The Exploratorium partnership will provide a
mechanism for educational outreach for students and post-docs, as well as an
efficient means to communicate the importance of ocean microbes and genomics to
the public (over 600,000 visitors per year). The PIs will work with the
education team in the Center for Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education
(C-MORE) scholars program, at the University of Hawaii, to recruit an
undergraduate student to participate in this project. The C- MORE scholars
program seeks to promote workforce diversity by identifying faculty mentors to
work with students of traditionally underrepresented backgrounds in the STEM
disciplines.

Integration. This project integrates multiple perspectives on microbial
biodiversity. The project seeks to understand how nitrogenous nutrients regulate
the taxonomic, genetic, and functional diversity of phytoplankton communities
through differential gene expression and functional properties of phytoplankton
taxa.