* 1241332
* INSPIRE:  Molecular Underpinnings of Bacterial Decision-Making
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This CREATIV award is partially funded by the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure
and Function and the Networks and Regulation Clusters in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences;
the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics, the Condensed
Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials Research, and
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this CREATIV project is to investigate the fundamental question of
how intricate protein-based molecular machines can determine cellular-level
dynamics for living systems. Specifically, the goal is to create a framework for
quantitatively predicting functional consequences of designed changes in protein
systems. This project will focus on the decision-making circuitry in Bacillus
subtilis as a test case for the thesis that, although biology starts from the
molecular scale, it is only at the cellular and multicellular scales that one
sees life in action, as a distinct form of matter having goal oriented behavior.
This is the level at which evolutionary selective pressures operate. It
therefore must be the case that the dynamics at these higher-scales are directly
determined by their molecular underpinnings. Exactly how this works has not yet
been understood even for simple forms of life such as bacteria. Instead,
quantitative systems-biology approaches today remain impoverished of molecular
detail and one cannot hope for an understanding of either why things work the
way they do, or, often more importantly, how we can intervene at the molecular
scale to engineer the system performance. The PIs and their collaborators will
apply an integrative approach that combines computational and experimental
techniques to bridge this huge gap in our understanding and predictive
capability of the quantitative functionality of biological systems. Recent
progress on the Bacillus system has for the first time enabled this type of
trans-scale approach. At the molecular level, advances in modeling and new ideas
utilizing sequence-based data can effectively treat protein-protein interactions
and conformational changes associated with chemical function. Cellular-level
circuits that govern sporulation and competence have been the subject of much
recent interest and there is in place an initial set of ideas regarding the
logic implemented therein. Finally, the coupling between each cell's decision-
making in overall colony structure is being vigorously studied. This research
project is inherently multidisciplinary, combining protein chemistry with signal
transduction, combining molecular biology and biophysics with complex pattern-
formation physics, and combining non-equilibrium statistical mechanics with
synthetic biology. This work is high risk and potentially high pay off.
Molecular modelers have stayed away from making predictions as to how specific
changes will be manifested at the scale of life, as this was considered to be
too hard as compared to explaining in vitro biochemistry data. The results from
this project would be transformative, changing how we approach the quantitative
analysis of integrated biological systems. It is therefore highly appropriate
for the NSF CREATIV program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic knowledge generated
from this CREATIV project will be crucial for revolutionizing our ability to
control biofilms by molecular manipulation. Biofilm control is crucial for
bacteria-based environmental remediation and for modern desalination. This
project will provide a fertile ground to expose junior scientists to the
challenge of cross-disciplinary research, both theoretical and experimental,
which explicitly aims to break down the barriers between different subfields.
This will lead to a future workforce better able to face the challenges of
modern quantitative biology. Finally, bacterial colony structures and their
cellular and molecular underpinnings are a fascinating area with which one can
draw the public into contact with the ideas of modern science.