* 1241461
* INSPIRE: Programming Materials via Biomolecular Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2013
* Yong Wang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 02/28/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This INSPIRE award to University of Connecticut is partially funded by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The other three interdisciplinary
programs that are partially funding this award are the Biosensor program and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, &amp; Transport Systems, and the
Materials for Surface Engineering program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing Innovation. All these three programs are in the Directorate
for Engineering. The objective of this project is to apply nature and biology as
design guidelines in the creation of new generation of active materials. Over
the years, the field of materials science has evolved from the study of inert
materials to the design of active materials. However, current active materials
usually need physical stimulation from light, temperature, ultrasound,
electricity, and magnetism. These physical stimuli lack a high resolution
controlled at the molecular level. Their reliance on complicated instruments and
operations also limit the wide applications of active materials. The main thrust
of this award will be is in developing programmable surfaces that can be used to
change their properties on demand, and to produce materials with diverse but
predetermined functions. As proof of the concept and to validate the hypotheses,
the investigator will modify selected surfaces with two or more sets of
oligonucleotides with specific and predetermined binding properties. Hybrid
oligonucleotides with nanomaterial cargo-carrying drug (or enzymes or other
functional materials) could be used to program the absorption and desorption and
release the contents of nanomaterial cargo in the presence of a set of 'mutated'
oligonucleotides on the surface. The mutated hybrid oligonucleotides could be
altered based on the hybrid nucleotides with the nanomaterials cargo. The
success of the proposed research holds great potential of transforming the way
current and future materials are developed for various applications such as
human healthcare and materials manufacturing. The scientific broader impact of
this award will be in developing multifunctional and adoptive materials for
potential applications such as surface processing, drug delivery, biosensing,
catalysis among others. The broader impacts of this project will be promoted by
diverse educational and outreach activities supported by this award. As part of
this project, innovative, interdisciplinary, and in-depth course work will be
offered to students at different levels to learn cutting-edge biomolecular
engineering technologies. Research findings will be broadly disseminated through
high-impact journals, prestigious conferences, and the
internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials are important in virtually every aspect
of our life. However, currently available materials do not have capabilities to
flexibly change properties as a small octopus can do during its defense against
predators. Therefore, the long-term goal of this project is to explore a
revolutionary concept of developing materials that can change their properties
in a way mimicking the behavior of living organisms. If successful, the proposed
research will open a new avenue for the human being to learn from nature and to
create smart materials not existing in nature. This project also involves
diverse and well-designed education and outreach activities that will make broad
impacts on the education of graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students. For
instance, interdisciplinary 'learn-and-seek' teams will be established for K-12
students to learn state-of-the-art biomolecular nanotechnology and to develop
21st century skills. Research findings will not only be presented to researchers
in the academia, but also to the public through the internet and social
networks.