* 1241083
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: FLASH!  Fueling Learning Alliance in Sustainability in Higher education:  Using social media and networks for science
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Kathleen Galvin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 06/30/2016
* USD 158,055.00

While there has been considerable evidence of the utility of social media to
enable high levels of collaboration and communication among distributed and
diverse scientific communities, there is very little empirical evidence about
the utility of social media to help individuals find the right people to connect
with in these communities. Connecting with the right individuals is particularly
catalytic in creating large scale innovation and acceptance of global issues
such as sustainable development which transcends geography, culture and
disciplines.

We propose to apply the insights gained from an NSF VOSS project (at
Northwestern University) investigating what motivates the formation of effective
networks in virtual organizations to enhance mentoring practices in the NSF SEES
project (anchored at Colorado State University) developing the Global Women
Scholars Network (GWSN).

Our goal is to implement and evaluate the utilization and outcome of a social
recommender system that will seek to enhance cross-mentoring of grassroots women
with academics, policy leaders and students in the globally-scaled knowledge
network for sustainability. We take a risky step in testing the hypothesIs that
social network recommender systems are an effective way to address the lingering
gap between women and men in the sciences and policy decision-making associated
with sustainable development. We posit that social recommender systems create a
knowledge network cloud that merges across cultural, geographic, and
institutional gaps (grassroots to academic, women to students, and policy makers
to graduate students). Such a cloud network is one way that can make a
transformational change in how science is communicated and who is engaged in
that communication.