* 1241609
* Collaborative Research: Modern Oil-based Paints: A Mechanistic Approach to Assessing and Modeling their Curing, Aging and Cleaning
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Kimberley Muir, The Art Institute of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/29/2016
* USD 42,268.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigations of paint coatings in the
context of cultural heritage science present a unique set of technical
challenges because of the evolution of the properties of materials over time
scales that are much too long to be reproduced directly. As a result, data-
driven kinetic models of the aging process are needed in order to understand the
physical state of aged paints and to develop effective restoration and cleaning
strategies. In this collaborative project involving Northwestern University and
the Art Institute of Chicago, a kinetic Monte Carlo model of paint curing and
aging will be developed, as will experimental systems needed to determine
relevant model parameters. The net result will be a set of simulation models
that can be viewed as 'virtual' oil-based paint coatings. These 'virtual'
coatings will enable the time dependent, structural features of complex,
multicomponent paint coatings to be tracked. The models, with their
experimentally determined input parameters, represent a physical and chemical
knowledge base for oil-based paint coatings that will serve as a platform for
addressing a wide range of questions. Specific issues to be addressed concern
the curing and aging of systems when subjected to heat, humidity and various
cleaning solutions. Kinetic parameters will be determined experimentally with
coatings made from well characterized starting materials, using the quartz
crystal microbalance (QCM) as the primary experimental tool. Nanoindentation
will be used to correlate the high frequency mechanical response obtained with
the QCM to complementary measures of the mechanical response and to actual paint
samples. While these techniques will be applied directly to oil-based coatings
used by artists, the methodology is broadly applicable in a variety of areas,
including characterization of high performance protective coatings, and the
development of sustainable, bio-derived materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative effort
between Northwestern University and the Art Institute of Chicago. State-of-the
art scientific tools will be used to study the curing and aging properties of
modern oil-based paints and the impact of conservation treatments on them.
Although oil-based paints were widely used throughout the 20th century, and in
some of the most prominent artworks of that period, their properties are poorly
understood. Advancing our knowledge in this area is crucial for preserving the
integrity of such artworks for future generations. The results of this research
will be used to develop more effective conservation strategies for paintings in
collections at the Art Institute and at other museums throughout the world. An
educational outreach element linking science and art will also be developed in
conjunction with the Art Institute's Department of Museum Education. Outreach
offerings will be developed to attract middle school and high school science
classes to the museum. These activities will be designed to attract students to
science who would otherwise not likely be drawn to science-related programs.
Similarly, the connection with the Art Institute will enable undergraduate and
graduate students at Northwestern to understand the ways in which scientific
concepts can benefit disciplines that lie outside the traditional scientific
realm.