* 1241814
* Collaborative Research:  Building Forest Management into Earth System Modeling: Scaling from Stand to Continent
* BIO,EF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Ankur Desai, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2016
* USD 66,397.00

Although there are many theories that explain how forests function at the stand
level, there is a lack of understanding of how these theories scale to larger
areas subject to different disturbances, such as hurricanes or harvests, which
cause temporary change in environmental conditions. Management of forest
resources has been guided by ecological theories that simplify disturbance,
management, and climate impacts on forests, but feedbacks from management are
seldom considered to influence function. This observation leads to an important
question: How does knowledge from studies of areas measured in meters or
kilometers apply to much more heterogeneous regional areas, within which human
activities are becoming the most significant determinants of functional
responses to disturbances? This proposed research aims to develop a framework
for building forest management into Earth system modeling to test whether stand-
level ecological theories hold in larger areas across different regions of the
continental US. The goal is to determine how variations in forest management,
climate, and disturbance impact forest ecosystems, and quantify the relative
importance of forest management, climate, and disturbance as drivers of
ecosystem structure and function at stand to continental scales. Initial spatial
data on land ownership and use, forest management, disturbances, climate, and
vegetation characteristics will be obtained for two regions of the US with
significant management activity: the Southeast and Pacific Northwest. The
project will map management, disturbances, and environmental characteristics
overlain on forest types. An ecosystem model will be modified and parameterized
to generate estimates of carbon, water, and forest structure characteristics
under various management and climate scenarios in order to investigate if the
macrosystem behaves similarly or as the aggregate of the mosaic of different
stages of succession, management, disturbance, and climate change scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This continental-scale analysis of management,
disturbance, and climatic effects on forest structure and function will lead
ecologists and forest resource managers towards improved stewardship of forest
resources. This project will make substantive contributions in developing
methods for appropriate scale determination and management mapping, and
demonstrate how management methods affect forest ecology. Moreover, new
frameworks and improvements will be made to improve existing ecosystem models.
This project will improve ecological theory of succession to better inform
forest management, which will help in evaluating forest feedbacks on climatic
patterns. Research data products will made available to forest managers via
outreach activities, including field-based workshops. The greatest significance
of this project will be to design new research approaches and contribute to
training a new generation of scientists through graduate research and cross-
disciplinary post-doctoral training with multi-institution lab rotations. The
project will improve our understanding of the interactions of forest management
at larger scales with disturbance regimes and climate change influences, as well
as how management activities might mitigate some of those influences.