* 1241357
* Conference:   Microbial Community Dynamics: Cooperation and Competition - Workshop November 5-7, 2012 in St. Louis, MO
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Judy Wall, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Morris
* 07/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The Workshop on Microbial Community Dynamics: Cooperation and Competition to be
held in the fall of 2012 in St. Louis, Missouri, USA, is an initiative of the
Environmental Biotechnology Working Group of the EU-US Taskforce on
Biotechnology Research, a cooperative program between the European Commission
and the United States of America. The activities of the Environmental
Biotechnology Working Group have as their goals to provide a forum for early
career scientists from the US and EU to meet, to learn cutting edge research in
the area of microbial biotechnology from world experts and to set the groundwork
for future transatlantic cooperation and collaboration. Workshop presentations
(20 min talks with 10 min questions) will address fundamental physiology and
genetics of microbial communities that will contribute to advances in
bioremediation, human health protection and treatments, bioenergy conversion and
carbon sequestration. Senior scientist participants (10 EU and 10 US) will be
world renowned experts who will present the current status of their fields and
forecast research challenges and opportunities. Each will be responsible for
identifying a promising early career scientist to participate in the workshop
and present their research results in poster format. A new feature of this
workshop will be a "Mentoring Hour", an opportunity for mentoring of the early
career scientists by the senior scientists on an individual basis. The workshop
will also provide time for all attendees to engage in open discussion to
identify areas where scientific advancement is needed and plan the steps
necessary for realizing future research collaborations. Finally, a report
summarizing the major scientific opportunities, visions and challenges revealed
through the presentations and discussions will be prepared for
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1. To
provide a forum for early career scientists from the US and EU to meet, to learn
cutting edge research in the area of microbial biotechnology from world experts
and to set the groundwork for future cooperation and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2. To address fundamental
physiology and genetics of microbial communities and biofilms that will
contribute to advances in human health, bioremediation of toxins, bioenergy
conversion and carbon sequestration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3. To
provide a mentoring opportunity for early career scientists to discuss their
career goals in ain one-on-one setting with an established expert in the
microbial interactions and environmental
microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4. To generate a report of the
meeting for publication that will summarize future research directions discussed
at the workshop and to contribute to the prevention of unnecessary research
duplication and generate synergy among scientists.