* 1241838
* WBDB2012: Workshop on Big Data Benchmarking 2012
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Chaitanya Baru, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

With the exponential increase in the size, complexity, and rate of acquisition
of diverse types of data, there an urgent need for new techniques for managing
and analyzing such data. In this context, there is a critical need for
benchmarks to facilitate evaluation of alternative solutions and provide for
comparisons among different solution approaches targeted to big data
applications. Benchmarks need to capture a variety of characteristics of big
data storage, management, and analytics including new feature sets, enormous
data size, largescale and evolving system configurations, shifting loads, and
the heterogeneous technologies of big-data and cloud platforms. The benchmarks
are inadequate for assessing emerging big data platforms, systems and in
software such as SQL, NoSQL, and the Hadoop software ecosystem; different
modalities or genres of big data, including graphs, streams, scientific data,
document collections, and transaction data; new options in hardware including,
HDD vs SSD, different types of HDD, SSD, and main memory, and large-memory
systems; and, new platform options that include dedicated commodity clusters and
cloud platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop on Big Data Benchmarking 2012
represents an important step towards the development of a suite of benchmarks
for providing objective measures of the effectiveness of hardware and software
systems dealing with big data applications. The objective of this invitation-
only workshop is to identify key issues and to launch an activity around the
definition of reference benchmarks that can capture the essence of big data
application scenarios. The effort aims to arrive at a set of objective measures
and benchmark datasets to characterize and compare the performance of and the
price/performance tradeoffs of alternative solutions for big data storage,
retrieval, processing, and analysis problems. The workshop brings together a
group of about 40 experts from academia and industry with backgrounds in big
data, database systems, benchmarking and system performance, cloud storage and
computing, and related areas.The industries represented range from hardware,
software, analytics, and applications. The group will develop a draft of a
report describing a big data benchmark suite that will be widely disseminated on
the web and through presentations and oureach activities at the relevant
conferences and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
availability of the big data benchmark suite will facilitate research and
technological advances by providing objective measures for comparing alternative
solutions to key big data problems.