* 1241463
* The Village Ecodynamics Project CRPA Initiative: The Deep History of Pueblo People and the Neolithic Revolution
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Mark Varien, Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This award addresses the archaeological issues surrounding the ancestral Pueblo
people and their Neolithic revolution or disappearance from the Mesa Verde
region of southwestern US. The research describes the people, their living
conditions and the environment, their impact on the region and the reason for
their exodus to form new societies such as the Tewa-Pueblo society. The research
and its results are significant, from both an archaeological and socio-cultural
standpoint. An exhibit is planned, to explain and inform the public, in the
History Colorado Center in Denver, Colorado, that will transfer this cultural
knowledge to the under-served public including Native American and numerous
rural residents. The effort is a collaborative endeavor involving the Crow
Canyon Archaeological Center in Cortez, Colorado and the new History Colorado
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exhibit will feature a typical living area, a
scientific area with discussion of tree rings, and an area for discussion with
scientific experts. In addition, the deliverable will include a website for
further discussion with scientist and for accessing the latest research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation of this project is extensive
starting from an overall evaluation of the museum itself and how to make this
exhibit a significant part of the museum, pleasing to the audiences and how to
improve its impact once the exhibit is open.