* 1241991
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Spatio-temporal Modeling; Buzios, Brazil, July 2014
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Peter Guttorp, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in July 14-25, 2014
in Búzios, State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Organized by Dr. Peter Guttorp, a
professor of Statistics, Quantitative Ecology &amp; Resource Management, and
Urban Design &amp; Planning at the , University of Washington in Seattle,
Washington, the institute will focus on spatial and spatio-temporal models and
their statistical analysis, with lectures in theory and applications as well as
practical computing exercises. The content will be linked together with advanced
applications in climatology, ecology and environmental health and provide a
comprehensive software archive for these methods, most of which have not been
publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will introduce participants
to many important techniques, including state-of-the-art methods in modeling.
The activity will also foster international collaboration among researchers from
the US and the Americas. The educational content of the institute and its
materials will be disseminated through an integrated web site, containing
presentations, software, annotated bibliography and a variety of resource links.
In addition, institute participants will receive guidance in producing white
papers for publication.