* 1241436
* Collaborative Research:   New Directions in Optical-Instrument-Driven Aeronomy at Arecibo Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Shikha Raizada, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 07/31/2018
* USD 301,112.00

The investigators will use the enhanced instrument cluster at Arecibo
Observatory (AO) to gain new insight into the complex nature of the space-
atmosphere interaction region (SAIR). The new High Frequency (HF) heating
facility with the ISR (Incoherent Scatter Radar) and other instruments provides
a unique opportunity to study heating-related aeronomic and plasma physics
problems. This includes the rapidly-imaged observation of airglow at 557.7 nm,
630.0 nm and 427.8 nm during ionospheric "heating" campaigns to understand the
role of HF-heating in generating plasma bubbles, or modulating them if already
present, and to understand the role of secondary suprathermal electrons in
producing airglow at different wavelengths. This research will also yield
insight to the heating process, including locating ionospheric "hot-spots",
yielding details of the electron collision process, elucidating the role of
Langmuir and ion-acoustic waves in the strongly heated regions, and study of
heating effects in Sporadic E. The latter study will include Ca+ metal-lidar
observations as further defined by 555.7 nm imaging as well as ISR and HF radar
results. HF heating of the ionosphere offers a unique opportunity to investigate
the plasma heating process and its effects on the neutrals in a controlled
(experimental) fashion. Outside of the heating campaigns, a database of 630 nm
all-sky camera images from other locations will be assembled collaboratively to
investigate the global context of the omnipresent ~1 hr period ionospheric
waves, and associated dynamics, first identified with the AO ISR. This work will
utilize other AO instruments, including the resonance and Rayleigh lidars, to
investigate the role of wave coupling from lower atmospheric regions. Also, a
proposed new CCD camera will allow high speed imaging to better understand HF
heating effects and linking optical and radar meteors to study meteoroid
aeronomy. The response of the SAIR to sudden changes in the environment caused
by heating will be explored with the collaborative use of multiple instruments,
thus informing numerous geophysical research areas. The multidisciplinary nature
of this work will help to establish collaborations with plasma physicists,
modelers, and space weather scientists. It will also advance the AO cluster
capabilities with the addition of a User-Owned, Public Access (UOPA) high frame
rate CCD to the current imager and help in establishing international
collaborations. Students representing minorities from local universities in
Puerto Rico will be encouraged to participate in observations and data analysis.
They will be involved in the improvements of the optical systems including
training on AO instrumentation and the application of these instruments to study
aeronomy of the SAIR.