* 1241969
* IIASA Young Scientists Summer Program: Testing the Role of Microbial Mechanisms in Moisture-Induced Soil Respiration Pulses Using a Theoretical Model
* GEO,ICER
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2012
* Sarah Evans, Evans                   Sarah          E
* Fellowship Award
* Maria Uhle
* 11/30/2012
* USD 8,000.00

The proposed work would take place at the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis (IIASA) as part of the Young Summer Scientist Program (YSSP).
During the proposed grant period (summer 2012), the participant would carry out
a project on microbial ecology in collaboration with scientists at IIASA.

Intellectual merit: Microbial communities control biogeochemical functions, and
therefore composition (species diversity) and function (enzyme production) can
constrain larger scale processes under certain conditions. Thus, descriptions of
these microbial mechanisms in models have the potential to improve predictions
of biogeochemical flux, and can increase our understanding of the recently
emerging field of microbial community ecology. The YSSP participant proposes to
use an ecosystem model developed by Christina Kaiser - that explicitly models
microbial communities - to identify precipitation patterns that most strongly
control microbial community structure, and describe how changes in enzyme
production under drought can influence biogeochemical functions when rainfall
returns. Although several recent empirical studies have described microbial
community and enzyme responses to rainfall manipulations, it is unclear what
controls these shifts in microbial dynamics, and whether there are generalizable
patterns in these responses. In this work, she will be able to test several
hypotheses about how microbial dynamics influence larger-scale functions, and
validate it with field data, presenting hypotheses and mechanisms to build off
of in future empirical and modeling work.

Broader impacts: This work has implications for 1) improving predictions of
biogeochemical cycles, and therefore predictions of climate change feedbacks and
trajectories, and 2) for integrating theoretical approaches into microbial
ecology. First, nitrogen and carbon compounds are emitted from the soil through
processes like denitrification and decomposition. Since many of these gases are
greenhouse gases, changes in the concentration of these gases in the air in turn
affect climate changes, like rainfall and temperature shifts. Microbial
communities control soil biogeochemical functions, but currently this biological
compartment is excluded from most models attempting to predict biogeochemical
dynamics. The participant?s work will use a theoretical approach to address how
microbes might contribute to function, and therefore identify whether this
mechanism will increase the accuracy of biogeochemical models. Second,
theoretical modeling holds great potential for improving our understanding of
controls on microbial community structure and function, but has been
underutilized in microbial ecology thus far. Learning theoretical approaches,
both in microbial ecology and in other fields, will allow the YSSP participant
to share these approaches with other microbial ecologists. Following her summer
abroad, the she plans to do this through day to day interactions and in
workshops and trainings, both public and academic. There is currently a lot of
interest in this approach, and others are eager to learn how theoretical models
can be used to compliment empirical work. This exposure will therefore not only
advance the career of a female scientist, but also broaden the scope of
approaches used in microbial ecology to improve model predictions and better
understand microbial ecology theory.