* 1241585
* Establishing the Information Assurance Student Pipeline Through Community College Outreach
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Charles Tappert, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2017
* USD 294,477.00

This project aims at increasing the number of undergraduate students studying
information assurance and pursuing careers in the field. The project is led by
Pace University and collaborates with four partner colleges: State University of
New York - Rockland Community College, State University of New York -
Westchester Community College, City University of New York - New York City
College of Technology, and City University of New York - Borough of Manhattan
Community College, of which the latter two are minority serving institutions.

A set of activities designed for both faculty and students fosters collaboration
among the participating institutions, attracts students to study information
assurance, and provides faculty with development opportunities in the
information assurance area. These activities include student information
assurance workshops, collaborative student/faculty research teams, a community
college/university faculty collaborative working group and faculty development
workshops.

The project is expanding the information assurance student pipeline at Pace
University through outreach to community colleges. In addition, this partnership
is establishing, implementing and evaluating the infrastructure needed for such
pathways, and thus is providing a reference model which can be adopted by other
schools. The overall impact of the project is to produce more and better
prepared information assurance professionals.