* 1241782
* RAPID: Challenge Platforms with a Public Intent Critical Reflections and Future Practices
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Erik Johnston, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 48,480.00

Participatory challenge platforms, like challenge.gov, 10,000 solutions at
Arizona State University, and the policy challenge at Arizona State University,
are examples of an emerging approach that can increase the efficiency,
effectiveness, and legitimacy of the public policy development and
implementation process in an increasingly complex, interconnected, and resource-
constrained governance environment. It seeks to give voice to, tap into,
empower, and focus the vast array of expertise, experience, and democratic
surplus possessed by a diversity of individuals throughout the nation in the
governance process to develop innovative and practical solutions to shared
public challenges. As such, the workshop supported by this grant is designed to
explore the emerging body of participatory challenges platforms with a public
intent and develop an community of practice for its research and practical
applications and implications in an effort to understand the design tensions and
applications of platforms as an efficient, effective, and legitimate governance
process. The workshop consists of a series of targeted discussions, panels,
roundtables, and keynote speakers to critically reflect on and envision the
future of participatory challenge platforms research and applications. The
workshop will support the following specific objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
Highlight the importance of the research and practice of participatory challenge
platforms to governing efficiently, effectively, and legitimately in an
increasingly complex, interconnected, and resource-constrained environment.
&lt;br/&gt;* Identify the obstacles, opportunities, and best practices of
designing and implementing participatory challenge platforms to address public
problems, grounded in case studies. &lt;br/&gt;* Explore design mechanisms to
foster sustainable networks of problems solvers from a diversity of backgrounds
around shared interests and public problems. &lt;br/&gt;* Develop a vision for
the future of and identify the next steps for the research and practice of
participatory challenge platforms in facilitating efficient, effective, and
legitimate governance processes and outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;* Bring together
practitioners, researchers, and participants from academics, private industry,
and governmental organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These types of approaches
will become more ubiquitous because of the broad prize authority Congress
granted to all federal agencies on December 21, 2010.