* 1241975
* Technical Assistance to Increase the Competitiveness of Minority Institutions in the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 07/31/2015
* USD 387,559.00

The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network is conducting two annual
proposal development workshops aimed at increasing the development and awareness
of granstmanship opportunities related to the Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
at several Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs). Individual workshops include
two person teams from each of 15 MSIs interested in developing a Noyce proposal.
The Noyce program and scholarships attract and retain qualified students
majoring in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields and
encourages them to pursue a career in the teaching profession. The QEM workshops
provide participants from MSIs feedback on their required project summaries to
assist them in, among other things, developing their ideas into competitive
Noyce proposals. In turn, the MSIs participating in the workshop use the Noyce
award as a stimulus for strengthening their teacher education programs to
produce high quality mathematics and science teachers who will eventually work
in high-need areas. MSIs are uniquely qualified to address the issue of
recruiting, retaining, and developing STEM teachers for high-need schools,
especially in urban areas. In this sense, the workshops are helping to develop
stronger MSIs, in general, and teacher preparation programs, specifically, to
meet the nation's needs for a more productive science and technology workforce.