* 1241424
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Ecological Chemistry at the University of Cádiz, Spain
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Joanne Romagni, DePaul University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2013
* USD 20,567.00

This program establishes a new summer International REU site at the University
of Cádiz, in southwestern Spain in the Dept. of Organic Chemistry. During this
REU, eight students will have the opportunity to participate in one of two labs
in the area of Chemical ecology. In the Allelopathy group, students will
isolate, identify and quantify secondary metabolites from Antarctic lichens.
Over the past several years, there have been significant biotic and abiotic
changes on the Antarctic continent due to climate shifts. Lichens produce an
array of secondary metabolites; with different compounds being produced within
the same species depending upon local environmental conditions. While there has
been extensive characterization of lichen secondary metabolites in
chemotaxonomy, this is one of the first studies to systematically compare
changes along an ecological transect as well as through time. The southern coast
of the province of Cádiz forms one of the sides of the Strait of Gibraltar. This
unique position encompasses an area of great ecological interest, housing the
greatest biodiversity of Europe's coasts. It has been declared a protected
natural area. More than 2000 species of marine flora and fauna have been
described in this region, some of them being endemic or with a restricted area
of distribution. In the Marine Natural Products group, students will also
isolate, identify, and quantify metabolites from marine organisms endemic to the
region. Once the compounds have been isolated and identified from both groups,
further studies will identify the bioactive compounds and their molecular
mechanism of action and subsequent role in the ecosystem will be elucidated.