* 1241704
* Collaborative Project: Integrating Learning Resources for Information Security Research and Education (iSECURE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Edina Renfro-Michel, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 118,836.00

This project is linking and integrating multi-media teaching materials (slides,
videos and textbooks) used in Information Security courses based on a security
ontology. The semantic linking of the multimedia course materials allows
students to search and compose multimedia and interactive course materials based
on the content, medium and learning styles, enabling flexible personalized
learning. To achieve these goals, the project is focusing on several research
tasks: (1) Segmenting and annotating learning media based on their learning
content, (2) Building a Security ontology to be used for annotating and querying
of the learning objects, (3) Adapting lecture content to student learning
styles, and (4) Evaluating the usability and effectiveness of the linked
multimedia security learning system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology and
methodology that is being developed by this project, including the ontology
builder for a given learning topic, the semantic segmentation of multimedia
learning objects, the search, and personalization of learning objects, can be
adapted to any course. The outcome of this project helps students build upon
existing knowledge as they are being introduced to unfamiliar material, by
creating subject specific searches of all course content. This changes the way
students learn by making course content more organized, interactive, and
instantly accessible while adding individualization options. Students are able
to fill gaps in their previous learning instantly by integrating search results
into their current studying. By having instant access to learning, and
experiencing a truly interactive, individualized learning environment, students
are less likely to be overwhelmed by course materials.