* 1241672
* Biological Clocks: High Throughput Identification of Deterioration Markers and Dating of Museums' Proteinaceous Specimens
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Mehdi Moini, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, Dr. Moini and his group
at Smithsonian Institution will address the need for tracking deterioration
markers and dating of proteinaceous specimens for cultural heritage purposes.
High throughput analytical techniques with high sensitivity, information-rich
chemical detection and low sample consumption will be developed, and several
categories of such markers will be validated. For a proof of concept, silk and
wool textiles, as well as collagen and leather specimens, will be used as
examples of museums' proteinaceous specimens. Specifically, this proposal
proposes to study the three factors that track protein degradation at a
molecular level - amino acid racemization (AAR), protein deamidation, and
protein fragmentation (truncation) - using state-of-the-art separation and mass
spectrometry techniques. Using a series of well-dated silk and wool textiles,
spanning in age from approximately present day to 2,500 years ago, and collagen
specimens from present to ~30,000 BP, the biological markers of deterioration
will be identified as a reliable means of dating. To increase throughput and
reduce sample consumption, ultrafast capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry
will be developed to take the place of conventional CE, reducing analysis time
by an order of magnitude to about one minute. The techniques developed in this
project may be applicable to other museums' proteinaceous specimens, including
paint binder, paper, glue, proteins-based adhesives, etc. The development of
reliable biological clocks has a wide range of practical applications including:
food safety and biological dating of food supplies in the food industry; disease
biomarker detection in hospitals and doctors' offices; and detection of
biological contaminants in the environment.

The investigator will be engaged in outreach programs and demonstrations at
local middle and high schools through his institution. The goal of these
activities is to involve the broader community with the conservation process.
Graduate and post graduate interns including underrepresented minority students
will be encouraged to begin their research at the Smithsonian Institution.