* 1241811
* IPG:   Collaborative Research:  Research on East African Catarrhine and Hominoid Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Laura MacLatchy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 117,760.00

New evidence from early fossil humans suggests that, in some respects, these
hominins more closely resembled the earliest fossil apes than any modern ape.
While such findings substantially impact our understanding of early hominin
adaptive morphology, their precise implications remain unclear because the
original ecological conditions in which these features evolved is poorly
documented. To address this problem, this project will answer the following
three research questions: What are the regional patterns of environmental change
and the site-specific habitats associated with the earliest fossil apes? How
does the morphology of early apes relate to the environmental contexts in which
they lived? How do early ape adaptations inform our understanding of later ape
and human evolution? These questions will be answered by establishing a multi-
disciplinary, multi-national collaboration to initiate new paleontological field
research at all of the early fossil ape localities in East Africa. For the first
time, new fossil and data collection will be coordinated across nearly a dozen
Kenyan sites near Kisingiri, Tinderet, West Turkana, and Buluk, and a similar
number of Ugandan sites at Napak, Moroto, and Bukwa. In addition to surveys and
excavation, a series of geological, ecological, and taphonomic analyses will be
used to understand the age, environment, and setting of each locality. New
fossils will be subjected to rigorous morphological analyses to determine their
evolutionary and adaptive significance. Unlike previous studies, which have
focused on individual localities, this regional approach to understanding
ancient ecosystems will track environmental variations over the time and space
of early ape evolution, making it possible to relate specific habitat types with
primate adaptive morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin and early
diversification of the ape-human lineage represents a fundamental shift in
primate body plans, and is therefore an integral resource for interpreting the
later evolution of apes and humans. For decades, most researchers have studied
human origins through the lens of modern ape and human characteristics,
marginalizing a large and diverse body of evidence from their ancient ape
predecessors. This project represents an important and substantive step toward
fully integrating our knowledge of living and fossil apes and humans. Moreover,
coordinating a project of this breadth - using the same methods and protocols
across all of the relevant fossil sites - will allow data to be synthesized on a
scale not previously possible, setting new benchmarks for conducting future
field projects. This project will thus model a collaborative approach that will
be more productive and beneficial to the discipline of
paleoanthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also generates substantial
broader impacts. A critical component of the grant is the training of US and
East Africa graduate and US undergraduate students in the discipline of
paleoanthropology. The project also includes the National Museums of Kenya as a
full collaborative scientific partner in the proposed research. A well-
established partnership between University of Michigan, Makerere University and
the National Museum (Uganda) will be fostered by this grant, helping to train
staff and students in Uganda on field and analytical techniques. Finally, a
digital database cataloging all the fossils and data collected from all of the
localities will be made freely available after the conclusion of the project.