* 1241358
* Dissertation Research: Subsistence Economy and Chiefdom Emergence in the Muisca Area
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 24,727.00

Muisca societies located in the central mountains of Colombia impressed early
Spanish arrivals in the sixteenth century with the power and level of respect
commanded by their chiefs and the quality and variety of the crafts their
artisans produced, sometimes from raw materials obtained from other regions.
Early Spanish accounts especially emphasize the "advanced" economic development
of Muisca societies, with what seemed to European eyes especially well organized
and flourishing trade and dense populations that were well provisioned despite
the fairly cold, wet, high-elevation zone they inhabited. As several regional
chiefdoms in northern South America have been studied archaeologically, it has
often turned out that their subsistence and craft economies do not involve very
high degrees of trade, tribute, or household interdependence. This emerging
pattern contrasts with sixteenth-century descriptions of the Muisca. The
archaeological evidence of Muisca societies has provided at best only incomplete
confirmation of the descriptions in historical sources, particularly in regard
to the development of local, regional, and supra-regional patterns of economic
interdependence and the importance of such an economy to the emergence of
chiefly power.&lt;br/&gt;One aspect of economic interdependence specifically
discussed in the historical sources, however, has been subject to very little
archaeological investigation. This is the agricultural exploitation of warmer
low-elevation zones located quite close to some of the principal Muisca chiefly
centers. In these areas higher temperatures led to greater productivity as well
as protection from the frosts that were a constant risk to agriculture in the
Muisca heartland. There are detailed sixteenth-century historical accounts of
the importance of these resources for sustaining the very high population
densities of the Muisca heartland, high densities fully attested to by both
historical and archaeological information.&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of
Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Pedro Argüello will carry out a systematic regional
survey of some 100 sq km in the Tena region on the slopes leading down from the
western edge of the Muisca heartland toward the valley of the Magdalena River.
The Tena region, which ranges from 2200 m above sea level down to about 700 m,
is specifically mentioned in sixteenth-century documents as a major source of
agricultural produce for the Bogotá chiefdom. If its agricultural resources were
increasingly intensively exploited as Muisca chiefdoms emerged and developed and
population levels in the high-elevation Muisca heartland grew, this will be
reflected in changing patterns of distribution of human occupation in the Tena
region. Such a result would provide stronger support for the historical accounts
of one of the economic foundations of Muisca chiefly power than has been
forthcoming from archaeological investigations of other aspects of Muisca
economy. It would help to explain the relatively late but extremely rapid
development of the Muisca chiefdoms and to position these societies properly in
comparative analysis of the pathways toward the consolidation of political power
in general.&lt;br/&gt;This project will also have broader impacts. First, it
will make a vital contribution to the training of the doctoral candidate as well
as to undergraduate students from several Colombian universities who will take
part. Second it will contribute to the public appreciation of science through
presentations to local communities as well as provide information that will
enhance local authorities' efforts to protect their cultural heritage.