* 1241473
* Collaborative Research: Materials Characterization toward Understanding the Cleaning and Preservation of Painted Modern Art Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Anthony Lagalante, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 210,543.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, Professor Lagalante at
Villanova University and Professor Wolbers at University of Delaware will study
the composition, cleaning, and aging of water-borne emulsion polymer (acrylic)
paints. Since their introduction in the 1950s, the number of acrylic paintings
in major public institutions has grown almost exponentially and represent a
significant cultural asset, both in terms of their sheer monetary value and
their social, economic, and cultural significance. While acrylic polymer paints
have enabled artists to move aesthetically far from the traditional limitations
of oil paints, conservators face a cultural legacy replete with some of the
greatest challenges in terms of cleaning and preserving these treasures. The
collaborative research will 1) investigate the formulation of aqueous
microemulsions to remove "model" soils from artificially aged test paints
utilizing liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and 3D
microscopic imaging to evaluate the cleaning efficacy, 2) investigate the photo-
oxidation and speciation of surfactants of aged acrylic films using 2D
desorption electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (2D DESI-MS/MS) surface imaging
in combination with 2D electron paramagnetic resonance imaging (2D EPRI), and 3)
solicit conservator testing of optimized microemulsion cleaning solutions at
national and international workshops. The introduction of 2D DESI-MS/MS imaging
will be transformative in the museum conservation laboratory for molecular
imaging of artwork surfaces as well as find broader applicability for EPR
imaging in scientific fields outside the scope of the present proposal. A broad
outreach is planned to educate artists, cultural heritage scientists, museum
conservators, and paint manufacturers as to the best methods for creating,
protecting, exhibiting, and preserving modern painted surfaces.