* 1241654
* Cyber Defense for High School Students and Teachers (CDSAT)
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* John Fernandez, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2016
* USD 580,000.00

Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi (TAMU-CC), a Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI), is partnering with the Air Force Association's CyberPatriot
program to increase the production of cybersecurity
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the CDSAT project is to engage
high school students, teachers, and counselors in innovative, hands-on computer
security training and applied computer security competitions that will motivate
students to pursue degrees and careers in cybersecurity and information
assurance. The project's short-term strategy targets high school students,
teachers, and counselors in the South Texas region, which is more than 80
percent Hispanic, to increase the number of students, especially
underrepresented minorities and women, in TAMU-CC's undergraduate Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure program. The project's long-term strategy targets these
populations nationally to increase enrollment in cybersecurity programs at other
colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CDSAT project
is:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* creating and distributing operating system training
images with instructional narratives, security configuration steps, and scoring
engines, as well as stand-alone integrated competition environments, to support
the preparation of high school teams for competitions;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
hosting summer camps for students interested in cybersecurity and CyberPatriot,
including Women in Technology Security (WITS), a summer camp for high school
juniors and seniors that focuses on the development of cyber-defense skills and
the exploration of education and career options in cybersecurity and other STEM
fields;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* providing training to high school teachers to
increase engagement of students and teachers in cybersecurity competitions and
to enhance knowledge of cybersecurity degree programs and careers;
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* sponsoring workshops for high school counselors to
enhance their knowledge of cybersecurity, introduce them to the CyberPatriot
program, and provide them with promotional materials for distribution in their
schools.