* 1241255
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Do Parallel Patterns Arise from Parallel Processes?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Michael Dawson, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,373,582.00

This project will survey the taxonomic, genetic, and functional diversity of the
organisms found in marine lakes, and investigate the processes that cause gains
and losses in this biodiversity. Marine lakes formed as melting ice sheets
raised sea level after the last glacial maximum and flooded hundreds of inland
valleys around the world. Inoculated with marine life from the surrounding sea
and then isolated to varying degrees for the next 6,000 to 15,000 years, these
marine lakes provide multiple, independent examples of how environments and
interactions between species can drive extinction and speciation. Researchers
will survey the microbes, algae, invertebrates, and fishes present in 40 marine
lakes in Palau and Papua, and study how diversity has changed over time by
retrieving the remains of organisms preserved in sediments on the lake bottoms.
The project will test whether the number of species, the diversity of functional
roles played by organisms, and the genetic diversity within species increase and
decrease in parallel; whether certain species can greatly curtail diversity by
changing the environment; whether the size of a lake determines its
biodiversity; and whether the processes that control diversity in marine
organisms are similar to those that operate on
land.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because biodiversity underlies the ecosystem services
on which society depends, society has a great interest in understanding the
processes that generate and retain biodiversity in nature. This project will
also help conserve areas of economic importance. Marine lakes in the study
region are important for tourism, and researchers will work closely with
governmental and non-governmental conservation and education groups and with
diving and tourism businesses to raise awareness of the value and threats to
marine lakes in Indonesia and Palau. The project will reach out to the public by
developing a marine lakes website, a tourist booklet and posters for Papua, and
a student club that promotes scholarship, professional development, and
evidence-based public education. The project will contribute to scientific
infrastructure by providing online access to specimens and associated metadata,
and content for the prize-winning website of the Museum of Paleontology at the
University of California at Berkeley. Finally, the project will help build the
workforce for science by involving early career scientists and by training
undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher.