* 1241136
* Dimensions US-China:   Disentangling the Components of Tree Biodiversity: Integrating Phylogenies, Functional Traits and Transcriptomes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Nathan Swenson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Temperate and tropical forests contain a significant proportion of our planet's
biodiversity, and they provide important ecosystem services that include climate
regulation. Despite their importance, the processes that produce and maintain
biodiversity within and among forested ecosystems remain poorly understood. This
lack of understanding applies to diverse tropical and subtropical forests, and
also to less diverse temperate forests. Further, the insights we do have about
forest diversity primarily concern species diversity; far less is known about
the processes regulating the phylogenetic, functional and genetic dimensions of
biodiversity that are likely to be more closely related to ecosystem
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patterns of phylogenetic, genetic, and functional
diversity, and their roles in maintaining biological diversity, will be examined
in temperate and subtropical forests in the United States and in China. A
combination of experimental and observational research will lead to a new
approach - termed community functional phylogenomics - that should provide
detailed insights into the causes and consequences of the levels of biodiversity
in forests. The research will inform forest management, it will strengthen
collaboration between researchers in the United States and China, and the
project will fund a joint training workshop for graduate students and early
career scientists in both countries.