* 1241709
* SFS (Scholarship Track):  Renewal:   An Interdisciplinary Information Assurance Curriculum
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Thomas Cusick, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,873,952.00

University at Buffalo (UB) - The State University of New York is supporting four
additional cohorts of undergraduate and graduate students in Information
Assurance (IA) as a continuation of their existing Federal Cyber Service:
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique feature of
this program is the interdisciplinary approach by the departments of computer
science &amp; engineering, mathematics and management sciences, and the law
school with the goal of driving students to become successful INFOSEC problem
solvers. It is planned to develop a broad-based IA program by considering
security of smartphones, computer forensics and security and privacy of social
networks at both undergraduate and graduate levels. By taking advantage of the
interdisciplinary nature of the curriculum, the program will educate
cybersecurity specialists in both technical and managerial tracks under one
umbrella. UB has 15 NSTISSI 4011 &amp; 4013-accredited IA courses which form the
basis of a certificate that is a requirement for all IA scholars in addition to
their basic academic degrees. UB being a Center of Academic Excellence in IA
Research also provides unique opportunities for the research project which is a
part of the certificate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is having an immediate
impact on cybersecurity capabilities of the federal workforce by providing
highly qualified IA professionals trained in an interdisciplinary setting. The
PIs have worked with community colleges in the region and conducted several
cyber security awareness workshops. In order to help increase the diversity of
IA professionals in the Federal workforce, this program is placing emphasis on
recruiting women students and members of other underrepresented groups. Several
minority students have interned in this program and several others have
graduated with IA training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SFS project involves the
participation of Erie Community College and Genesee Community College.