* 1241651
* Collaborative Project:   Capacity Building in Mobile Security Through Curriculum and Faculty Development
* EHR,DGE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Kai Qian, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 10/31/2016
* USD 209,981.00

This is a Collaborative Project consisting of two awards: NSF Award No. 1241651
to the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga and NSF Award No. 1241670 to
Tuskegee University.

The security of mobile computing is vital to the growing army of mobile device
users. Educational materials and curricula focusing on mobile security are still
sparse. In this project, four universities--the University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga, Tuskegee University, Southern Polytechnic State University, and the
University of Cincinnati--are collaboratively building research and education
capacity in mobile security through curriculum development, curriculum
enhancement, faculty professional development, and partnership development.

The investigators are developing a course on mobile security, including teaching
materials and hands-on labs and learning exercises; developing transferable
modules that cover key topics in mobile security (secure coding, cryptography,
security architecture, network security, web security, and security policy and
management) and contain hands-on labs; integrating the modules into existing
computer science and information assurance courses such as Operating Systems and
Network Security; and hosting workshops to disseminate the curriculum materials
to faculty at other institutions.

Through these efforts, the project aims to build and strengthen curricula,
student learning, and faculty collaboration and partnerships. The modular nature
of the developed materials will aid their wide dissemination and usage, and all
of the materials can be adopted in multiple disciplines, such as computer
science, software engineering, information technology, and business.