* 1241327
* Scaling Up:   Joint Workshops on Continental-Scale Population and Community Ecology and Education
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Clifford Duke, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 170,272.00

Opportunities to address new scientific questions at continental scales have
been growing enormously over the past decade or so, as new networks and
knowledgebases are developed and deployed at a rapid rate. While ecosystem
ecologists are used to addressing questions on such scales (productivity of
biomes, global nitrogen cycles), population and community ecologists have less
experience working at these spatial scales. The award provides funds to support
two joint, co-occurring workshops, one for early-career population and community
ecologists to develop research plans for continental scale questions on
population and community ecology, and the other for undergraduate students to
explore ways to apply continental and regional scale knowledgebases and tools to
environmental policy issues. The proposed workshops would bring large scale data
and analytical tools to the attention of young career scientists and
undergraduates in population and community ecology. Practitioners at landscape
and ecosystem levels are more comfortable with these tools, but population and
community ecologists need to be encourages to explore questions at larger scales
than plots and transects. The award will enable a broader movement in ecology
towards the use of networks, global knowledgebases and distributed public data.
The workshops will provide training, ideas, and collaborative network for
students and early career scientists who wish to 'scale-up' in the questions
addressed in community and population ecology.