* 1241970
* ASM-NSF Leaders Inspiring Networks and Knowledge (LINK): a Program to Build Bridges, Communities, and Career Competencies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Amy Chang, American Society For Microbiology
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Crane
* 07/31/2017
* USD 999,638.00

A challenge for advancing science for the public good is building connections
between the investigators in the lab and the educators and students in the
classroom. The American Society for Microbiology (ASM) seeks to create the ASM-
NSF Leaders Inspiring Networks and Knowledge (LINK) Program, a structured
mentoring initiative that would build and sustain connections between NSF
scientists and the student and early-career participants of two national STEM
education conferences: the Annual Biomedical Research Conference for Minority
Students (ABRCMS) and the Annual ASM Conference for Undergraduate Educators
(ASMCUE). Under guidance from NSF investigators (mentors), the LINK program will
increase the capabilities of conference participants (mentees) to compete
successfully in emerging and interdisciplinary areas of the molecular, cellular,
and microbial biosciences. The initiative objectives are to:

1. Increase understanding about NSF opportunities in emerging areas of the
molecular, cellular, and microbial biosciences, 2. Develop mentee skills to
compete successfully for resources and expertise in emerging and
interdisciplinary areas of the molecular, cellular, and microbial biosciences,
and 3. Develop a robust community of scientists actively engaged in mentoring,
networking, and collaborating.

For objective 1, the program requires that NSF investigators attend ABRCMS and
ASMCUE beginning in 2012 and continuing for four years. Each conference will
offer the NSF a cost-effective venue to highlight its programs, research, and
scientists. Each will also offer a means to connect with beginning investigators
and other scientists from a diversity of backgrounds and levels.

For objective 2, LINK will address a gap in graduate and postdoctoral training
that goes beyond scientific competency and is collectively referred to as career
competency. Career competency skills include those necessary for communications,
interpersonal relationships, teaching, mentoring, management, leadership, and
ethics. The LINK program will provide mentees an environment to practice and
strengthen these skills under the close guidance of NSF mentors. In a series of
well-coordinated activities, mentors and mentees will connect, share ideas, and
collaborate before, during, and after ABRCMS and ASMCUE.

For objective 3, the ASM proposes four coordinated, complementary activities:
(i) orientation and reflection sessions at ABRCMS and ASMCUE, (ii) creation of a
dedicated LINK registry and listserv, (iii) ongoing listserv homework and
activities that keep mentors and mentees engaged and on task, and (iv) creation
of LINK mentorship grants that will support up to 12 mentor-mentee pairs per
year.

Intellectual Merit. The LINK program will address a challenge in connecting two
NSF purposes: accelerating and enhancing scientific discovery and broadening the
participation of students and educators in the emerging fields of bioscience
research. Timely advancing of science for the public good requires many bridges
to connect scientists to educators and students. The proposed program seeks to
build such a bridge through ABRCMS and ASMCUE, two national STEM education
conferences, and to provide the resulting community with support through
specific, structured LINK activities.

Broader Impacts. In the program?s second year, it is anticipated that at least
250 ABRCMS and ASMCUE mentees will participate in LINK activities and 20% of
this pool (50 participants) will submit their first grant within 24 months of
attending the conferences. By 2016, the program will identify at least 750
mentees who are enrolled in LINK activities and exploring opportunities with NSF
and ASM mentors. It is anticipated that about 150 mentees will submit grants to
NSF or form research collaborations with a current NSF investigator before the
program's conclusion. It is also anticipated that the LINK program?s structured-
mentoring activities will highlight career competencies and best practices in
mentoring. Finally, the initiative will serve as a role model for other life
science professional societies to embrace structured mentoring programs for
their members.