* 1241930
* Collaborative Research and NEON: MSB Category 2: PalEON - a PaleoEcological Observatory Network to Assess Terrestrial Ecosystem Models
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Neil Pederson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2015
* USD 441,858.00

Because of the slow pace of terrestrial ecosystem processes, including the slow
generation time, growth rate, and decomposition rate of trees, the impact of
changing climate and disturbance on forests plays out over hundreds of years.
For this reason, terrestrial ecosystem models are used to anticipate the
centennial scale projections of forest response to environmental change. Current
terrestrial ecosystem model predictions vary widely and results have large
statistical uncertainties. Furthermore, testing and calibration of these models
relies on short term (sub-daily to decadal) data that fail to capture longer
term trends and infrequent extreme events. The capacity of ecosystem models for
scientific inference and long-term prediction would be greatly improved if
uncertainties can be reduced through rigorous testing against observational
data. PalEON is an interdisciplinary team of paleoecologists, statisticians, and
modelers that have partnered to rigorously synthesize longer term
paleoecological data and incorporate into ecosystem models to provide a deeper
understanding of past dynamics and to use this knowledge to improve long-term
forecasting capabilities.

Funds are provided to address four objectives and associated research questions:
1) Validation: How well do ecosystem models simulate decadal-to-centennial
dynamics when confronted with past climate change, and what limits model
accuracy? 2) Initialization: How sensitive are ecosystem models to
initialization state and equilibrium assumptions? Do data-constrained
simulations of centennial-scale dynamics improve 20thcentury simulations? 3)
Inference: Was the terrestrial biosphere a carbon sink or source during the
Little Ice Age and Medieval Climate Anomaly? and 4) Improvement: How can
parameters and processes responsible for data-model divergences be improved? The
data synthesis will include wide range of ecosystems, encompasses past climate
variations that were large enough to affect tree growth rates, disturbance
regimes, and forest demography, and leverages available paleodata. The synthesis
will include 1) fossil pollen and Public Land Survey data to reconstruct forest
composition, 2) sedimentary charcoal, stand-age and firescar indicators of past
disturbance regimes, 3) tree-ring records of tree growth rates, and 4) multiple
paleoclimatic proxies and paleoclimatic simulations. Bayesian hierarchical
statistical models will be used to reconstruct key ecological variables and
their associated uncertainty estimates. A standardized model intercomparison
involving 13 ecosystem modeling groups will be used to evaluate the robustness
of the modeling approach.

Three areas will be emphasized for PalEON's broader impacts. Community Building:
The PalEON research community has doubled over the past 10 months, with more
than 60 participants now. It is anticipated to nearly another doubling over the
next five years, and the funds will allow the ongoing community-building via
annual large meetings and task-oriented workshops. Interdisciplinary Training
and Mentoring: A new generation of researchers will be trained to naturally
conceptualize large spatial and temporal scales and to approach ecological
forecasting as an integrative activity spanning data collection to model
prediction. Eight postdocs and seven graduate students will be involved in
proposed PalEON research, with multiple opportunities for cross-training.
Additionally, the PalEON Summer Short Course provides an intensive cross-
training experience for young scientists in all areas encompassed by PalEON. The
2012 course will be followed by courses in 2014 and 2016. Building Scientific
Infrastructure: All PalEON datasets will be made publicly available upon
publication, as will our new data-assimilation methods and model intercomparison
protocols. Tools will be developed for optimal site selection (given the goal of
reducing the integrated prediction uncertainty about past vegetation and climate
over space and time) and will distribute a publicly available webtool version
that will be linked directly to the Neotoma Paleoecology Database.