* 1241029
* Dimensions US-BIOTA-Sao Paulo: Assembly and evolution of the Amazonian biota and its environment: an integrated approach
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Robert Guralnick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2015
* USD 211,066.00

Amazonia is Earth's most iconic center of biological diversity and endemism and
is among the most important terrestrial biomes due to its contributions to
global systems ecology. This project seeks to answer an overarching question in
biodiversity science: How was the modern Amazonian biota and its environment
assembled across space and time? The research is designed to understand the
evolutionary and environmental-ecological history of late Neogene-Recent
Amazonia through a comparative approach that integrates across the disciplines
of systematics, population biology, ecosystem structure and function, geology,
Earth systems modeling and remote sensing, and environmental history. The
project also investigates how biotic and environmental change over this time-
period influenced Amazonian functional diversity in biogeochemical flows, and
how these, in turn, shaped the dimensions of biodiversity seen today as well as
the history of global-scale changes in biogeochemical cycling.

The project, which is a collaboration with Brazilian scientists and funding
agencies, represents the most integrative examination of Amazonian biodiversity
and its history to date. The approaches taken describe a methodological template
for analyzing information about the history of biotic and environmental change
across large, ecologically complex landscapes that can be generalized to other
systems. The project creates a large framework for formal and informal education
including the training of students, development of a major museum exhibit on
Amazonia, workshops for K-12 STEM teachers, publications in professional
educational journals, and a web portal, The Evolutionary Encyclopedia of
Amazonian Biodiversity, that will make all results available to the public, as
well as serve as an informational platform about Amazonian biodiversity and its
global importance. This award is being co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.