* 1242566
* LTREB-Renewal: Collaborative Research: Behavioral and demographic responses of migratory birds to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Terence Sillett, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 115,680.00

This long-term research project examines the potential impacts of climate change
on migratory birds breeding in northern hardwood forests of the northeastern US.
The goals are to determine whether observed behavioral and demographic
adjustments are adequate to compensate for climate-induced changes in bird
habitat quality. By documenting climate differences over time and space and
through long-term food supplementation experiments, the researchers will examine
key choices that birds make in response to climatic variation. These choices
have important effects on the number of offspring an individual produces as well
as on individual survival. The project is being conducted in the Hubbard Brook
Experimental Forest, NH.

In today's rapidly changing world, forests and the birds that inhabit them face
a multitude of environmental challenges. Because migratory birds are keen
indicators of changing climate, biodiversity, and the health of public lands,
results from this study will inform policy and decision makers as well as
conservation efforts. Data from this study will be made available to researchers
around the world, and results will be featured in the popular press, on public
television, and presented in diverse public venues. The project includes strong
training components for undergraduate and graduate students as well as for
primary and secondary school teachers.