* 1242233
* Workshop: Functional Imaging for Regenerative Medicine, May 31 - June 1, 2012, Gaithersburg, MD
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

1242233/ Vunjak-Novakovic

This award supported by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering
Program along with the Biophotonics Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering
Environmental and Transport Division of NSF will fund a workshop on 'Functional
imaging for regenerative medicine (FIRM)' that will identify areas of
opportunity, and stimulate new collaborations and applications of cutting edge
imaging methods in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine (TERM). The
meeting outcomes are expected to help shape the future of tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine research. Session Topics will include: (1) Cellular
Function in vitro: High Resolution Single Cell Imaging, (2) Cellular Function in
vivo: In Vivo Cell Imaging, (3) Tissue Grafts: Macroscopic Imaging, and (4)
Regenerating Whole Organs: Whole Body Imaging.

Intellectual Merit - The main objective of the workshop is to foster cutting-
edge imaging for application in TERM. Toward this goal, the workshop will bring
together the leaders from the TERM and imaging communities for cross-
fertilization of ideas and practical approaches. The workshop aims to accelerate
development and adoption of advanced imaging methodologies and tools by
identifying current needs of tissue engineers, from the molecular to the
macroscopic scales, and consider approaches to meet those needs, with a focus on
functional, noninvasive methods appropriate for in vitro and in vivo TERM work.
The participants include members of academia, industry, and government with
interests in TERM, imaging, and especially the application of imaging methods in
TERM.

Broader Impacts - Tissue Science and Engineering uses physical, chemical,
biological, and engineering processes to control and direct the aggregate
behavior of cells. Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine therapies have
tremendous promise for generating non-immunogenic organ replacements or
specifically promote healing and regeneration of tissues. Already there have
been demonstrations that stem cell- and bioengineering-based strategies can be
used in-vivo to regenerate heart, nerve, pancreatic islets, bladder and lung
tissues, with autologous skin replacements under development. Additionally, stem
cell and bioengineering technologies are also being employed toward generating
in vitro three dimensional model systems that mimic human tissues and organs
closely enough to be used for toxicity screening and drug development. While
these therapies and model systems show exceptional promise, there remain
significant barriers to their commercialization and widespread use to a large
extent because of the difficulties in precise real-time monitoring and
manipulation of these processes in vitro and in vivo in time and space. A
particular challenge is to be able to evaluate cell potency and what
characteristics of cells in culture are predictors of their fate in vivo. Novel
multimodal imaging methods will be important for understanding the in vitro - in
vivo transition.