* 1242544
* Transforming The Relationship Between Science And Society: The Manhattan Project And Its Legacy
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Cynthia Kelly, Atomic Heritage Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 07/31/2013
* USD 65,510.00

The Atomic Heritage Foundation is conducting a two-day conference in Washington,
D.C. that brings together scholars, researchers and informal science education
professionals to explore new approaches to engage the public in issues at the
interface of science and society. The conference will consider recent
scholarship about the legacy of the Manhattan Project during and post WWII and
address how questions about science and society raised by the development of the
atomic bomb can inform and be integrated with contemporary issues. Also
attending the conference will be representatives from the American Science and
Energy Museum in Oak Ridge, TN, the Los Alamos Historical Society in Los Alamos,
NM, the National Museum of Nuclear Science and History in Albuquerque, NM, and
the Columbia River Exhibition on Science, History and Technology in Richland,
WA. This exploratory workshop is intended both to advance the inter-disciplinary
scholarship and to generate innovative ideas and recommendations for the
development of exhibits, programs and media about this topic and its relevance
to the 21st Century. The focus is not about presenting the underlying science of
nuclear fission or energy, for example, but speaks to the greater challenges
that emerge when presenting issues raised by science in the broader context of
history, society and culture. Given the goals and inter-disciplinary nature of
the topic and the diversity of the expertise of participating professionals, the
workshop is being supported by the Informal Science Education program in the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR) and the Science, Technology
and Society Program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE).