* 1242180
* Understanding stratification and wake evolution due to thermal fields for wind-turbine array over a rough-terrain
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Kiran Bhaganagar, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 06/30/2014
* USD 99,964.00

The University of Texas?San Antonio will initiate a study of the interaction
between atmospheric boundary layers and wind farms over rough terrain. This
project is related to and derived from the UTSA Centers of Research Excellence
in Science and Technology award (HRD 0932339) entitled "Integrating High
Performance Computing in Research and Education for Simulation, Visualization
and Real-Time Prediction".

The PI will conduct a fundamental study to improve the understanding of
stratification and wake evolution due to thermal fields for wind-turbine arrays
laid out over a rough terrain. She will develop a multi-scale framework to
understand the key external effects between atmospheric winds and wind turbine
farms. The project will develop a new partnership between UTSA, particularly a
junior female faculty member, and the National Wind Resource Center at Texas
Tech University in Lubbock, Texas.

Intellectual Merit The proposed study will advance the state of the art in the
computational simulation of wind farms by accurately accounting for the key
external factors affecting the wind farm performance. Analysis from the
numerical simulations and existing experimental and field data will provide
improved understanding of interplay of the physical processes between the wind
turbine-generated turbulence and the atmospheric boundary layer, thus making a
significant stride in fundamental science of wind engineering. Specifically, the
team will develop fundamental multi-scale framework to understand the key
external effects: (a) stratification (b) developing atmospheric thermal boundary
layer interaction with a wind farm and (c) wake-wake interaction, and (d)
complex topography. The objectives of the current study are (a) to develop a
large eddy simulation tool that can accurately account for the key external
factors affecting the wind farm performance, (b) to understand the interactions
of the wind turbine generated flow structures and stratified atmospheric thermal
boundary layer under stable and unstable conditions, (c) use the numerically
generated data and existing laboratory and field measurements to develop an
understanding of the complex interaction of the turbulence due to buoyancy,
surface roughness and wind turbine structures.

Broader Impact The project has direct relevance to the development of renewable
energy sources in the US. The results could help to make wind energy more
accessible in wider terrains, providing more realistic predictive tools to serve
as guides for the future of wind-farm installations. The project will develop a
joint course in wind energy technology to be taught simultaneously at UTSA and
TTU. The project will help in the education, motivation and mentoring of
students at UTSA, who are predominantly Hispanic. The PI is a female faculty
member in engineering at UTSA in a field where role models for women are lacking
in many quarters of academe.