* 1242525
* I-Corps:  ExpressionBlast
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Ziv Bar-Joseph, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

New experimental methods for collecting high throughput data are revolutionizing
biology and clinical studies and are now routinely used for pre-clinical drug
discovery. Several large public and proprietary databases collect these types of
data, however this data is largely unstructured and is difficult to utilize. The
proposed effort is developed as a search engine for genomic data aimed at
pharmaceutical companies, biotechnology companies, academic institutes, and
medical centers allowing them to utilize large volumes of condition-specific
data from public repositories, and also integrate it with proprietary, in-house
data. The framework automatically downloads, parses, and annotates data from
different repositories and is complemented with an easy-to-use web interface.
The team created a large collection of automatically-annotated data and the
platform offers search capabilities within and across species as well as
additional advanced analysis options. These can provide new validation for
current experimental results as well as new research directions. In particular,
drug discovery is usually conducted on lower mammals before it is applied to
human, hence the ability to easily perform cross species comparisons can reduce
drug development cost and time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology
addresses the classic problem of dealing with heterogeneity in unstructured data
and integrating massive amounts of data from different sources into a seamless
framework. The unique challenge here is a function of the domain (biological and
pre-clinical data). The team's goal is to create a system that manages
heterogeneity in more than a single aspect and provides vertical integration
that allows the data to be searchable and comparable on many levels. This
integration is made possible through the use of computational text mining and
machine learning methods that are able to derive high quality information from
the free text in order to automatically categorize and annotate the large
volumes of data. This work also provides a holistic approach for the
incorporation of new analysis tools for genomic data, offering standard services
and benchmarks that can significantly shorten development time and increase
usage. The ability to easily query large volumes of genomic data can facilitate
basic research of cell processes by academic researchers and the discovery of
new drugs or repurposing of old drugs by pharmaceutical companies. In addition,
large medical centers are starting to collect genomics and genetics data for
individual patients aiming to provide personalized medicine tailored
specifically to each individual. The ability to compare results of an individual
patient to a large collection of patients and their clinical records is a key to
finding better suited treatments for that individual leading to reduced
hospitalization time and fewer complications. Lastly, the software and methods
created here are intended to be reusable for any science moving from individual
lab practices to a shared, global collaboratory system. If successfully
deployed, this technology has the potential to make a significant impact across
a wide span of the health care industry.