* 1242444
* Buenos Aires Semester in Computability, Complexity and Randomness
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Joseph Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2014
* USD 44,999.00

The Buenos Aires Semester in Computability, Complexity and Randomness will be an
international gathering of Mathematicians and Computer Scientists from January
to June 2013. It will be held at the Departamento de Computación, Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales de la Universidad de Buenos Aires. We anticipate
between eight and ten researchers will be in residence for the entire period,
accompanied by a similar number of graduate students. We also expect shorter
visits, of two to four weeks, by another eight to ten researchers. There will be
an intense and sustained research effort in computability theory, randomness,
computable structures and reverse mathematics. The semester will bring together
many of the area's most active researchers over an extended interval, allowing
for a level of collaboration that is not usually possible and the accelerated
progress that arises from such continuous interaction. In addition to the
research effort, there will be a focus on training graduate students and
disseminating recent research. We will organize a graduate-level course on
Combinatorics, Complexity and Logic taught by Ted Slaman; a topics seminar in
which all of the long term participants, including the graduate students, will
take turns presenting advanced material; a weekly seminar on individual research
interests and related open problems; and a regional seminar that will feature
South American logicians. The NSF funding will primarily be used to support the
participation of junior US researchers: graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
and junior faculty.