* 1242957
* Collaborative Research:  Advancing extreme value analysis of high impact climate and weather events
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Richard Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2019
* USD 110,725.00

1243102&lt;br/&gt;Dan Cooley, Colorado State
University&lt;br/&gt;1243333&lt;br/&gt;J. Keith Gilless, University of
California-Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;1242957&lt;br/&gt;Richard Smith, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; One of the most important
questions in climate science is how extreme weather changes as a result of
natural and anthropogenic forcings. At this project's core is a goal to address
three areas that are critical to understanding extreme events, but whose methods
are not yet developed enough to answer impact-relevant questions. First, the
investigators advance and develop multivariate statistical methods that can
describe and model extreme events that arise from a combination of
meteorological factors that may or may not individually be extreme. Second, the
investigators advance spatial downscaling methods to be applicable to studying
extreme phenomena that occur at spatial scales not resolved by climate models.
Third, the investigators put the study of detection of changes in extremes and
attribution of extreme events on a solid statistical foundation, and apply the
spatial and multivariate techniques to this area. The participants collaborate
with social scientists in incorporating the improved methodology into models
that analyze the impact of extreme weather events on agricultural production and
the forestry sector for specific regions of the US. They also develop risk
assessment measures that take into account possible increases in the frequency
of extreme weather events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Extreme weather can have
profound consequences for the well-being of individuals, societies, and natural
systems. This project studies several aspects of weather extremes and how the
nature of extreme events is likely to change under an altered climate. The
project develops probability-based measures of risk that take account of the
fact that impacts of extreme weather events cannot be predicted with certainty.
Another feature of the project is that high-impact events often arise from a
combination of extreme weather conditions. For example, wildfires may arise from
a combination of heat, wind, and lack of moisture; we therefore need methods of
analysis that take into account multiple meteorological variables. Most of the
methods being developed rely on large computer programs known as climate models
to project future climatic events. However, climate models often work on time
and space scales that are much larger than the high-impact events we are
interested in; therefore, data from climate models must be translated to the
scales of interest. The specific focus on extreme events is different from most
current research using climate models for the detection and attribution of
climate change. Detecting changes in extreme behavior is essential for risk
assessment, as risk-related quantities such as the 100-year flood, fire,
burning, and heat indexes are estimated based on data that may no longer be
relevant if extreme behavior has changed. The determination of the impact of
such changes at a broad range of socio-economic levels is needed to determine
appropriate societal responses to extreme weather events associated with climate
change. In addition to university-based investigators, the project includes
Michael Wehner and collaborators at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. who
are an intrinsic part of the team. University-based investigators are funded by
NSF while the Department of Energy supports LBNL investigators.