* 1242155
* Collaborative Research:  Atmospheric Mixed Phase Chemistry for Improved Climate Predictions:  Field Measurements and Modeling of the Southern Oxidant and Aerosol Study
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Ann Marie Carlton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 311,890.00

This project will investigate processes associated with the natural emissions of
biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs) that lead to the formation of
secondary organic aerosol (SOA). Of particular interest is the assessment of
organic compounds derived from BVOC oxidation that are water-soluble, CCN-active
and react readily with the OH radical in controlled laboratory experiments to
create low-volatility products that may form secondary aerosol via multiphase
organic chemistry. Continuous measurements of SOA chemical and physical
properties will be made during the Southern Oxidant and Aerosol Study (SOAS) to
be conducted near Centreville Alabama in the summer of 2013. This study will
focus on the role of particle phase liquid water and particle pH in determining
SOA mass. The data will be analyzed to elucidate the linkages between bio- and
anthropogenic emissions on multiphase chemistry, and estimate the magnitude of
the contribution of multiphase pathways to SOA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is needed in order to improve understanding of local and global climate
and air quality. The results may help explain whether the anomalous temperature
trend in the Southeast, which has not warmed like other regions in response to
global climate change, is due to interactions among biogenic and anthropogenic
emissions that can affect regional climate through formation of secondary
organic aerosol. During the field campaign, there will be many activities
supporting science communication and education.