* 1242259
* Pan American Advanced Sciences Institute On Geophysical Research: New Tools and Techniques for Earthquake Hazard Analysis &amp; Mitigation; Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, July
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* David Simpson, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 01/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in July 2013 in
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. The organizing committee for this PASI
includes the Principal Investigator, David W. Simpson (Incorporated Research
Institutions in Seismology IRIS), as well as Jay Pulliam (Baylor University,
USA), John Louie (University of Nevada, Reno, USA), Olga Cabello (IRIS), Morgan
Moschetti (U.S. Geological Survey), Michael Schmitz (FUNVISIS, Venezuela),
Lyndon Brown (University of the West Indies, Mona,Jamaica), Carlos Valdes
Gonzalez (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico), Walter Salazer (University
of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago), Eugenio Polanco
(Universidad Autonoma de Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic), Marino Protti
(Universidad Nacional de Costa Rica), Victor Huerfano (University of Puerto
Rico, Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, USA), and Mauricio Mora (Universidad de Costa
Rica).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institute will address modern strategies for
earthquake hazard analysis with a focus on techniques for seismic site
characterization, which is a critical component of lessening earthquake hazards.
The basic methodology is comprised of source modeling, wave propagation, and
local site characterization, which consists of measuring the local geological
and geotechnical factors that potentially affect earthquake shaking at a
particular site. This PASI will discuss all three components of earthquake
hazard analysis but will focus on site characterization because it has been
undergoing rapid development in response to new technologies and new datasets.
The institute offers an opportunity to spread awareness of the new techniques to
researchers and practitioners in Middle America. A small field experiment, will
serve as an evaluation of a subset of techniques, and demonstrate practical data
acquisition, field logistics, and analysis strategies. Simple and effective
seismic site characterization is a vital component of hazard mitigation in
earthquake prone areas throughout the developing world. This PASI will
disseminate knowledge of earthquake hazard analysis strategies to a group of
junior seismologists, which they can put to use immediately in their own
countries. By so doing, it will also help to promote international research
collaborations. All data acquired during the PASI will be contributed to the
NSF-supported IRIS Data Management Center in Seattle, WA.