* 1242657
* EAGER: Tackling the Variations and Instability of Nanophotonic Interconnection Network via Architecture Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Rami Melhem, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 130,000.00

In current designs of computer chips, electrical wires are used for
communication between the different components of the chip. As technology scales
down into the nanometer domain, the signal delay and power consumption caused by
electrical wires start to dominate the overall delay and power consumption on
the chip, mainly because wires do not scale as well as other logic components. A
promising alternative to using electrical wires is to use optical waveguides for
communication. Using nanophotonics for on-chip communication may lead to faster
signal propagation, increased bandwidth density and reduced power consumption.
However, many fundamental challenges face the integration of optical devices
into commercial chips. This project addresses some of these challenges and its
success will have a significant impact on the semiconductor
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two major challenges addressed in this
project are process variations and thermal sensitivity of optical devices. The
former refers to the drifts in resonance wavelengths of optical devices due to
fabrication errors during the manufacturing process. The latter refers to
similar drifts that result during operation due to temperature fluctuations
within the chip. Both drifts are inevitable with current technology and cause
the optical network to lose significant bandwidth. Instead of relying on device
level innovations, the proposed research takes an architectural approach to
endure and tolerate drifts in wavelength resonance. Specifically, it
investigates different techniques to maximize the effective bandwidth at run-
time in the presence of defects and changes in operating temperatures. These
techniques treat bandwidth as a resource that is allocated, on-demand, to
different nodes in a way that masks the resonance shifts of optical devices.
Since the aggregated available on-chip bandwidth is usually larger than the
instantaneous demand for bandwidth, the effect of the imperfect hardware is
mitigated by appropriately assigning wavelengths to nodes, thus offering a
reliable and near perfect optical communication layer to the other components of
the system.