* 1242268
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute on Manufacturing Innovation through Sustainable Design; Barranquilla, Colombia, July 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Ratna Babu Chinnam, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 12/31/2014
* USD 99,990.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place July 14-27, 2013 at
the Universidad del Norte in Barranquilla, Colombia. Organized by Dr. Ratna Babu
Chinnam, Professor of the Industrial &amp; Systems Engineering Department at
Wayne State University, the institute will focus on novel approaches in
sustainable manufacturing and design. The PASI will address the need for
fundamental research and holistic training on many different topics related to
sustainability, including materials, product design, production processes,
supply chain management, and tools for sustainable innovation. The discussion
will be integrated in a multidisciplinary fashion to nurture exploration of
future directions for new research collaborations and industrial applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institute is expected to enhance the infrastructure
for research and education on the PASI topics through collaborations developed
before, during, and beyond the activity, and by sharing resources. Additionally,
it will facilitate future relationships between international participants,
while promoting student exchanges in the Americas and an increase in the number
of visiting scholars from other countries at participating universities. The
nature of the PASI will also facilitate the participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering. Results from the PASI will be disseminated through an
institute website and journal publications.