* 1242519
* I-Corps:  Assessment of Commercial Viability of Electrochemical Flow Capacitors for Grid Scale Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Emin Caglan Kumbur, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This Innovation Corps (I-Corps) project aims to assess the commercial viability
and technological impact of a new energy storage concept called "electrochemical
flow capacitor" (EFC). This new storage concept takes the advantages of both
supercapacitors and flow batteries, and enables rapid charging/discharging
(i.e., fast system response with high power density), while decoupling energy
storage from the power output (i.e., scalable energy storage). At the core of
this technology is the utilization of a flowable carbon slurry as an active
material for capacitive storage. At the technical level, the team's goal in this
project will be to continue its ongoing efforts in establishing the enabling
science and technology necessary to address the critical scientific gaps related
to the capacitive charge storage in a flowable media. At the commercialization
level, the team's efforts will be placed on developing a portable bench-top
prototype to demonstrate the fundamental operation of the proposed concept and
benchmark performance and cost targets. The team's main goal will be to
establish a streamlined technology development process and formulate a strong
business case that will enable the team to secure third-party funding and
establish strategic alliances with interested parties for commercialization of
this new technology.

Rapid energy recovery and delivery is essential to enable better utilization of
fluctuating renewable sources, as well as to increase the efficiency of the
grid. To date, there is a great need for a large-scale energy storage system
that can effectively buffer large and rapid fluctuations in energy supply and
demand. The proposed technology has significant potential to overcome the major
challenges in grid-scale energy storage associated with conventional
technologies, enabling greater utilization of renewable energy sources, while
making the electrical grid more robust. Therefore, the new knowledge gained from
this work is expected to have a substantial impact on the crucial societal
challenge of renewable energy and will help transform the current practices
employed to address the rapidly growing global energy issues. Additionally, the
successful development of this technology can potentially result in the
formation of a start-up company, stimulation of private investments and
contribute to strengthening the U.S. position in new energy storage
technologies.