* 1242358
* I-Corps:  The Charge Tracker
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The buildup of electric charges on the surface of materials is frequently large
enough to cause electrostatic discharge (ESD). This is a serious problem in the
semiconductor and the electronic industry because ESD causes product damage
ranging from immediate failure to performance degradation and shortened
lifetimes. In 2010 the electronic manufacturing industry spent approximately
$950 MM in ESD prevention products. Currently electric field sensors are not
capable of monitoring people and work areas for the buildup of the charge that
leads to ESD. Therefore, industry focuses on ESD prevention without monitoring
charge buildup. With funding from NSF, the team developed a sensor capable of
measuring static electric fields vectors with high accuracy and sensitivity. The
designed and fabricated two versions of the sensor, one version is simpler the
other is more accurate. The sensor is being used in science and engineering
applications. It has been demonstrated to potential industrial partners with
positive results. Based on the feedback from these potential customers, the team
proposes to refine the platform and determine the viability of both versions as
commercial products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed charge sensor will
enable electronic manufacturers to identify ESD hazards and to address potential
problems at their sources, reducing expenses, and improving product quality and
productivity. The sensor will also be useful in the electrostatic painting
industry because the quality of applied paint depends on the electric fields
generated by painting robots. Another industrial application is the prevention
of ESD during the handling of flammables and explosives. Besides industrial
applications, there are many scientific applications. For example, there is
evidence that electric forces play an important role on the lifting of dust
particles from the surface. This is an important process because dust aerosols
play an important role on climate. If successfully deployed, the proposed sensor
has the potential to address multiple opportunities in industry and research.