* 1242069
* IIASA Young Scientists Summer Program: Climate Change Impacts on Power Plant Emissions, Air Quality and Health in India
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2012
* Vijay Limaye, Limaye                  Vijay
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2012
* USD 8,000.00

The proposed work as an International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA) Young Summer Scientist Program (YSSP) participant would augment recent
studies by quantifying future power plant emissions from anticipated hotter
summer conditions in India. The overarching goal of this work is to determine
populations in India most exposed to air pollution-related health risks in 2030.
The proposed research will advance knowledge by linking energy use, air quality,
and health impact data in a creative way. Expected results include estimations
of relative risk of adverse health outcomes due to exacerbated air pollution
levels, which will help inform future energy, climate, and health policies. The
YSSP participant will work with researchers at the International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis to disseminate research results with the aim of
improving climate, energy, and health intervention strategies. Risk estimates
will also be placed in the larger context of air pollution policy to estimate an
optimal emissions scenario balancing economic needs and health concerns.

The expected results from this research have clear benefits as broader impacts
to society: risk estimates will inform currently unaddressed consequences of
energy use. As urban expansion continues, the results will improve energy use
and health intervention planning by highlighting air pollution risks. In
addition to conducting this research with targeted policy applications, the YSSP
participant will engage with the university community after his return from
IIASA to further the reach of the project. The YSSP participant plans to work
with his advisor on a teaching module demonstrating how energy production,
climate, air quality, and human health are linked for a course on Health Impact
Assessment of Global Environmental Change. The YSSP participant is also a member
of a National Science Foundation Integrated Graduate Education and Research
Traineeship program which promotes sustainability and vulnerability research
across disciplines (Humans and the Global Environment, CHANGE). The Young
Scientists Summer Program at IIASA will allow him to undertake interdisciplinary
work and capitalize on the communication and leadership skills gained through
the IGERT experience.