* 1242122
* CREST Phase II: Cyber-ShARE Center of Excellence
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2020
* Aaron Velasco, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2020
* USD 5,099,436.00

The Cyber-ShARE ("Cyberinfrastructure for Sharing resources to Advance Research
and Education") Center of Excellence at the University of Texas at El Paso
(UTEP) was established in 2007 with a mission to advance education and research
through cyberinfrastructures that support information exchange and integration,
as well as collaborative interdisciplinary research. The Center conducts
research and prepares a workforce that can tackle some of the most challenging
problems confronting society. The interdisciplinary research at the Center has
resulted in tools and approaches that support scholarly interdisciplinary
collaboration by facilitating the ability to share knowledge, concepts,
approaches, and perspectives. As national leaders in the study of collaborative
science and engineering, the Center has developed and applied models of team-
based, cooperative learning, interdisciplinary teamwork, and knowledge
integration. Areas of advancement in cyberinfrastructure (CI) have been in data
management, data analysis, and virtual organizations in support of
collaboration. In particular, CI research has focused on scientists' ability to
document data collection and product development in ways that enable sharing and
reuse of scientific results by enhancing results with provenance and other
critical information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's crosscutting expertise
is in collaboration and collaborative environments, semantic-based approaches to
knowledge synthesis and representation (ontologies and provenance), and
propagation of uncertainty in integrated analyses. The subprojects through which
this expertise will transcend are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Knowledge
Representation, Negotiation and Integration: Linking Human and Machine Knowledge
Models through Semantics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Advancing Understanding of
Ecosystem Processes Using Cyberinfrastructure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3)
Integrated Analysis for Development of 3-D Models of Earth
Structure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-ShARE's research in analysis of climate
change impacts on the environment and the modeling of Earth's structure has
advanced through the Center's interdisciplinary approaches supported by CI. Our
environmental science group is advancing understanding of carbon flux in extreme
desert and arctic environments through innovative multi-scale data collection
and analysis, along with novel methods for minimizing error propagation and
ensuring data quality. Our geophysics research group is developing more accurate
models of the Rio Grande Rift System through computational approaches to data
integration and model fusion. The Center has developed novel tools that allow
researchers to more effectively analyze the large amounts of data being
collected through environmental and seismic sensor networks in these projects
and around our nation. Sensor data are critical for understanding short and long
term global change, enabling better understanding of the effects of climate
change on water and energy, and the effects of earth structure on earthquake
risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the next phase of funding, the Cyber-ShARE Center
will continue to conduct innovative, synergistic STEM research supported by CI
in the areas of environmental science and geosciences. Among a large number of
research questions to be investigated as part of the three subprojects are the
following: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can we create a machine understandable
representation of individual mental models and integrated conceptual frameworks
for interdisciplinary research, facilitated by advanced cyber-
infrastructure?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What factors control land-atmosphere
exchange of carbon, water and energy in desert and arctic terrestrial ecosystems
and over what spatial and time scales?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can Semantic Web
technologies be used to enhance open access environmental data sharing,
discovery, retrieval, integration, analysis, and
visualization?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is the evolution of the Rio Grande Rift
and how does this relate to other active rifts, for example, the East Africa
Rift System?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can scientists understand, believe and accept
new insights in the tectonic evolution of the southwest (and other regions) that
were produced through the development of CI and CI-based applications that can
seamlessly integrate and optimally fuse existing information
sources?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center is critical to broadening training and
education of interdisciplinary, CI-knowledgeable citizens, including STEM
students who receive advanced degrees and represent the 21st century
demographics. Compared to the national averages for graduate students in geology
and environmental and computer science (NSF 2008), Cyber-ShARE students are
82.7% Hispanic while the national average is 4.7%, and 36.5% female while the
national average is 30.8%. The Center aims to reach even higher levels of
involvement of citizens from underrepresented groups during Phase II. The Center
will extend the network of Cyber-ShARE collaborations to include other major CI
projects, international collaborators, and industry partners.