* 1242451
* EAGER: Cluster Detection in Graphs for Noisy, Incomplete Biological Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Susan Epstein, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The integration of gene annotations and omics (e.g., genomics, proteomics,
metabolomics) data can provide important insights into noisy and incomplete
biological data. Such data is often also on a scale presents computational
challenges to many traditional algorithms. This project exploits Foretell, a
local search algorithm originally created to accelerate solvers on large
constraint satisfaction problems. Here Foretell is used to detect complex
relationships among genes in context-specific protein-protein interaction (PPI)
networks, with guidance from human experts. This is a novel, and potentially
transformative, approach to provide new insights into the molecular and cellular
mechanisms of fundamental biological processes. This flexible, innovative
project is ideal for noisy, incomplete genomic data. It uses repeated local
search guided by empirical biological knowledge to explore large weighted graphs
under human direction. It provides users with meaningful feedback to reformulate
their search for complex relationships among genes in context-specific PPI
networks, and to devise new weight schemes to find them. Expected outcomes
include a knowledge base of recurring clusters in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
the weight schemes used to detect them, a more flexible algorithm that detects
and tabulates cluster features and provides meaningful feedback to the user, and
a tool whose output suggests additional biological experiments. This project
addresses, both in its design and its implementation, important questions in the
discovery and application of computational approaches to biological
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge derived from this project will be
broadly applicable and well promulgated through publication and through a web
site. The resultant knowledge base will support other researchers? detection of
combinations of interacting genes and the interpretation of their results. While
it advances discovery and understanding, this project will support
interdisciplinary collaboration, disseminate its results broadly, and promote
research by students in a predominantly female, minority-serving institution.