* 1242938
* LIVE DEMONSTRATION EVENT at the14TH GEC in BOSTON
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 05/31/2013
* USD 45,722.00

The Global Environment for Network Innovations 'GENI' is a suite of research
infrastructure supported by the NSF that is rapidly emerging in prototype form
across the United States. GENI aims to transform experimental research in
networking and distributed systems, as well as emerging research into very large
socio-technical systems, by providing a suite of infrastructure for 'at scale'
experiments in future internets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GENI Project Office
organizes three major GENI Engineering conferences (GEC) per year, in which the
entire GENI community meets to review current status, and to decide on
subsequent steps in GENI's evolution. These GECs include community-based working
groups leading GENI's design and planning, and demonstrating progress with live
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIT is hosting the fourteenth edition of the
GENI Engineering conference. This project supports organizing the demo session
to be held on the MIT Campus. About 400 leading researchers and Ph.D. students
from diverse US institutions will gather at MIT to showcase their ideas and
results. The campus venue has an existing 10GB link which will provide access to
the National Lambda Rail (NLR) network in addition to MIT's more standard
Internet services. Each demo will be provided with 1G wired connection to the
GENI infrastructure. Additionally, because MIT and its Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) provide wireless access to all
guests, wireless will be available for demonstrations and participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The GEC Demo sessions provide graduate
students with both an opportunity to demonstrate and explain their work to the
GENI community prior to formal publication. It helps new graduate students
understand what is being done with GENI and encourages cross-university
cooperation by providing a method for students and faculty to discover who
amongst their peers at other institutions might be valuable resources. It also
supports outreach to new community members, including the emerging US Ignite
community.