* 1242216
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute on Methods in Computational Discovery for Multidimensional Problem Solving; Universidad del Valle, Guatemala, July 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Mauricio Carrillo-Tripp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 10/31/2013
* USD 99,986.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place July 2013 at the
Universidad del Valle in Guatemala. Organized by Dr. Marshall S. Poole,
Professor in the Department of Communications at the University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, the PASI aims to introduce junior researchers to methods in
computation-based discovery (CBD). In searching for solutions to major problems
(e.g., biodiversity, modeling of natural systems, water ecology, and others),
researchers across the natural and social sciences as well as the humanities and
arts are generating massive and/or highly complex data sets that extend well-
beyond humans' capacities to perceive or analyze without sophisticated
technological augmentation. CBD allows researchers to gather, transform, and
analyze data from a range of sources, including, for example, sensors, video
archives, telescopes, and supercomputers. Thus, access to advanced computational
resources and also to sophisticated skills in data acquisition, management,
transformation, visualization, analytics, and preservation, are highly valued by
researchers. For example, sophisticated visualization tools and techniques
enhance human understanding of extreme, complex and/or abstract data sets,
making it easier to see patterns and relationships and to form or test
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute will focus on CBD technical and
analytical methods and help investigators apply these to their own research. Key
goals are to (1) expand participants' knowledge of high performance computing
(HPC) and specialized tools and techniques that support CBD involving massive or
complex data sets; (2) provide hands-on experience in exploring large and
complex data sets using easily accessible desktop open source tools; (3) bring
researchers from underrepresented populations into the CBD field; and (4) foster
new collegial partnerships that stimulate both national and international co-
operative research among the presenters and attendees. In addition, the PASI
will also provide up-to-date information on the deliberations of the PASI to a
wider audience through a web page to disseminate results and reports of the
meeting.