* 1242787
* Collaborative Research: PFISR Ion-Neutral Observations in the Thermosphere (PINOT)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Aaron Ridley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 09/30/2016
* USD 75,000.00

This collaborative research effort will study magnetosphere-ionosphere-
thermosphere coupling through a coordinated campaign of observations and
modeling using the Poker Flat Incoherent-Scatter Radar (PFISR), the Resolute Bay
Incoherent-Scatter Radar (RISR), a variety of optical instruments, the Super
Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN), the Homer Very High Frequency (VHF)
radar, and the Global Ionospheric-Thermospheric Model (GITM). The ionosphere,
thermosphere, and magnetosphere comprise a tightly coupled system at high
latitudes. The ionosphere is the mediating element in this view, facilitating
the transfer of free energy generated by solar wind-magnetosphere coupling into
heat and bulk motion of the neutral atmosphere. This mediation occurs through
electric fields, particle precipitation, diffusion, and field-aligned currents,
agents that act collectively to structure the plasma density and composition
within the system. Although elements of this system have been studied in
considerable detail, their nonlinear interactions, and the global implications
of these regional processes, remains poorly understood and inadequately
observed. The electronic steering capability of PFISR offers a unique diagnostic
to fill this gap. Using a dense grid of beams, a three-dimensional, time
dependent view of the ion-neutral interactions can be developed. These results,
in coordination with observations by common volume optical, and VHF and HF radar
observations, allow access to system dynamics and system responses which were
previously unobservable. The experimental campaign, involving twenty researchers
from nine institutions, will be carried out over two winter seasons. The results
will be used to address fundamental questions of the physics of the upper
atmosphere and its coupling to the magnetosphere and the lower atmosphere, which
have remained obscured for lack of key data. As a result, although it is
understood that small-scale processes play critically important roles in this
coupling, they have been difficult to include in quantitative models. The new
information will be implemented in the GITM model validating the new
understanding of the coupled magnetosphere, ionosphere and thermosphere, and
thereby providing enhanced simulation capabilities.