* 1242945
* Strategic Synergies: STEM Pipeline
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Atina Pascua, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kelvin Chu
* 10/31/2013
* USD 98,607.00

This award will facilitate the organization of a workshop aimed at developing
and implementing strategic initiatives to strengthen the STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) skills of students, particularly
underrepresented minorities. A collaborative group of faculty and staff from
three organizations will engage in student development activities with the
workshop as the starting event for the year-long project. The three
organizations that would lead this project's activities are: (1) Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jurisdictions, (2) Campus
Compact (a network of college and university presidents who focus on civic
purposes of higher education), and (3) SENCER (Science Engagement for New Civic
Engagements and Responsibilities - an organization that committed to connecting
science learning to critical civic questions). Hawaii, Montana, Iowa, Oklahoma,
West Virginia, Tennessee, Maine, and New Hampshire are the initial cohort of
EPSCoR jurisdictions that will participate in this initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Developing sustainable
support systems for students requires a strategic approach that takes
synergistic advantage of capital - financial, social, and intellectual. This
workshop and associated year-long activities will pair representatives from
EPSCoR jurisdictions and Campus Compact offices in collaboration with SENCER
Fellows to develop college student leadership, service, and research models
(social capital) and employ civically engaged pedagogies (intellectual capital)
to create sustainable Grade 6 through college sophomore STEM success pathways
for underrepresented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The project will address and provide possible solutions to issues inhibiting the
full engagement of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. The systemic
approach, starting with Grade 6, is based upon proven success strategies
implemented in HI. The adaption and adoption of analogous initiatives in seven
other EPSCoR jurisdictions could have significant impacts by increasing the
cadre of underrepresented minorities engaged in STEM nation-wide. Additional
broader impacts of the proposed work lie in the use of outcomes from the
assessment of the impact of the group's efforts and the dissemination of that
information to other EPSCoR jurisdictions for their use in initiating similar
partnerships.