* 1242377
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of Chirped-Pulse Fourier Transform THz Spectrometers for Gas Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Brooks Pate, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Advances in high-speed digital electronics have enabled a new approach for
measuring high-resolution molecular rotational spectra of room-temperature
gases. The chirped-pulse Fourier transform (CP-FT) technique improves
measurement speeds by about four orders-of-magnitude over the current state-of-
the-art. This advance makes it possible to bring the traditional advantages of
molecular rotational spectroscopy for multispecies detection and high molecular
specificity to applications that require high sample throughput or real-time
chemical monitoring. The combination of broad instantaneous frequency coverage
and high spectral resolution of the spectroscopic features makes it possible to
analyze complex gas mixtures without the need for prior chemical separation
(like gas chromatography). This advantage produces lower overall spectrometer
operating costs by bypassing the need for consumable chromatography
supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular rotational spectroscopy identifies
molecules through their quantum mechanical frequency spectrum. The rotational
spectrum can be measured with high frequency accuracy using precision frequency
standards like rubidium clocks. These features provide unsurpassed
transferability of measurements from lab-to-lab. Once the spectrum is
identified, it can forever be recognized on any other instrument. The next-
generation CP-FT spectrometers exploit advances in high-speed digital
electronics to achieve exceptionally high data throughput - with spectrum
acquisition rates of 2.4 Gs/s now possible. There is the potential to develop a
qualitatively new analytical tool for chemical monitoring whose power is
amplified by mining all of the spectral data produced by these instruments so
that the known catalog of molecular signatures rapidly expands in real time.
This concept of a data enabled science driven analytical chemistry technique
based on widely deployed and internet-connected CP-FT gas sensors has the
potential to revolutionize real-time chemical monitoring in applications across
the industrial spectrum.