* 1242245
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute: The Science of Predicting and Understanding Tsunamis, Storm Surges, and Tidal Phenomena; Valparaiso, Chile, January 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Lorena Barba, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 12/31/2013
* USD 99,945.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place on January 2-15,
2013 at the Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María in Valparaiso, Chile.
Organized by Dr. Lorena Barba, an assistant professor in Mechanical Engineering
at Boston University, the institute will consist of a series of advanced
lectures and hands-on tutorials on the mathematical models that describe our
understanding of ocean phenomena affecting coastal areas, and the use of state-
of-the-art computer simulations of these physical processes to predict their
effects. The PASI will bring together distinguished scientists in applied
mathematics, ocean dynamics, physical oceanography, atmospheric and ocean
coupled phenomena, computer science, and civil engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this PASI is to train a cohort of young
scientists in this rapidly growing field, providing a solid foundation for their
involvement in active research in tsunami and storm-surge simulation. In
addition to the exposure and mentoring of young scientists to state-of-the-art
methods in modeling, this PASI will foster international collaboration among
researchers from the US and the Americas. Dr. Barba will lead mentoring
activities for the young researchers attending, and strive for broad
participation by leading efforts to recruit student participants from
underrepresented groups. The dissemination plan for this PASI includes the
production of videos and materials that will be made freely available online.