* 1242941
* The National Alliance for Doctoral Studies in the Mathematical Sciences: Infrastructure
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* William Velez, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,822,500.00

The National Alliance for Doctoral Studies in the Mathematical Sciences ("The
Alliance") is an alliance of mathematical sciences faculty and students with the
following goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To increase the number of doctoral
degrees in the mathematical sciences among groups that have been traditionally
underrepresented in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;2. To improve placement of students
from these groups in doctoral programs in disciplines that recruit undergraduate
mathematics majors.&lt;br/&gt;3. To increase the number of Ph.D.s from these
groups who enter the professoriate in the mathematical sciences as well as other
appropriate professions.&lt;br/&gt;4. To increase funded research collaborations
among faculty members at universities with mathematical sciences doctoral
programs and faculty members at colleges and universities focused on
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;5. To foster the growth of a community of
mathematical scientists that promotes a diverse
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance brings together more than 200
faculty from colleges and universities that serve large percentages of
undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds and nearly 100 of their
counterparts at masters and doctoral granting mathematical sciences departments.
It serves more than 400 undergraduate and master's level students from families,
regions, and ethnic backgrounds that have had little prior contact with the
culture and profession of research in the mathematical sciences. The Alliance
has had initial success and it is growing rapidly, in numbers, in programs, and
in its ties to other parts of the profession. This proposal provides funds to
support Alliance programming and personnel to allow the organization to create
an appropriate governance structure and infrastructure to support this growth as
well as to begin the critical evaluation and research that will guide the
Alliance in its growth and provide data and outcomes to those who would develop
such programs in other STEM disciplines.