* 1242749
* EAGER: Sensible Science: A Sociometric Approach to Collaboration in Synthesis Groups
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* John Parker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 254,898.00

This study examines how interdisciplinary groups of scientists collaborate to
produce explanations that are highly integrative and original. This intellectual
process, which is called synthesis, has the potential to transform fields of
science and to address challenges concerning environment, energy, and other
matters. It does so by integrating theories, methods, or data across
disciplines, professional sectors, or spatial and temporal scales to produce
explanations that are deeply original and exceptionally broad in applicability.
Synthesis is important to science and society, but the organizational and social
conditions necessary to achieve it are not well understood, and so the ability
to manage them is limited. This project uses sociometric sensor badges, a new
research technology for the study of small group behavior, in combination with
well-established methods in social studies of science, small-group research,
sociology, and organizational behavior, to examine how patterns of group
organization and interaction influence performance and creativity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of small groups, particularly groups of
scientists, tend to rely on observation. Valuable as this is, observation is
necessarily limited by the observer's attention or focus and tends to produce
qualitative data. Sociometric sensors can complement observation by revealing
new facets of group dynamics and measuring them precisely and unobtrusively, and
can also tap the affective dimension of collaboration. Sociometric sensors, and
the new insights into group behavior they will produce, may transform studies of
collaboration, synthesis, and emotion in science, and advance research in
related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary synthesis and innovation
are vital for addressing societal problems, and policies to encourage synthesis
are high on the national science agenda. By improving our understanding of
synthesis and our methods for studying it, this project will lay a strong
empirical foundation for better policies, decisions, and organizational
practices concerning collaboration, interdisciplinarity, and synthesis.