* 1242489
* I-Corps:  Low cost, high volume manufacturing of multicomponent plasmonic interfaces:  A nanopaint-based technology for tunable light capturing and energy harvesting
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Radhakrishna Sureshkumar, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed activity entails adaptation of plasmonic interfaces with tunable
optical properties to benefit a number of innovative applications relevant to
renewable energy harvesting. These interfaces are fabricated by imparting a
desired optical property to a surface from a bulk nanoparticulate suspension,
referred to as nanopaint. The scientific foundation of the nanopaint technology
is built upon a synergistic integration of the principles of thermodynamic self-
assembly, physico-chemical interactions between nanoparticles and surfaces as
well as a fundamental understanding of the optical properties of metal
nanoparticles and their dependence on size, shape and composition. In addition,
robust nanomanufacturing routes that allow for low cost and high volume
production of the nanopaint-based interfaces are developed by utilizing process
engineering principles. The translation of the nanopaint technology to the
renewable energy arena requires that the abovementioned fundamental science and
engineering platform be evaluated in the light of market variables and process
economics. This will be the principal focus of the proposed I-Corps project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation presented in this proposal is the
ability to enable low cost, high volume manufacturing of hard or flexible
multicomponent plasmonic interfaces capable of highly selective or broadband
light harvesting. Current manufacturing bottlenecks associated with the
incorporation of multiple species of particles onto an interface and poor
stability characteristics of nano-suspensions are easily overcome by the
nanopaint technology. Three major applications proposed are (i) smart glass
envelopes for buildings, (ii) enhancing the light trapping and conversion
efficiency of thin film photovoltaics (PVs), and (iii) increasing phototrophic
growth rate of algal biomass. The transformative societal and commercial impacts
of this platform technology include the following: &lt;br/&gt;(i) The ability to
harvest and convert sunlight into heat through smart windows for residential and
commercial buildings will reduce their carbon footprint.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Integrating PVs with plasmonic interfaces will have
significant benefits in terms of their overall energy efficiency and cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Practical and environmentally safe methods of
plasmon-enhanced biomass growth will benefit biosensor technology as well as
large scale production of algal biomass as feedstock for fuels and chemicals.