* 1242139
* NUE: Enhancing Undergraduate Students' Learning and Research Experiences through Hands on Experiments on Bio-nanoengineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Debasish Kuila, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2015
* USD 219,997.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: Enhancing Undergraduate Students Learning and Research
Experiences through Hands on Experiments on Bio-nanoengineering", at North
Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State University (NCAT), under the
direction of Dr. Narayan Bhattarai, will bring together a team of
interdisciplinary faculty members from the Department of Chemical and
Bioengineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering and the Department of
Chemistry to enhance undergraduate student learning in bioengineering by
introducing training on devices and systems that integrate nanoscale
technologies with biological systems for the development of new materials,
biomimetic nanostructures and tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCAT's College of
Engineering is consistently among the top two producers of African-American
engineers in the nation. The proposed NUE project is expected to provide a
significant number of underrepresented minority students with training and
mentoring focused on bio-nanoengineering. Further the undergraduate students
impacted by this program are expected to add to the talent pool for NCAT's
graduate programs in traditional as well as in nontraditional engineering and
science disciplines such as Bioengineering, Nanoscience and Nanoengineering, and
Computational Science and Engineering.