* 1242967
* Undergraduate and Graduate Student Scholarship and Travel Grants for 2012-2014 Grace Hopper Women in Computing Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Telle Whitney, Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 07/31/2015
* USD 499,074.00

This award provides funding for approximately one hundred undergraduate and
graduate students each year to attend the 2012 - 2014 Grace Hopper Celebration
of Women in Computing conferences. The Grace Hopper Celebration is designed to
bring the research and career interests of women in computing to the forefront.
Leading researchers present their current work and special sessions focus on the
role of women in today's technology fields. NSF scholarship support allows
students who could not otherwise attend to participate and become part of the
broad Hopper community of young computing professionals that is nurtured through
the event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the access to the many technical presentations and researchers at the
conference. In addition, students have the opportunity to participate in poster
sessions and receive feedback from discipline specialists. The Grace Hopper
Celebration provides a unique, supportive environment for intellectual discourse
that is particularly appealing for women and other under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project deal with providing
resources and support to students that will help them persist in their programs
as well as access to avenues to continue through the IT workforce pipeline.
Students who attend the Grace Hopper Celebration will be exposed to leaders who
are creating, improving, and studying computer and information technologies who
serve as role models and mentors. This travel scholarship support provides a
unique opportunity to directly affect the careers of future computer scientists
and impact the serious problem of broadening participation in computing.