* 1242046
* Graduate Student Workshops in Mathematics with Applications to Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2013
* John Morgan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2013
* USD 48,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1242046, Principal Investigator: John
W. Morgan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for graduate
student workshops on "String Phenomenology" (July 2012) and "Symplectic
Topology" (October 2012) at Stony Brook University. The Simons Center has
programs at the cutting edge of research in geometry, in theoretical physics,
and in areas of overlap between the two fields. These programs bring together
senior researchers, mid-career experts, and postdocs with a common interest
around a topic in geometry or physics. The purpose of this project is to expose
these fields to graduate students and give them access to the expertise of the
assembled workers in the field. The project calls for workshops aimed
specifically at graduate students with approximately 40 students being invited
to each workshop. The graduate students are invited to the Center and supported
during their stay, which will be either one week or two weeks. They will listen
to introductory talks in the chosen area by experts in the field, and then later
in the workshop by more specialized talks by other graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The programs at the Simons Center for Geometry
and Physics bring together experts on various topics in geometry and physics to
exchange ideas and to learn of the results of other workers in the field. This
is one of the best ways for various workers in the field to become aware on all
the latest trends and ideas in their subject. The project extends the scope of
these programs by providing activities within the overall scientific framework
aimed specifically at graduate students, who are not otherwise usually included
in the activities. A week or two is dedicated to a workshop aimed at graduate
students and approximately 40 students are invited to the Center and supported
during their stay. During the workshop experts in the field give talks suitable
for graduate students; also there are more specialized talks by the graduate
students. This exposes the students to the field, to many of the leading
researchers in the field, and to other graduate students with similar interests.
This will ease their integration into the field and assist them as they launch
their own research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The URL for the first of these
workshops is: http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/archives/3978