* 1242067
* Center for Research and Education in Optical Sciences and Applications: Promoting Scientific Discoveries, Technological Advances, and STEM Education
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Noureddine Melikechi, Delaware State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,996,696.00

The Center for Research and Education in Optical Sciences and Applications
(CREOSA) was established at Delaware State University in 2006 as a NSF Center of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST). The Phase II Center will
build on accomplishments of the first 6 years of the program, with a continued
focus on optical sciences and applied physics. The CREOSA has been leading
systemic and transformative educational, research, and outreach programs at
Delaware State University, a Historically Black University. A new doctoral
program in Optics has been initiated (the only one at an HBCU), leveraged the
CREST award to secure funds for construction of a new building dedicated to
optics research, increased scholarly publications by a factor of 6, enabled the
hiring of 9 new faculty members, licensed the first intellectual property for
DSU, and provided graduate student training of a new generation of optical
scientists, mostly from minority groups. The Center also was instrumental in
creating a culture of innovative integration to foster interdepartmental and
multidisciplinary research and education at DSU. The continued support by the
NSF for CREOSA has enable Delaware State to achieve national prominence in
optical sciences while serving the minority population of students that will
attend and will be drawn to DSU. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Center
Vision&lt;br/&gt;CREOSA will be a sustainable unit that seeks to achieve
national prominence in research and education in optical sciences with a strong
commitment to educate, train, and prepare traditionally underrepresented groups
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center Mission&lt;br/&gt;CREOSA will integrate
multi- and inter-disciplinary approaches to (1) Perform cutting-edge research in
optical sciences; (2) Provide world-class education in optical sciences with a
focus on serving historically underrepresented groups in STEM; (3) Improve the
research infrastructure in optical sciences at DSU; and (4) Enhance
significantly the diversity of the workforce with backgrounds in optical
sciences by broadening participation of underrepresented groups in research and
education at all levels which includes the population groups from K-12,
undergraduate, graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;CREOSA will exploit
the interdisciplinary nature of research activities across fields of optics,
biology, biochemistry, mathematics and computational sciences. Three research
subprojects form the foundation of the Center's research and educational
activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Spectroscopy and Imaging of
Biomacromolecules in Crowded and Complex Media&lt;br/&gt;This subproject brings
together optical sciences and biological sciences at the technological cutting
edge. The research has the potential to attain unprecedented limits for the
accurate detection, identification, and classification of diverse bio-
macromolecules in their host environments. These biomolecules may serve as novel
biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment of various diseases and are the key idea
behind the rapidly developing research in the field of
nanomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Spin Polarization Spectrosopy in
Nanodiamond for Nanoscale Sensing and Imaging&lt;br/&gt;The subproject team will
investigate spectroscopic methods of studying nanoscale materials. The work
complements the activity of the first subproject, in that it will provide
avenues to probe single and/or complex biomacromolecules. These materials may
provide an important driver in the development of solid-state quantum
information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. A System for Interactive Data
Mining in Experimental Optics &lt;br/&gt;This subproject will link experimental
optics with important elements of data mining. The research proposed in both of
the first two subprojects will create a large amount of complex data, which will
require an integrated approach in which data-driven machine learning techniques
are coupled with idealized models and expert knowledge in the analysis of
spectroscopic data. The techniques to be developed will help resolve the
communication bottleneck that occurs when several scientists in
multidisciplinary optics research collaborate and exchange experimental data and
extracted information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;More than
65% of the students at Delaware State are African American, and the new doctoral
program established from the Phase I award is an important resource for that
population, both in terms of advanced graduate programs and as a model for the
role of research in stimulating more students from underrepresented groups to
pursue STEM degrees. A partnership with the Fisk-Vanderbilt doctoral bridge
program has been initiated, which will stimulate pathways IN BOTH DIRECTIONS for
these institutions. An active professional development program for graduate
students will be initiated, concurrent with a well organized recruitment and
mentoring activities. The program will also be at the heart of recruitment
efforts for undergraduate students to matriculate in STEM fields at DSU and from
URM groups in Delaware elsewhere, because of the high visibility of the optical
sciences program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DSU will continue outreach activities for
pre-college students and the general community, such as a summer program that
has prepared 89 students from 23 universities during the first five years,
sponsorship of events such as open houses for the Delaware Science Alliance and
Physics Days. The project will continue the enhancement of the curriculum at
DSU, across several academic platforms. These include new tracks in electrical
engineering, optical engineering, and bio-engineering in the Department of
Physics and Pre-Engineering, as well as updates to the curricula for physics and
physics education. New educational laboratories will be developed as part of the
world-class imaging facilities that are part of a new building being
constructed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigations have the potential
for profound impact on human health and counterterrorism. The work will provide
a stronger scientific foundation that could yield new technologies for medical
diagnostics of early signs of disease and to detect pathogens used to fight bio-
terrorism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award has been partially funded through
the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research at the National
Science Foundation.