* 1242639
* Interactions of Aerosols, Marine Boundary Layer Clouds, and Precipitation During the VOCALS-Regional Experiment: Observations, Modeling, and Large-scale Model Assessment
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Christopher Bretherton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2016
* USD 531,944.00

This supports analysis of collected during the Variability of the American
Monsoon Systems Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land Study Regional Experiment (VOCALS-
REx, or simply REx). The VOCALS-REx field campaign took place over the Southeast
Pacific Ocean (SEP) during Oct-Nov 2008, and was designed to improve
understanding of interactions between aerosols, marine boundary layer (MBL)
clouds, and precipitation over the region. The SEP is climatically important
because it is home to the world's largest subtropical stratocumulus cloud deck,
which cools the climate by reflecting solar radiation back to space. Thus
interactions between clouds, aerosols, and precipitation in the SEP can have an
important climatic effect by modulating cloud cover and cloud albedo. The
research here continues two key REx themes: research on Pockets of Open Cells
(POCs), which are openings in the stratocumulus deck in which clouds have
presumably dissipated due to drizzle formation; and research on offshore
transport of pollution and its effect on SEP cloud and aerosol characteristics.
Observations of cloud droplet concentration taken during REx using the NCAR
C-130 aircraft show large "hook" features extending offshore from the Chilean
coast, which may be due to high concentrations of cloud condensation nuclei
(CCN) associated with pollution from copper smelters and coastal conurbations.

Research performed under this grant uses REx data, much of which has not been
previously analyzed, as well as data from global atmospheric model simulations
prepared for the VOCALS Model Assessment (VOCA), together with numerical
experiments using a large-eddy simulation (LES) code, to develop a better
understanding of POCs, hooks, and SEP aerosol-cloud interactions. Three broad
science questions are addressed: 1) How important is the free-tropospheric
aerosol source to CCN and cloud droplet number concentrations in the VOCALS
region, especially in the oceanic region over 500 km away from coastal pollution
sources? 2) Is the precipitation sink for aerosols a major positive feedback on
CCN differences between clean and polluted regions, in particular for hooks and
POCs? 3) Can regional and global chemistry-climate models that include some
representation of aerosol-cloud- precipitation interactions realistically
simulate hooks and POCs?

Beyond its scientific merit, the project has broader impacts due to the
important role of SEP clouds in regulating earth's climate. A better
understanding of the role of aerosol-cloud interactions in determining cloud
cover and cloud brightness could thus lead to improved understanding and
predictions of climate variability and change. In addition, the project supports
two graduate students, thereby providing for the next generation of the
scientific workforce in this area.