* 1242075
* NUE: Flipping Learning Models to Illuminate Nanomanufacturing and Nanomaterials for Photovoltaics
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Guangyong Li, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2015
* USD 199,018.00

The objective of this NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Flipping
Learning Models to Illuminate Nanomanufacturing and Nanomaterials for
Photovoltaics", at the University of Pittsburgh, under the direction of Dr. Paul
W. Leu, is to establish an interdisciplinary education and research framework to
prepare future engineers to take on the grand challenge of manufacturing low-
cost, high-efficiency solar cells through the scalable integration of
nanomaterials. The National Academy of Engineering has identified making solar
energy economical as a grand challenge of the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the critical role of nanotechnology in next-
generation photovoltaics and the need for educational programs to prepare future
engineers to develop new innovations for this application, the PIs propose to
develop an interdisciplinary education and research framework for illuminating
photovoltaic devices, nanomanufacturing, and nanomaterial concepts and
experimental practices. This project will (1) design a flipped undergraduate
course, ENGR 1248: Nanomanufacturing and Nanomaterials for Photovoltaics, where
lecturing and reading occur outside of the classroom and active learning
involving conceptual exercises, learning tasks, and instructional laboratories
occur-in-class, (2) teach this flipped undergraduate course, which will impact
30 to 40 Engineering students per year and be part of the Engineering School's
new Nanoscience and Engineering Certificate, (3) advise undergraduate summer
research projects through the Mascaro Center for Sustainable Innovation which
will develop about six students per year, and (4) create online content for high
school students by extending INVESTING NOW outreach through Pitt's Engineering
Office of Diversity that has involved about 150 high school students per year.
The proposed project seeks to provide students with (the four I's) inspirational
motivation, intellectual foundations, innovation skills, and increased
involvement.