* 1242213
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Polymer and Composite Materials from Renewable Resources and Biorefinery: from Chemistry to Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Orlando Rojas, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

Pan American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI) on Polymer and Composite
Materials from Renewable Resources and Bio-refinery: From Chemistry to
Applications &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes
(PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE),
will take place in late 2012 or early 2013 at Centro Nacional de Alta Tecnología
(CeNAT) located in San Jose, Costa Rica. Organized by Dr. Maria Auad, associate
professor in the Department of Polymer and Fiber Engineering at Auburn
University, the institute will focus on the dissemination of advanced scientific
and engineering knowledge in the areas of green polymers and composites based on
natural resources and the development of strategies for promoting collaborative
opportunities for research, training and exchange in the Americas. The PASI will
bring together a team of scientists and engineers to collaborate and learn from
a multitude of disciplines including chemistry, characterization and fabrication
of new materials such as advanced green polymers and composites, and potential
applications for such materials in structural, transport, medical and others
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PASI will help to strengthen research
environments between the participating institutions, establish new partnerships
across the continent, and provide interdisciplinary training for the next
generation of scientists. Participants, including graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, junior faculty, and researchers, will benefit from a dual
mentorship experience. Additionally, the PASI will enhance understanding of the
basic chemistry and properties of these complex materials, which may lead to the
creation of a new generation of multifunctional, green materials from renewable
resources. The results from the PASI will be disseminated through a website
where all the lectures will be available for downloading.