* 1242993
* I-Corps:  Highly efficient/low cost method for mass production of graphene platelets
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Keidar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

This project will evaluate commercial potential of the novel approach of plasma-
based method of graphene. The technical part of the project will be focused on
creation of an industrial-scale prototype system for graphene synthesis. The
proposed interdisciplinary project has both fundamental and technological
significance. The fundamental significance is that our understanding of the
fundamental role of plasmas in graphene synthesis will be greatly expanded. The
technological and scientific significance lies in exploring the possibility of
using various means to control graphene synthesis in arc discharge, possibility
to enhance graphene production yield and ultimately pave the way for graphene
mass production and industrial applications. Many important sectors of the
national economy will be potentially affected. Successful development of the
technology for producing graphene in a scalable manner (to produce large volumes
of such) would have an enormous impact on energy storage, electronics,
aerospace, mechanical, civil, and biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has potential for a variety of
industries. Since graphene was first created in the lab in 2004, graphene has
been considered a material with significant promise. The two dimensional sheets
of carbon atoms are the strongest material known, and graphene's electrical
properties make it a potential replacement for silicon in faster computer chips.
Together with industrial partners, the team is developing graphene-based
electrochemical energy storage applications. They will evaluate the commercial
potential of the material and will optimize its performance based on specific
requirements from potential customers.