* 1242471
* NSF Visitor Support for the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2012,07/31/2018
* John Rayner, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 718,431.00

The NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF) was established by NASA as a
national astronomical observatory primarily to support missions and to obtain
infrared observations of solar system objects. The IRTF is managed, operated and
maintained for NASA under a Cooperative Agreement with the University of Hawaii
(UH) through its Institute for Astronomy. NASA provides the entire cost of
operation of the facility as well as visitor support for the astronomers
carrying out programs focused on Solar System objects. Approximately 50% of the
available observing time is allocated to such programs. The rest of the
observing time is allocated to observational programs of scientific interest
outside the Solar System. NSF provides funding for visitor support for the
approximately 50% of observers whose programs are not related to Solar System
objects. This award covers the NSF-related visitor and observing support costs
for observers who either come to the observatory or observe remotely. These
costs include the cost of lodging and food at the Mauna Kea Observatory mid-
level facility, ground transportation between Hilo and the summit, and cryogens
for the instruments. For remote observing programs, the costs include support
for a second person at the summit (for safety reasons) and the food and lodging
for this person at the mid-level facility.

In regard to broader impact, most of the IRTF staff are based at the UH
facilities in Hilo, situated in a largely rural setting. Several
underrepresented groups (e.g. native Hawaiian) are employees of or are UH
students with the IRTF. In addition to disseminating research results to the
scientific community, the IRTF contributes to educational and public outreach
within the Hilo community through two major programs ? Journey through the
Universe (JTTU) and the Imiloa Astronomy Center. The JTTU program (the IRTF is
part of the team) is a community based program originally sponsored by USRA?s
National Center for Space, Earth, and Flight Sciences that brings together the
resources of the entire local community (schools, families, businesses, civic
groups, local government, and academic/research institutes) to promote astronomy
and science to K-12 students through the development of an astronomy curriculum
for all grade levels. The IRTF is a resource for highlighting exciting examples
of science and technology in Hilo. The Imiloa Astronomy Center is a modern
astronomy education and outreach center in Hilo whose goal is to educate the
greater community on astronomy and its connection to the Hawaiian culture, both
present and past. The IRTF works with the Imiloa Astronomy Center with
development of educational materials, the most recent example being the
development of a planetarium program featuring the IRTF. The IRTF staff also
works with community-based programs such as Astro-Day, an annual event dedicated
to sharing astronomy with the public. Of particular note is a robotics-based
program for local high schools that is led by a member of the IRTF staff. This
program has led to competition at the national level.