* 1242383
* CAREER: Integrating Research and Education to Apply High-Rate GPS Into Natural Hazards Reduction
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Guoquan Wang, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 306,507.00

Global Positioning System (GPS) has grown to become one of the principal tools
applicable to many disciplines, including geography, earth sciences, atmospheric
sciences, environmental sciences, civil engineering, surveying, and others. GPS
with a low-sampling rate (e.g., 30 second per sample) has been used by
geoscientists for more than two decades to study plate motions. The new aspect
of this project is to study high-rate GPS (e.g., 1 sample per second or higher),
which is critical to conduct real-time monitoring and early-warning of natural
hazards, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, and landslides. This project will foster
the integration of education and research through conducting independent
research, improving current geosciences curriculum, supporting and mentoring
undergraduate and graduate research, and promoting faculty expertise
development. The research component of this project will focus on improving
precision of real-time high-rate GPS and promoting its applications in natural
hazards monitoring and early-warning, while the educational component will focus
on implementing GPS into earth science education at college as well as pre-
college levels. Both components are based on a high-rate GPS network funded by a
NSF Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program. The high-rate GPS network
includes six permanent GPS stations and four campaign GPS stations located in
Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. These permanent GPS stations are
colocated with seismic stations operated by the Puerto Rico Seismic Network and
Strong Motion Program and closely-spaced with sea level tide gauge stations
operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The
integrated GPS-Seismic-TideGauge observation system has become a fundamental
infrastructure for earthquake and tsunami research in Puerto Rico and its
surrounding regions. The final goal of this project is to promote applications
of real-time high-rate GPS in natural hazards reduction, and fuel our new
generation (graduates, undergraduates, and K-12 students) with the cutting-edge
GPS technology to prepare for a broad set of career paths. The specific
objectives of the research are to (1) systematically evaluate the performance of
high-rate (5-Hz, 10-Hz, or higher) GPS as a new seismometer, (2) develop new
methods of improving precision of high-rate GPS, and (3) integrate real-time
high-rate GPS into the earthquake monitoring and tsunami early-warning system
operated by the Puerto Rico Seismic Network at the University of Puerto Rico-
Mayaguez. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time high-rate GPS technology is an
integration of advanced GPS satellite, internet, real-time communication, solar
power, computer, and visualization technologies. These new technologies will
inspire students? interests in a spectrum of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematic (STEM) disciplines, and attract more students to earth science
majors, which will increase the diversity of earth science community. Education
and outreach are the vital parts of this project. We will support two graduates,
two undergraduates, and one high-school earth science teacher (in summer) each
year. We will also develop a series of education and outreach activities related
to the applications of GPS. They are expected to enhance public awareness of
science and new technologies and increase the participation of underrepresented
groups (Hispanics) in earth science research. &lt;br/&gt;