* 1242765
* INSPIRE: Neutrophil Delivery of Apoptosis-Inducing Anticancer Drugs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Stefan Bossmann, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE award to Kansas State University at Manhattan is partially funded
by the Biomaterial program in the Division of Materials Research in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The other two
interdisciplinary programs that are partially funding this award are the
Biophotonic program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
&amp; Transport Systems, and the Materials for Surface Engineering program in
the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation, both from the
Directorate for Engineering. With this award, targeted protease-activatable
polymer-caged liposomes (PPCLs) will be designed and synthesized for rapid
uptake by neutrophils from peripheral blood. The liposomes prepared will be
loaded with a metal binding anticancer drug
(4,4-dimethyl-1-(di(pyridine-2-yl)methylene) (Dp44mT), which destabilizes
liposomes. This metal chelating agent will be conjugated with a mitochondria
inactivating peptide D[KLAKLAK]2 before the conjugate is loaded in the
liposomes. This new class of liposomes with loaded drugs are expected to remain
intact in the neutrophil while being transported by blood to the brain cancer
cells (glioblastoma multiforme). PPCLs will be activated by caspases and
discharge their payload once the neutrophils have reached their target and
undergo apoptosis. Synergy between the two drugs loaded in the liposomes is
anticipated and that will start apoptotic cascades in primary tumors and
metastases. It is important to note that neutrophils are able to cross the blood
brain barrier, and will be able to kill cancer cells even if these brain cancer
cells are small and in the early stages of development. The proposed cell-based
cancer treatment strategies are potentially superior to the ones that use
nanoparticles and other drug carriers, because the proposed neutrophil-based
therapies can treat early tumors, and they are selective, efficient, and fast.
Additionally, the use of autologous cells has the potential of significantly
lowering the regulatory barriers generally seen with cell-based human cancer
therapies. In addition, this strategy could be expanded to other applications
for targeting numerous cell types using different oligopeptides as targeting
sequences. The targeting principles of a single cell-type would have the
potential to evolve into targeted therapies for viral, bacterial and protozoal
infections, and biophotonic approaches for different applications. In addition,
a successful outcome from this INSPIRE project could lead to a new
interdisciplinary research approach at the interface of materials science,
surface processing, synthetic biology, molecular engineering, nanotechnology and
biophotonics. As part of teaching, training and outreach activities, the PI
plans to develop and teach a course entitled 'Theranostics' at Kansas State
University. In addition, the PI and Co-PI will alternately lead a workshop on
developing skills in writing manuscripts, and this workshop will be offered to
all undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral scientists in their
groups. Currently, the PI and Co-PI have five female graduate students, four
Developing Scholars' Program students, one Summer Undergraduate Research
Opportunity Program student and two Research Experience of Undergraduates
students in their laboratories. These recruiting, mentoring and training
activities will be enlarged and enhanced with this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is directed at developing new
materials for the treatment for brain tumors (glioma or glioblastoma
multiforme). A new treatment concept will be developed, which utilizes the
patients' own white blood cells as "transport ships" for anticancer drugs. These
drugs will be released once the white blood cells have reached the tumor. Using
whole blood from cancer patients, this project will target the white blood cells
to load them with anticancer drugs, and then re-inject their blood. The white
blood cells will then travel to the sites of tumors. Classic liposomes are not
taken up selectively by the various cell types in blood. They either burst after
uptake or the fuse with the cells. In either case, the drugs that are supposed
to stay within the liposomes are released prematurely, thus killing the
transport cells and not the tumors. However, the proposed novel protease-
activatable polymer-caged liposomes (PPCLs) are expected to be stable during
transport within white blood cells, and become activated once these white cells
become integrated into the tumor cells. The drugs will then cause programmed
cell death (apoptosis). They will be able to kill the fast growing tumor cells
and the slower growing cancer stem cells. The latter are responsible for the
reappearance of tumors and the formation of metastases. The use of patient
derived cells will provide a pathway to truly personalized medicine, free of
concerns about the potential of stem cells causing cancer, and also free of
ethical concerns. Three education thrusts will be carried out during the period
of this project: (i) the PI will develop and teach a block course entitled
'Theranostics'. This course will be open to all graduate and undergraduate
students in veterinary medicine, chemistry, biochemistry, biology and physics;
(ii) the PI and Co-PI will alternately lead a workshop on writing research
papers, and will be offered to all undergraduates, graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists in the PIs' research team; and (iii) the research will
also create opportunities for incoming Research Experience of Undergraduates,
Summer Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program and Developing Scholars?
Program students at Kansas State University. Both PI and Co-PI will continue to
work with graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, as
well as veterans. In addition, this research will help extend the efforts to
ongoing collaborative efforts in materials chemistry, cancer therapy and
diagnostics at Kansas State University.