* 1242030
* NUE: UNITE - Undergraduate Nanotechnology Inquiry, Training, and Experimentation at the University of Georgia (UGA)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Leidong Mao, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE:UNITE-Undergraduate Nanotechnology Inquiry, Training, and
Experimentation at the University of Georgia (UGA), under the direction of Dr.
Leidong Mao, will develop an innovative nanotechnology lab course with 12 lab
modules for undergraduate and high school students that will cover the major
processes for nanotechnology--from synthesis to application. Special emphasis
will be placed on nanostructure fabrication, characterization, device
fabrication, and biological and energy applications. The course will use a non-
traditional, problem-oriented, lab-based educational approach. The approach will
allow students to not only learn the fundamental science and engineering
principles and hands-on skills that are related to their lab projects, but also
learn to identify new problems and how to search for solutions. The intellectual
merit of this proposed curriculum initiative lies in the increase of nanoscience
and nanotechnology education at UGA. The nanotechnology lab modules and
interdisciplinary structure of the proposal is the first of its kind for UGA,
and their flexible structure is more amendable to incorporation into a variety
of diverse curricula.

The broader impact of this proposal is that it also serves as an opportunity to
bring together researchers interested in nanotechnology across the UGA campus
from the Faculty of Engineering and the Franklin College of Arts and Sciences,
creating a collaborative atmosphere. Further, UGA serves a very diverse student
body and the availability of the proposed lab modules will expose a significant
number of students to nanotechnology. An education in nanotechnology will put
UGA students at the frontiers of science and engineering, preparing them for
graduate study or industrial careers in many modern research areas. Inclusion of
and collaboration with UGA scientific partners will alert industry to this
highly qualified and diverse pool of students. The project is designed to
facilitate broad regional high school participation by offering high school
teachers a summer workshop and high school students summer projects to introduce
them to course materials to utilize back in their home classrooms. Participation
of underrepresented minority groups will be enhanced through collaboration with
Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Peach State LSAMP)
program.