* 1242529
* LTREB Renewal: Fourteen years of simulated climate change in an ancient limestone grassland: connecting responses of genotypes, species, and ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Jason Fridley, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 454,827.00

In this project, researchers seek to understand the long-term impacts of climate
change on grassland ecosystems. They use multi-decadal simulation experiments of
warmed soil and air temperatures and of summer drought or elevated rainfall to
identify how well the characteristics of different plant species predict how
communities and ecosystem processes will shift in coming decades. This project
also extends research on climate change impacts to the genetic level; recent
evidence indicates that some ecosystems may be resistant to climate change
because some species can adapt rapidly to new environments. Results to date show
that individual species respond over small spatial scales and that these changes
may be adaptive. Over the next five years of a ten year project, the researchers
will provide long-term data that reveal the details that underlie an apparent
stability of plant community structure in response to climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperate grasslands are a key contributor to global
productivity and their response to global climate change is of critical
importance to the future of human welfare. While fertile grasslands show rapid
vegetation shifts in response to simulated warming, those on less fertile soils
that contain slower-growing species appear more resistant to rapid climate
change. Because the latter grasslands account for a large majority of pasture-
and range-lands throughout the world, their recalcitrance to climate shifts will
have significant ramifications for the future of food and fiber production. The
Buxton research site has garnered considerable media attention and will continue
to increase community awareness of climate change research through visits from
the interested public, now facilitated by a partnership with the Ecological
Continuity Trust. The dataset accumulated annually from this study is currently
available online to other researchers. Continued involvement and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students of broad racial and ethnic representation
from different nations provides valuable opportunities for education and
advances international communication in climate change science.