* 1242531
* LTREB Renewal:   Long-term Interactions among Biodiversity, CO2, and N in a Perennial Grassland Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Rapid human-caused increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations
during the next 50 years will contribute to global warming and will likely shift
precipitation patterns and/or amounts, influencing the growth and performance of
vegetation worldwide. Plants and their ecosystems absorb roughly one-fourth of
the CO2 emitted from fossil fuel combustion each year, and it is critical to
understand whether plants can continue this important function as CO2 levels
continue to rise. There are fewer than five realistic long-term field
experiments that test whether vegetation will continue to absorb extra carbon,
and whether such carbon capture may be constrained by infertile soils, lack of
soil moisture, climate warming, or loss of diversity. The BioCON experiment is
one of these, where plants are exposed to CO2 levels expected to occur late in
the 21st century. Since 1998 BioCON has examined interactions among
biodiversity, atmospheric CO2, and soil N supply in a temperate perennial
grassland in Minnesota. BioCON includes precipitation manipulation (begun in
2007) and warming treatments (begun in 2012). This project will support this
experiment from 2012-2017, including measures of plants and soils relevant to
both ecosystem science and atmospheric change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will address issues of major importance to society, in particular the
potential impacts of human activities on environmental processes at local to
global scales. The degrees to which loss of diversity, climate warming, soil
nitrogen, and soil moisture constrain the long-term ability of ecosystems to
capture and sequester carbon will also be examined. In addition, because it is a
unique facility open to and encouraging new initiatives, BioCON will enhance
research and education and promote teaching, training, and learning for
students, teachers, journalists and others.