* 1242645
* R&D toward SuperCDMS at SNOLAB
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Bernard Sadoulet, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,454,370.00

Observations of galaxies, superclusters, distant supernovae, and the cosmic
microwave background radiation tell us that ~85% of the matter in the universe
is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this dark matter is of
fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle
physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting
Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments after the Big Bang. If
WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our galaxy may be detectable
via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located deep underground.

The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration has pioneered the use of
low temperature phonon-mediated detectors to detect the rare scattering of WIMPs
on nuclei and distinguish them from backgrounds. CDMS is currently operating at
Soudan, Minnesota with 10 kg of iZIP detectors, which have already demonstrated
a background rejection factor sufficient for zero background operation with
several hundred kilogram targets. In order to fully use this capability, it is
necessary to build a new larger and cleaner experimental set up and locate it at
a much deeper site than Soudan to eliminate the cosmogenic neutron background.
The baseline design of this new experiment (SuperCDMS SNOLAB) calls for a 100 kg
germanium experiment located at SNOLAB, Sudbury, Canada adapting the iZIP
technology to 100 mm diameter detectors of 1.4 kg mass each.

This award provides support for Research and Development towards this
experiment. It focuses on critical R&D goals: the testing and characterization
of the proposed detectors, contribution to the design and testing of the cold
hardware and electronics (novel HEMT and SQUID for ionization and phonon
readout), and the procurement and characterization of the germanium crystals.

Broader impacts: The SuperCDMS experiment will have a broad impact which extends
beyond the dark matter search. The technical development will further advance
phonon-mediated detectors, which have already found many applications in
cosmology, astronomy and industry. The project will contribute to the training
of undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, using
techniques at the leading edge of measurement technologies. SuperCDMS scientists
will continue their involvement in K-12, their collaboration with teachers and
their support for promising high school students from underserved backgrounds.