* 1242572
* Research Starter Grant:   Genetic and Neuronal Mechanisms of Food Preference Behavior in Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Elizabeth Glater, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 49,952.00

A central question in neuroscience is understanding the mechanisms by which
genes influence behavior. Using model organisms that have genes that can be
easily manipulated is critical to gaining a better understanding of how genetic
polymorphisms contribute to complex phenotypes. Past work has shown that the
innate food preferences of the free-living nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans,
vary in different strains. The project focuses on understanding how natural
genetic polymorphisms influence food preferences as well as the neuronal basis
of food preference. The project has three aims: 1) determine the mechanism by
which the identified F-box gene modifies bacterial preference behavior; 2)
identify additional causative genes underlying other previously determined QTLs;
3) determine the neuronal circuits underlying discrimination among complex odors
released by a wide range of bacteria likely to be found in the natural
environment of C. elegans. This project will provide insights into the genetic
and neuronal mechanisms by which C. elegans generates its responses to different
complex stimuli, and into the relationship between the genome and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study how genes can
influence complex behaviors such as food preference using the C. elegans model
organism. The research will be conducted primarily by undergraduates at Harvey
Mudd College. Students will participate in all aspects of the research,
including designing and conducting experiments, analyzing data, presenting their
work at on-campus research symposia as well as national scholarly meetings and
preparing their work for publication.