* 1242594
* LTREB Renewal - Collaborative Research:   Responses of high elevation, aquatic ecosystems to interannual climate variability and trends in atmospheric inputs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* John Melack, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2019
* USD 182,476.00

Long-term investigation of Emerald Lake and neighboring lakes and watersheds in
the Sierra Nevada (California) are transforming our understanding of how
mountain ecosystems are responding to global change. The proposed research will
test the hypothesis that altered climate, changing snow regime, and changes in
atmospheric composition are driving biogeochemical and ecological changes in
high elevation ecosystems. Data to test this hypothesis will come from studies
of lake metabolism, continued assessment of the response of lake phytoplankton
to changing atmospheric deposition, continued study of the coupling between
climate variability and nitrogen and phosphorus biogeochemistry, enhanced
measurements of atmospheric deposition, and paleolimnological study of lake
sediments. This research will build on more than two decades of biological,
meteorological, hydrological, and chemical measurements in high elevation sites.

Management of National Parks and Wilderness Areas in the Sierra Nevada will
benefit from the results of our research. The analyses and reconstructions will
provide valuable information to Federal and State scientists on long-term lake
changes and likely future responses of high elevation aquatic ecosystems to
climate change. This research will provide training for one graduate student at
UC Riverside in the interdisciplinary study of paleoclimatology and one graduate
student at UC Santa Barbara. There will be active recruitment for these students
at Minority Serving Institutions of higher learning. A strong outreach program
developed with Woodlake High School in Tulare County (Central Valley
agricultural region) will be expanded using field experiences and data from the
proposed paleo-investigations and climate reconstructions.