* 1242881
* 2012 Gordon-Kenan Graduate Research Seminar, August 4-5 and Sixth Gordon Research Conference on Plant Cell Walls, August 5-10, 2012,  Colby College, Waterville, Maine
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Jocelyn Rose, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 14,910.00

The cell walls of plants play critical roles in numerous aspects of their growth
and development, responses to the environment, and interactions with other
organisms. Plant walls also provide sources of food, fiber, and a spectrum of
biomaterials. Most notably, the last few years have seen a major resurgence of
interest in wall biology as a consequence of their enormous potential as a
bioenergy resource. Accordingly, the 2012 Gordon Conference on Plant Cell Walls
will cover a broad range of topics that are aimed at attracting researchers
interested in both basic and applied aspects of the field. The sub-theme of this
year's meeting, "Cell Wall Research in a Post-Genome World", will be a
consideration of the dramatic technological changes that have occurred in the
three years since the previous cell wall Gordon Conference in the area of DNA
sequencing. Next-generation sequencing technologies are revolutionizing
essentially every aspect of the life sciences and we are now in an era where
access to huge amounts of genome and gene expression data is readily available
and at low cost. What are the consequences of this paradigm shift to the study
of plant cell walls? What are questions related to the structure, function and
practical applications of cell walls that could not previously be addressed, but
are now within our reach? Are we witnessing the end of "model organisms"? Will
biodiversity be the next major frontier of wall research? How can we best
translate sequence information into enhanced understanding of fundamental cell
wall biology and biochemistry? In addition to sequencing, such questions will be
asked in the context of a wealth of other innovative technologies that are being
brought to bear on wall biology at unprecedented levels of resolution and at
many temporal and spatial scales: molecular, cellular, organismal and
evolutionary. This meeting will serve as a major forum for scientists from
diverse backgrounds to present, debate and craft the future of cell wall
research and it can be argued that there has never been a more important time to
do so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Gordon Research Conference will bring together
an international mix of academic, industrial, research center, and government
laboratory researchers to critically evaluate current understanding of plant
walls. The conference will also bring leading researchers from multiple
disciplines into contact with younger scientists to seed new research goals and
ideas. The Gordon Research Seminar will include oral presentation and poster
sessions presented and attended primarily by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers along with a selected panel of established researchers to contribute
to discussions, offering a unique opportunity for young scientists entering the
field to develop a close-knit community.