* 1242561
* Topics in the moduli theory of sheaves
* MPS,DMS
* 12/23/2011,07/31/2013
* Alina Marian, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 102,563.00

The PI plans to investigate the geometry of various spaces of sheaves on curves
and surfaces. In particular, she will study a space of stable sheaf quotients of
a trivial rank n sheaf on a curve, as the curve is allowed to vary in the
Deligne-Mumford moduli space. The space of stable quotients was constructed
earlier in joint work with D. Oprea and R. Pandharipande. In one direction, it
may help to clarify features of the tautological ring of the moduli space of
curves, to which it admits a proper morphism. In a different direction, the
intersection theory of the moduli space of stable quotients has close
connections with the Gromov-Witten theory of Grassmannians and complete
intersections in Grassmannians, which would be interesting to understand
completely. The PI also proposes to continue the study of strange duality
phenomena on moduli spaces of sheaves on surfaces. Recently, there has been good
progress in this area in the case of rational surfaces and K3 surfaces.

Moduli spaces of sheaves on varieties are geometric objects of great importance
in both mathematics and theoretical physics. Mathematically, their study was
initiated by Mumford's construction of the moduli space of stable bundles on a
smooth projective curve via geometric invariant theory. Later, Donaldson showed
that the intersection theory of moduli spaces of rank 2 sheaves on surfaces is a
useful tool for understanding the geometry of four-manifolds. In physics, moduli
spaces of vector bundles arise naturally in the fundamental investigation of
gauge theories. The PI plans to further the study of parameter spaces of sheaves
in various settings, and advance our understanding of these important geometric
structures.