* 1242316
* Direct Numerical Simulation and Experimental Validation of Electrohydrodynamic Fuel Atomization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Olivier Desjardins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 282,227.00

1034506 Desjardins

One approach to enhance the fuel atomization process is to capitalize upon the
benefits of electrohydrodynamic (EHD) phenomena. There are many possible
benefits to EHD aided atomization for combustion, such as smaller droplets,
wider spray cone, and the ability to control or "tune" the spray for improved
performance. The objective of the proposed work is to employ recently advanced,
state-of-the-art numerical schemes to conduct direct numerical simulation (DNS)
of EHD atomization and validate simulation results with experimental data. High-
fidelity numerical simulations will employ recently developed adaptive interface
transport techniques, coupled to a robust and accurate Navier-Stokes/Ghost fluid
solver. A novel numerical scheme for EHD will be developed that incorporates
both bulk dynamics and surface effects in order to achieve realistic predictions
of liquid break-up and atomization. The combination of these numerical tools
will permit full DNS of electrostatic-aided liquid atomization for high electric
Reynolds number.

Intellectual Merit: EHD flows and sprays have drawn increasing interest in
recent years, yet key questions regarding the complex interactions among
electrostatic charge, electric fields, and the dynamics of atomizing liquids
remain unanswered. Combining recently advanced numerical simulation tools with
validation experiments will permit exploration of EHD atomization with
unprecedented detail. The outcomes of this research will be a fundamental
understanding of the dynamics of EHD atomization, and a point of departure for
robust modeling of EHD sprays using advanced numerical methods or reduced order
models.

Broader Impacts: Fundamental atomization statistics extracted from this project
will benefit a large community by providing a theoretical foundation for new EHD
model developments. Automotive and aircraft engines rely extensively on fine
atomization of liquid fuels for complete and efficient combustion, and will
therefore benefit from this research. The simulated flow visualizations and
experimental results will be incorporated as pedagogical tools to support the
graduate courses that both PIs teach. The experimental validation will be
adapted for a hands-on learning module to support the undergraduate curriculum
and K-12 outreach activities at the University of Colorado at Boulder (UCB)
Integrated Teaching and Learning (ITL) Program (itll.colorado.edu).