* 1242975
* International Conference on Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, June 24-27, 2012, Berkeley, California
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Miriam Cortes-Caminero, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2013
* USD 9,935.00

1242975/ Cortes-Caminero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of bioengineering and
nanotechnology has rapidly emerged as an important area of research that affects
ranging from the environment to medicine; however, there few forums that bring
together biologists, chemists, and engineers to discuss ways in which their
disciplines can collaborate to find novel solutions to fundamental and applied
problems that are limiting the development of new technologies and therapies. In
response to this need, we are organizing the Sixth International Conference on
Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (ICBN). This meeting will be held every two
years and covers the breadth of bioengineering and nanotechnology to promote,
shape, and refine new directions in the field. The title for the conference is
"Bionanoscience and Bioengineering for Translational
Medicine."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The International
Conference on Bio-Nanotechnology (ICBN), organized by AIChE's Society for
Biological Engineering, has become a premier venue for presenting, discussing
and stimulating new research in the applications of nano-scale molecular
engineering to biology, biotechnology and biomedicine. Over the last decade the
conference has moved on a rotating basis among sites in the U.S., Europe and
Asia, encompassing a broad, international set of participants. This year's ICBN
is scheduled for June 24-27, 2012 in Berkeley, California, situated in a locale
where bio-nanotechnology activity is very intense, guaranteeing a high-level of
participation. The strategy of the organizers is to plan a program combining a
few leading, high-profile keynote speakers, with a set of invited and
contributed talks that will present work from laboratories of emerging leaders.
Five topical areas will be the basis of the conference organization: Biological
Devices/Biosensors and Molecular Diagnostics; Cell and Tissue Engineering; Drug,
Protein and Gene Delivery Systems; Nanoparticles, Nanocomposites and Nanoporous
Materials for Bio-Applications; Synthetic Biology. The organizing theme of this
conference is "Bionanoscience and Bioengineering for Translational Medicine",
focusing on bringing the unique combination of Bio-Nanotechnology presented at
ICBN to bear on delivering cost-effective health care. Achieving this goal
requires the intellectual intermingling of biology, medicine and molecular
engineering that ICBN has a demonstrable track record of
creating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;There are several
aspects to the broader impacts of this year's ICBN. First, there is the impact
of the unique combination of fields that come together at ICBN. Beyond this, the
organizing committee is specifically targeting a broad set of emerging leaders
in relevant fields with a group of speakers that gives some prominence to
emerging leaders who may not yet have received significant invitations
previously. The organizers have also given serious consideration to attracting
an appropriately gender-balanced set of speakers. NSF support will be used in
part to help achieve these broader impact objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scope, theme, and aims of the meeting fall squarely within the mission of the
NSF, which has been increasingly committed to integrating the physical and
engineering sciences with the life sciences, encouraging research and
development in multidisciplinary areas, educating the next generation of young
researchers, and helping increase the diversity of the workforce in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;This application, if successful, will provide partial
support for graduate student/postdoctoral associate participants, and by
providing a forum for the interactions between normally separated leading
scientists and engineers to stimulate new ideas that could benefit economic,
health and environmental related activities.