* 1242759
* Sustaining and Strengthening the US Desk for International Science Grid This Week
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Avery, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 445,411.00

iSGTW (International Science Grid This Week) is a unique international weekly
online publication that covers distributed computing and the research it
enables. They report on all aspects of distributed computing technology, such as
grids and clouds. They also regularly feature articles on distributed computing-
enabled research in a large variety of disciplines, including physics, biology,
sociology, earth sciences, archaeology, medicine, disaster management, crime,
and art. (Note that they do not cover stories that are purely about commercial
technology) In its current incarnation, iSGTW is also an online destination
where you can host a profile and blog, and find and disseminate announcements
and information about events, deadlines, and jobs. What many people outside of
particle physics may not know is that distributed computing played a crucial
role in the race towards the discovery of the Higgs Boson at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, each issue of iSGTW includes three feature
articles, a visual, and a spotlight. Visuals present opportunities to showcase
something graphic in nature, such as scientific visualizations, while spotlights
feature a variety of links, news articles, papers, and so forth. Both items are
typically written in a more casual style, with only a small amount of text.
iSGTW feature articles are typically 500 - 1,500 words, but sometimes run
longer. iSGTW coverage attempts to be rigorously neutral, never favoring
projects affiliated with its funding source or Advisory Board, and maintaining
balance across world regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iSGTW website, re-
launched in January 2011, also has a number of new and exciting community
service features. Readers can post announcements, advertise jobs, and add events
to the calendar and everything appears on the front page. News feeds on related
topics also appeal to readers looking for more background. Similarly, the
website has basic social networking functionality: visitors can leave comments,
share content, create profiles, and blog.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large
proportion of the news stories covering cyberinfrastructure-enabled research do
not mention the computational side of the story. By publishing well-written
science stories that explain the computational aspects of the research, iSGTW
ensures that taxpayers, policy makers, and other interested readers understand
the role of cyberinfrastructure in scientific endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;As a long-established publication, iSGTW has earned the trust of a
range of audiences. Furthermore, as an international collaboration with the
explicit support of diverse cyberinfrastructures (such as the Open Science Grid
and XSEDE), iSGTW is better able to maintain impartiality and credibility, as
compared to publications from individual institutions. The general public and
members of the press are more likely to give weight to the stories iSGTW runs,
and news outlets are more likely to pick them up.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
theory is supported by the growing number of journalists subscribing to iSGTW.
In the July 2009 reader survey, only 3% of iSGTW readers identified as
journalists. In the most recent survey, that rose to 7%. The subscription list
currently includes approximately 130 journalists, not counting those affiliated
with foreign-language media. Publications represented include The New York
Times, NPR, Science/AAAS, and the Washington Post. iSGTW's email subscriber list
has grown to approximately 8,180 today. Web readership is split evenly between
the US and the EU, with approximately 40% of viewers hailing from each
continent. Viewers from the Asia Pacific region constitute another 13%. Four
percent are from the Central and South American sub-continents. The remainder
are from Western Asia, the Middle East, and Africa.