* 1242417
* I-Corps:  High Density Memristive Devices for Non-Volatile Memory Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Rashmi Jha, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop high-density, low-power, and low-
cost memristive/Resistive Random Access Memory (ReRAM) devices for Non-Volatile
Memory (NVM) market. The memristive/ReRAM devices are identified on the
semiconductor roadmap as a leading potential replacement for the present flash
memories and an enabling technology for Terabytes/cm2 data "storage on chip"
almost 3 orders of magnitude denser than the current technology. However, the
major challenges to commercialization remain in addressing critical issues
including: (i) electroforming, (ii) tight control of compliance current, (iii)
reducing switching energy, (iv) device-to-device variability, (v) endurance and
cycle-to-cycle variability, and (vi) demonstration of 1Diode 1ReRAM (1D1R)
crossbar structures. This gap in knowledge persists due to a lack of fundamental
understanding on switching and charge transport mechanism in these devices. The
fundamental studies through previous NSF-funded research in this area led the
team to a potential solution that addresses these challenges.

The current market for NVM is around 26 billion USD and is projected to grow at
14% annually, reaching 51.2 billion USD by 2015. These NVM devices are becoming
increasingly important for massive data storage in smart-phone, tablets,
notebooks, digital cameras, video recording, and thumb-drives. The current NAND-
flash technology will be unable to meet this demand due to fundamental scaling
limits. The proposed innovation will provide high-density, low-power
memristive/ReRAM devices based memories with additional performance benefits of
fast write/erase/read times, endurance of 105 cycles, and 10 years of retention.
These devices demonstrate Multi-Level Cell (MLC) storage that will provide an
attractive solution for low-cost per bit storage. The demonstration of 1kb
memory in 1D1R configuration will significantly enhance the scientific and
technological understanding and will have significant impact on developing high-
density memory by 3-D stacking. If successful, this will have a direct impact on
economic development and job creation in Northwest Ohio and help maintain the US
leadership in this emerging technology.