* 1242585
* Collaborative Research: R &amp; D Toward DarkSide-G2, a Second-Generation Direct Search for Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Luca Grandi, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,839,083.00

The existence of dark matter is known from gravitational effects, but its nature
remains a deep mystery. One possibility motivated by other considerations in
elementary particle physics is that dark matter consists of undiscovered
elementary particles; Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs) are one
possibility. Evidence for WIMPs that could constitute dark matter may come from
experiments at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN or from sensitive astronomical
instruments that detect radiation produced by WIMP-WIMP annihilations in galaxy
halos. The orbital motion of the WIMPs composing the dark matter halo pervading
the galaxy should result in WIMP-nuclear collisions of sufficient energy to be
observable by sensitive laboratory apparatus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will provide funding for research and development steps to support DarkSide-G2,
a second-generation ("G2") direct WIMP search using a liquid argon Time
Projection Chamber (TPC) with an active mass of 3.3 tons. Liquid argon is a
promising medium for WIMP detection due to its efficient conversion of energy
from WIMP-induced nuclear recoils into both ionization and scintillation. The
argon scintillation time profile ("pulse shape") depends on the type of ionizing
particle, providing particle discrimination that can be used to suppress
background. This is one of the most powerful background rejection factors among
all dark matter detectors, and when combined with the measurement of ionization,
background rejection is even further enhanced. The performance of a ton-scale or
larger liquid argon TPC would be limited by the high rate of 39-Ar beta decays
if atmospheric argon was used. DarkSide-G2 will use argon collected from
underground sources which has been shown to have 39-Ar content lower than
atmospheric argon by at least a factor of 150. These funds will allow the groups
to carry out the detailed mechanical design work necessary to ensure the
functionality of the detector, develop necessary high voltage and data
acquisition elements, and develop and identify the extremely radiopure detector
components and techniques necessary to maximize the sensitivity of the
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This activity will advance the
development of astroparticle physics and its scientific and educational mission
in a variety of ways: (1) it will offer a continuing opportunity for the
training of students, who will have a chance to contribute a cutting-edge
project in fundamental science and advanced engineering; (2) it will benefit
society by developing techniques that could find application in areas ranging
from national security to medical imaging; and (3) it will support continued
development of successful E&amp;O programs such as the LNGS-South Dakota-
Princeton summer school for high school students.