* 1242892
* Building Connections and Learning Communities among  Educators and Researchers at HBCUs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* A. Boykin, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 12/31/2016
* USD 2,189,715.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Capstone Institute at Howard University uses
four partially overlapping tiers of activities aimed at systematically
addressing the complex challenges HBCUs face in providing a high-quality STEM
education for undergraduate and graduate students. In tier 1, the goal is to
develop dynamic networking structures to establish, expand, and sustain
connections among research participants and connections to human and
informational resources to enhance prowess at conducting high quality scientific
research. In tier 2, selected research participants will gain specific in-depth
support, in collaboration with colleagues and mentors, to craft a concrete, high
quality research product. Tier 2 will also target recursive problem-solving
tasks using a Collaboratory Notebook for accomplishing these types of tasks. In
tier 3, two cohorts of 30 educators (60 in total) from HBCUs who teach
gatekeeper STEM or STEM education courses will participate in a continuous
improvement intervention focused on a professional development model with
follow-up support structures and opportunities for collaboration. In tier 4, the
complexity of the various institutional structures across HBCUs and the need for
organizational exchanges will be facilitated by a Networked Improvement
Communities vehicle within this tier. Tier 4 will target top administrators
(e.g. provost, dean, department chair) at HBCUs that have consented to be a part
of an organizational change networked improvement community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this intervention entail a primary
focus on expanding the participation of underrepresented minority researchers,
educators and students in STEM fields through networking, training
opportunities, and advanced frameworks to undergird research and high quality
STEM teaching and learning. By improving STEM classroom instruction at the
faculty level, this intervention will strengthen STEM education for minority
students at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The core focus of the
proposed project is broader participation of under-represented groups and the
institutions that serve them in STEM-based research activities. A variety of
resources, innovative approaches, engaging activities, and highly appropriate
instruments will be used to advance the goals and objectives of the project. The
project addresses a true need in the academic community to develop and prepare
future STEM talent at the undergraduate and graduate levels relative to research
opportunities that propose innovation and technological advancement. Enhancement
of the infrastructure for STEM research and instruction is a direct benefit and
anticipated outcome of the project in regards to networks and collaborative
partnership development. The core outcomes speak to STEM-based innovation in the
broader society.