* 1242204
* The Millstone Hill Geospace Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2018
* John Foster, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carrie E. Black
* 11/30/2018
* USD 11,196,662.00

The investigators will continue the operation of, and research associated with,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology radar and distributed ground-based
instruments which comprise the Millstone Hill Geospace Facility (GF) in
Westford, Massachusetts. The operations plan for Millstone Hill closely follows
community guidance in enabling science, maintaining the facility, and conducting
education and outreach activities. The facility provides unique capabilities for
community science and observations at midlatitudes and in the important
plasmasphere boundary layer (PBL) --activities essential for addressing the
coupled workings of the Geospace system. The investigators will coordinate and
conduct frontier science investigations aligned with community strategies in
ionosphere-atmosphere interactions, Geospace system response, ion-neutral
coupling, and radio science investigations of fundamental plasma physics. In
support of community goals, the Millstone Hill staff will develop and implement
new radar and radio remote sensing techniques with improved spatial and temporal
resolution. These efforts will advance the technical capabilities of the
facility, enabling a wider use of key technology, tools, and approaches that
serve to maximize the scientific output of the facilities. Millstone Hill
scientific staff will also continue to investigate the development of
distributed-instrument arrays, lower atmosphere-upper atmosphere coupling, long-
term trends in the ionosphere and thermosphere, and studies of magnetosphere-
ionosphere coupling and the plasmasphere boundary layer. The facility operations
plan includes activities designed to train and motivate a new generation of
space scientists, radio scientists, and technicians through focused research
opportunities, technical workshops, and general public outreach. Staff
participation in international incoherent scatter radar workshops will focus on
graduate students and their mentors. Other international collaborations include
radar and radiophysics technical development, and efforts to develop an
affordable Geospace-system global observatory. The investigators will maintain
and expand the Madrigal Geospace Data System, and train and support the space
science community in its use and development. The program includes support for a
Boston University graduate student to work with the Millstone Hill Facility, and
for continued participation in the Haystack Observatory Research Experiences for
Undergraduates program. Millstone staff will also support international
collaboration and education by organizing and teaching in schools, workshops and
university classrooms, working with undergraduate, graduate, and precollege
students, and providing visiting residence programs.