* 1242087
* NUE: NanoTRA- Texas Regional Alliance to foster 'Nanotechnology Environment, Health, and Safety Awareness' in tomorrow's Engineering and Technology Leaders
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Craig Hanks, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2015
* USD 215,968.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: NanoTRA-Texas Regional Alliance to foster 'Nanotechnology
Environment, Health, and Safety Awareness' in tomorrow's Engineering and
Technology Leaders", at Texas State University-San Marcos, under the direction
of Dr. Jitendra S. Tate, will be a collaborative project with the University of
Texas (UT) at Tyler, to develop introductory and advanced curricula that address
the 'nanotechnology safety issues' that include social, ethical, environmental,
health, and safety issues of nanotechnology. The curricula will be modular in
nature, suitable for use either as two full semester courses that will be taught
online at UT at Tyler or for insertion as separate modules into undergraduate
engineering, engineering technology, and industrial technology courses at Texas
State.

This project will initially impact more than 1,000 undergraduate engineering and
technology students at Texas State and UT at Tyler, of which 350 are
underrepresented minority students. The insights gained from the development of
the courses and the rigorous assesment of learning outcomes will provide the
basis for the inclusion of nanotechnology social, ethical, environmental,
health, and safety issues in conventional engineering, engineering technology,
industrial technology, and science courses. The experience gained from co-
developing nanotechnology courses for two institutions will permit the
replication of the courses at other institutions, including HBCUs and HSIs and
community colleges, becoming a catalyst to promote nanotechnology safety
education in two and four year institutions throughout the U.S. The development
effort will enhance the qualifications of undergraduates, many of them women and
Hispanics, as they pursue nanoscience and nanotechnology-related careers in
industry or academia. The proposed project will help prepare a diverse workforce
to supply the needs of emerging nanotechnology companies, over 100 of which are
currently based in Texas.