* 1242334
* Future Faculty Workshop:  Diverse Leaders of Tomorrow
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Timothy Swager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This workshop, supported by the Division of
Materials Research and Division of Chemistry is designed to facilitate
underrepresented scientists to compete for assistant professor positions in
materials chemistry/engineering and materials science. The workshop targets
individuals with training in chemistry, physics, engineering, and biology
interested in independent research careers focusing on materials research. The
academic focus of this workshop serves to assist underrepresented groups to
create support networks. The relationships forged at the workshops facilitate
ongoing advocacy for the participants through future phases of their careers.
The Future Faculty Workshop (FFW) is now entering its fifth year and the last
workshops by every measure have been successful. The first three workshops were
funded with purely private sources. However, with the generous support of NSF,
the 2011 workshop was expanded and had the largest group yet with 41 attendees
and 11 Professor mentors. The FFW organization has largely been performed on an
ad hoc basis and has been rotating among a group of highly committed mentors. We
have documented the impact in increasing diversity in professorial ranks.
However, the challenge of increasing the diversity of the academy remains as a
significant problem. As a result, this workshop will therefore be needed for
some years to come. The FFW will be further developed over the next three years
by engaging different geographic regions and populations of the US beyond the
Northeast, where the last 4 workshops were held. A national FFW is expected to
not only serve different groups of aspiring academics, but also facilitate
interactions with other centers of materials research and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop, supported by the Division of Materials Research and Division of
Chemistry is designed to facilitate underrepresented scientists to compete for
assistant professor positions in materials chemistry/engineering and materials
science. One of the greatest challenges to the future of the United States is
effectively harnessing our nation's diverse human resources in science and
engineering. We will not be competitive without developing future generations
from all social, economic and racial backgrounds. In spite of many programs,
there continues to be a disproportionately low engagement of underrepresented
minorities in science and engineering. It is recognized that getting people
interested in science at a young age is important. However, even for those
underrepresented minority students who go on to study science, the "pipeline" is
leaky from the undergraduate to graduate school and on to the professorate. At
every stage the proportion of underrepresented minority students progressing to
the next level loses ground relative to the majority. Greater representation in
the professorship by underrepresented minorities and other disadvantaged groups
will be transformational and is one of the most effective ways to enhance
diversity in the future science and engineering workforce.