* 1242011
* EAGER: Direct Assimilation of Low-altitude Magnetic Perturbations in a Global Magnetosphere Model
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Dmitri Kondrashov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 06/30/2016
* USD 178,350.00

An EAGER project to explore newly developed advanced data assimilation methods
and implement them in a global magneto-hydro-dynamic (MHD) simulation of the
Earth's magnetosphere. While global MHD magnetospheric models have matured to
the point when they can be used for prediction of space weather processes, the
fundamental problem that they face is common to all numerical models of any
realistic physical system: insufficiently or poorly specified boundary/initial
conditions and, possibly, missing physics. To tackle this problem, the
atmospheric weather community has been developing methods of "data assimilation"
for the past ~50 years. In global magnetospheric modeling, the development and
implementation of data assimilation methods is hampered by the enormous spatial
scales of the system and inevitably poor spatiotemporal coverage of available
measurements. Data assimilation in MHD is particularly challenging because the
primary wave modes are non-linear, non-dispersive, and highly anisotropic. In
addition, modern global MHD codes utilize very large grids with up to tens of
millions of cells leading to huge covariance matrices that cannot be solved by
classical data assimilation approaches. The project will utilize major new
ionospheric observational assets, especially high-cadence magnetometer data from
the &gt;70-satellite Iridium constellation. The low-altitude (~800 km)
observations of magnetic perturbations with truly global continuous coverage
that are now provided by the NSF AMPERE project, will be used to specify a key
inner boundary condition for global MHD models. In this way, the project will
attempt the development of the first-ever data assimilation methodology for
global magnetospheric MHD simulations. If successful, results from this project
will lay the ground for transformative advances in global MHD simulations, both
as tools of scientific inquiry and for space weather forecasting.