* 1242141
* NUE: Societal, Ethical, Economic and Environmental Issues Relevant to Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* David Nikles, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2015
* USD 199,999.00

The goal of this NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Societal, Ethical,
Economic and Environmental Issues Relevant to Nanotechnology" (a Nano Bio Ethics
course), at the University of Alabama (UA) Tuscaloosa, under the direction of
Dr. Leila Ladani, is to develop a new multidisciplinary pipeline development co-
created course in the University of Alabama's Colleges of Engineering and Arts
and Science on nanoscience and its implications with regard to ethics, society,
economic considerations and the environment. The course will consist of seven
modules consisting of: (1) Introduction to Nanotechnology and Biotechnology, (2)
Emerging Applications of Nanotechnology and Biomedicine (3) Seeing is Believing
and Micro/Nanofabrication, (4) Economics of Nanotechnology and Biotechnology,
(5) Philosophy, Ethics, Science and Engineering, (6) Nanotechnology,
Biotechnology and Society, and (7) Nanotechnology, Biotechnology, and the
Environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research
address the creation of a pilot pipeline from high schools to major research
programs in Alabama. The pipeline will help prepare secondary, two-year and
four-year college students for strategic economic sectors in the state tied to
emerging technologies while fostering awareness of their implications to
society. It is anticipated that the pilot will involve 200 students per year
with 40% underrepresented group participation.