* 1242222
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI) on Frontiers in Particulate Media: From Fundamentals to Applications, La Plata, Argentina, August 2014
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Robert Behringer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2015
* USD 99,975.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place at the National
University of La Plata (UNLP) on August 2014 in Argentina. Organized by Dr. Lou
Kondic of the Department of Mathematical Sciences at the New Jersey Institute of
Technology (NJIT) and Dr. Robert P. Behringer, of the Department of Physics of
Duke University, the institute will focus on problems related to particulate
media. The distinguishing feature of the PASI will be close interaction of world
experts from different fields connected by the common underlying theme. The
proposal implements an interdisciplinary approach to learning, necessary in the
field of particulate media due to the skills from multiple disciplines that
transverse the traditional boundaries, and includes techniques from engineering
disciplines, computing, applied mathematics, theoretical and experimental
physics, and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PASI will integrate research and
education by giving an opportunity to junior scientists not only to learn, but
also to present their work to the international community, and interact directly
with the leaders in the fields of research related to particulate media. In
addition to this exposure the activity is further motivated by the need to
develop better educational and research connections between scientists and
engineers from the US and the countries of Central and South America. The
proposed PASI will lead to establishment of professional and personal
connections between researchers in various disciplines, and to new interactions
via student exchanges, reciprocal visits, and development of jointly funded
proposals. Results from the PASI, including videos and presentations, will be
disseminated through a website where all the lectures will be available.