* 1242240
* INSPIRE: Resorbable Electronics - Materials, Manufacturing, and Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* YongGang Huang, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the NSF Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate through the Biomaterials and Polymers Programs of the
Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
Partial funding from the NSF Engineering Directorate is provided through the
Mechanics of Materials and Nanomanufacturing Programs of the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SYNOPSIS: This
project will create an electronic platform with the ability to resorb into the
surrounding environment in a benign way, at prescribed times, and with well-
defined rates. This behavior is contrary to traditional expectations for
conventional electronics, where the goal has typically been to achieve physical
forms that display extended lifetimes. The work described will develop a
scientific and engineering base of knowledge on materials, manufacturing
strategies, and modeling tools for a resorbable electronics technology. This
approach will enable important new classes of devices that cannot be achieved
with conventional electronics. These could include medical monitors, sensors, or
actuators that fully resorb into the human body at the end of their functional
life and environmental monitors that eliminate the need for collection or
recovery because they decay into their surroundings in a programmed way. Other
concepts could include compostable circuits that will facilitate disposal of
used electronics or circuits that incorporate strategic segments with timed
transience to induce controlled transformation in electronic function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The project combines a highly
collaborative, interdisciplinary team of PIs with a distinguished record of
accomplishment in biopolymer-based devices, unconventional electronics
(stretchable/flexible), manufacturing and mechanical modeling. The core
intellectual content covers materials science (biological/organic/inorganic),
advanced fabrication techniques, electrical engineering, and integrated circuit
design, all together with theoretical modeling from the device to system levels.
Expertise in these areas will be combined to define the foundations of a
resorbable electronics technology with target demonstration vehicles in digital
and analog integrated circuits. Specifically, the PIs will generate an extensive
set of resorbable electronic materials and device designs and develop novel
manufacturing strategies to process these materials and create functional
devices. At the same time, they will develop ad hoc analytical and computational
models for resorption at the materials, device, and systems levels in order to
integrate the findings and provide the necessary predictive and design
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Successful outcomes will obviate
surgeries previously required to remove temporarily implanted medical sensors
and actuators, reduce the costs of recovering environmental sensors and
measuring devices, and help to compost electronic devices that are consigned to
landfills. A new library of resorbable electronic components and compatible
manufacturing technologies will be made available to the community. The project
will support graduate and postdoctoral training at the forefront of materials
science and electronic device design. Existing programs providing research
experiences for undergraduates at Illinois and Tufts will be continued. The
topic can stimulate the inherent interest of the general public and will provide
opportunities for contacts through museums and the public school system. The
Tufts site already uses the silk and silkworm aspects of this project to attract
interest in these settings. These activities will continue.