* 1242503
* I-Corps:  Helping Users and ISPs Manage Home Networks with BISmark
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Nicholas Feamster, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Home networks are an unexplored frontier of modern communication networks.
Despite the massive penetration of home networks, researchers and network
operators have almost no understanding of how users configure and use them, how
well they perform, and (perhaps most importantly) what types of new applications
could be possible with home network infrastructure that enables easier
management and more flexible application development. Many conventional network
management problems become even more acute in the home, where typically
unskilled or uninterested users find themselves with complex network management
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advent of the U.S. Ignite program on the
heels of the national broadband initiative, the United States will see
increasing penetration of high-speed connectivity into homes. Access Internet
Service Providers will thus be faced with an increasingly large customer base
with diverse expertise and expectations. Increasingly, these ISPs are looking to
innovate in "Home Area Networks" with new applications to enable remote
troubleshooting, backup and data management, remote health care, energy
management, and so forth. All of these applications will require an underlying
network infrastructure that is flexible, extensible, and easy to manage. If
successful, the applications that the team proposes to develop will help both
users and Internet service providers manage their home networks better.