* 1242281
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Atmospheric Processes in Latin America and the Caribbean: Observations, Analysis, and Impacts; Cartagena, Colombia, Spring 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* John Braun, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 99,997.00

A Pan American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI) on Atmospheric Processes of
Latin America and the Caribbean: Observations, Analysis, and Impacts will be
held be held in Cartagena, Colombia, in 2013. The Principal Investigator, John
Braun, will be joined on the organizing committee by Hector Mora Paez (Center
for Processing and Analysis of Geodetic Data, Colombian Geological Survey),
Angel G. Munoz (Center for Scientific Modeling, Universidad del Zulia,
Venezuela) and Olga L. Mayol-Bracero (Institute for Tropical Ecosystem Studies,
University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This short course
is intended to foster a community of early career scientists who are interested
in regional atmospheric processes, and is intended as a way of introducing these
researchers to the Continuously Operating Caribbean Observational Network
(COCONet). COCONet is a regional network of Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS) instruments and surface meteorology stations that will provide continuous
total column precipitable water vapor, surface pressure, temperature, relative
humidity, horizontal winds, and precipitation measurements across the Caribbean
and Latin America. The course will provide a comprehensive summary of the state
of knowledge of the key processes that are important to the region including
global tele-connections, regional monsoon systems, ocean-air interactions,
hurricanes, and regional sources of moisture and its transport. The course will
contain lectures, computing exercises, exposure to observational datasets and
atmospheric model fields, and software training. Both the lecturers and students
will represent a number of countries in the Americas. Thus this PASI will
provide an environment to advance partnerships and start new collaborations. The
intent of this activity is to allow junior scientists in the Americas the
opportunity to gain professional experience beyond their nations? borders.