* 1242579
* Development of the LZ Dark Matter Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Daniel Akerib, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,400,770.00

A broad range of astrophysical and cosmological observations indicates that 80%
of the matter in the universe is in a new form which does not emit or absorb
light, and has not yet been encountered in the laboratory. Many physics models
suggest that the dark matter may be composed of one or more previously
unobserved Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs. The astrophysical
detection of such a particle through its interactions in a terrestrial particle
detector would have a profound impact on cosmology and fundamental interactions,
while also giving rise to a new type of observational astrophysics. This work
supports key research and development and design efforts toward construction of
a 7-ton liquid Xenon dark matter detector, known as 'LZ', to be installed at the
4850 level of the Sanford Underground Research Facility in Lead, South Dakota.
This detector will use established liquid Xenon Time Projection Chamber
technology with read out of primary and secondary scintillation signals for
particle identification, together with 3-d position reconstruction to exploit
the self-shielding of the liquid Xenon, removal of surface artifacts and
calibration of position-dependent response functions. The experiment will take
advantage of existing infrastructure and detector components from the LUX
experiment, which is currently being deployed into the mine, allowing a rapid
turn-around at the conclusion of that experiment's life.

Broader Impacts By exploiting the natural curiosity of the public in dark matter
as well as the connection and familiarity with gravity, this project will
provide a rich environment in which to develop a range of activities from tours
and displays to partnerships with local schools and individuals, aimed at
fostering an interest in science and science careers. Through both LUX and LZ
programs, the collaboration will continue to play a key role in the efforts at
Sanford in education and public outreach programs. Dark matter science also
demands the development of new technologies that are ultra-sensitive to
radiation and new methods for achieving ultra-low radioactive backgrounds. There
is direct overlap with the methods used in a wide range of nuclear security and
medical imaging contexts. The instrument that will be developed will also
provide direct educational and training benefits at the undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral levels, and will promote basic science research by providing
access to non-Ph.D. granting institutions, particularly those in geographical
proximity to Lead, SD.