* 1242506
* DIANA, an Underground Accelerator Facility for Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Paul Fallon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,800,375.00

This award will enable continuation of research and development of plans for an
underground accelerator laboratory that would address fundamental questions in
nuclear astrophysics like understanding the origin of the elements and the
chemical evolution of the universe. The goal is to eventually address three
long-standing fundamental problems in nuclear astrophysics: solar neutrino
sources and the core metallicity of the sun; carbon-based nucleosynthesis; and
neutron sources for the production of trans-iron elements in stars. Each of
these processes requires precise measurements of very low-energy nuclear cross
sections. However, because of the small cross-sections and large radiation
backgrounds in the typical laboratory environment, the use of underground-based
low-energy accelerator facilities is required to advance our knowledge of low
energy stellar reactions. The Dual Ion Accelerator for Nuclear Astrophysics
(DIANA) is a proposed next generation underground accelerator laboratory
providing enhanced capabilities in terms of substantially higher ion beam
intensity, different ion species, and broader energy range than those at current
facilities. It would enable measurements of solar burning cross-sections at
lower energies with higher precision and enhance our knowledge of more complex
reaction mechanisms during late stellar burning. This award provides support for
research and development, feasibility studies of underground sites, and project
development and definition so that the DIANA team can further advance the design
activities and deliver reliable cost and schedule estimates. This work builds
upon the conceptual design that was developed for the Homestake Mine in South
Dakota.

If DIANA is eventually built, the facility will host a large number of graduate
student and postdoctoral researchers and users, contributing to training
professionals in the areas of radiation physics and nuclear technologies, which
are essential for the national needs in medicine, energy production, defense,
industry, and government. An outreach program will be developed in collaboration
with the Joint Institute of Nuclear Astrophysics (JINA). It will take advantage
of the opportunities offered by an underground location and will be organized in
coordination with local colleges and outreach organizations.