* 1242209
* Pan-American Studies Institute (PASI): Adaptive Water-Energy Management in the Arid Americas; La Serena, Chile, 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Christopher Scott, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI), jointly supported by the
NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in La Serena, Chile, in
2013. Dr. Christopher Scott (University of Arizona) will be joined in the
organizing committee by scientists from Chile and the Inter-American Institute
for Global Change Research. The institute will focus on developing a cadre of
multidisciplinary scientists with conceptual understanding, skills and tools to
address the inter-linkage of water resources (primarily freshwater) and energy
(electrical power and biofuels). Regions experiencing scarcity of freshwater and
inadequate availability of energy are especially vulnerable to global change.
The interrelationship between water and energy raises challenges for policy and
planning. This PASI will provide participants with diagnostic skills and water
and energy co-management tools that maintain or increase resource-use
productivity while enhancing adaptation outcomes. Foci will be on tailoring new
tools such as resource and efficiency inventories, analytical and computational
models, and stakeholder engagement methods. The PASI will train young
researchers, agency personnel, and non-governmental organization staff. The
objectives are to provide participants with diagnostic skills and water and
energy co-management tools that maintain or increase resource-use productivity
while enhancing adaptation outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will
introduce U.S. students to many important techniques in the above subjects. The
PASI will also strengthen a regional knowledge network within the Americas for
the inclusion of adaptive management principles in water and energy decision-
making. Participants will gain hands-on experience working with models in
interaction with decision-makers.