* 1242113
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute on Sustainable Urban Freight Systems (SUFS); Cartagena-Bogota, Colombia, 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Jose Holguin-Veras, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in Cartagena and
Bogot√°, Colombia. Organized by Dr. Jose Holguin-Veras, Professor of Civil and
Environmental Engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the Pan-American
Advanced Institute on Sustainable Urban Freight Systems aims to promote enhanced
cooperation among transportation researchers in the Americas around the subject
of sustainable urban freight systems (SUFS). The proposed PASI intends to
develop a new generation of researchers and practitioners with a holistic view
of urban freight system issues and their solutions that, ultimately, will have
an impact on research, education and practice to foster SUFS. The PASI will
bring together instructors who are international experts in major disciplinary
groups including engineering, decision sciences, management, and economics. The
multidisciplinary nature of this team, as well as the opportunity to engage in
international collaborations, will ensure cross fertilization among the
participating disciplines and, ultimately, will pave the ways for new paradigms
of transportation sustainable systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will
introduce students to many important techniques in the above subjects. In
addition to the benefits from developing long term synergistic relationships
among faculty members, post docs, and senior PhD students, the PASI is intended
to help achieve the support the education and advancement of underrepresented
students. It will also provide up-to-date information on the deliberations of
the PASI to a wider audience through a web page to disseminate results and
reports of the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;