* 1242943
* CEDAR: Numerical Investigation of Observed Multiscale Dynamics in the Middle Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Brian Laughman, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 244,022.00

This is a 3-year modeling effort to be undertaken as part of the Coupling,
Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions program. Atmospheric gravity
waves are believed to play a vital role in the transport of energy and momentum
between atmospheric layers. This transport is enabled by the propagation of
these waves vertically through the background atmosphere and dissipation of
these occurs via the growth of instabilities (both convective and shear
instabilities). This project utilizes two advanced numerical simulations to
investigate gravity wave and instability processes in the Mesosphere-Lower
Thermosphere (MLT) region. Previous simulations have been performed in idealized
environments and small periodic domains. Here, the simulations will be extended
to deep domain studies, which will examine these wave and instability processes
in more realistic flows inspired by detailed
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravity waves are a significant forcing
source on MLT dynamics and their effects strongly impact general circulation and
climate models. In addition, numerical weather prediction models, despite their
tropospheric focus, have been shown to make better predictions when the upper-
atmospheric dynamics are more accurately modeled. Specifically, improved
understanding of when / where gravity waves become unstable in realistic flows
that would result from this effort is a vital step towards improving
parametrization of these waves in global-scale models.