* 1242509
* Advanced Techniques for Loading Metals into Liquid Scintillators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Nikolai Tolich, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 792,241.00

One of the most important questions regarding neutrino properties is whether or
not neutrinos are their own antiparticles, or equivalently, whether neutrinos
are Majorana rather than Dirac particles. If neutrinos are Majorana particles,
the mechanism that gives them mass is not part of the Standard Model of particle
physics and requires new physics. The most practical way to observe that
neutrinos are Majorana particles is to see the neutrino-less double beta decay,
a process that explicitly violates the conservation of lepton number. The work
supported by this award will develop new techniques for increasing the
concentration of metals that can be loaded into liquid scintillator detectors.
The near-term physics goal is to improve the sensitivity of neutrino-less double
beta decay searches with large underground liquid scintillator experiments, such
as the SNO+ experiment. The sensitivity of SNO+ is a function of both the
quantity of double beta decay Neodymium isotope that can be dissolved in the
scintillator, and the detector's overall energy resolution: more isotope
increases the signal, while improved resolutions allow better separation of
signal from background. The limit to the total mass of isotope that can be
dissolved comes from the competition between the additional statistics and the
loss of light due to absorption by Neodymium. This work will carry out a
dedicated investigation into the loading of Neodymium nanoparticles, rather than
dissolving Neodymium directly, as a way to add more isotope while limiting the
level of light lost, thus significantly improving sensitivity to a neutrino-less
double beta decay signal. The plan of work includes development of loading
techniques to ensure homogeneity and stability within the scintillator,
measurements of optical transmission and scattering of the suspensions,
measurements of light yield and scintillation timing profiles, and simulation
and analysis to determine the impact of nanoparticle solutions on SNO+'s
sensitivity to neutrino-less double beta decay.

Broader Impacts The question of whether the neutrino is its own antiparticle is
not only the most pressing question in neutrino physics, it also has
implications for the origin of the current preponderance of matter over
antimatter in our Universe. The techniques that will be investigated here can
also be applied equally well to other liquid-scintillator detectors, including
planned very large-scale detectors such as LENS. They may also be useful for the
loading of any non-double beta decay isotope, for purposes that could go well
beyond neutrino physics. The work described here will also play an important
role in the training and education of young researchers. It is very well-suited
to the involvement of undergraduates, both in hands-on activities as well as
simple data analysis and simulation.