* 1242514
* A Wideband Intelligent Trigger
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Henry Sobel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 325,742.00

The ability to observe very low-energy electrons is crucial for the physics
reach of the Super-Kamiokande (SK) experiment at the Kamioka mine in Japan. It
influences the sensitivity to a wide range of physics topics from solar
neutrinos to proton decay to particle identification. This work will develop new
software and hardware for a new very low-energy trigger for the SK experiment.
In late 2008, all of the electronics and data acquisition components in SK were
replaced, leading to an entirely new data-taking approach using real-time
software triggers; however, the initial computing and storage capabilities of
this system only allow an energy threshold similar to that of the previous
system. The Wideband Intelligent Trigger (WIT) system will provide sufficient
connectivity, storage, and CPU power to completely process the data in the un-
triggered, raw stream and extract electrons with high efficiency down to a total
energy of 3 MeV, which is the limit of stable and reliable event reconstruction
at SK. It operates by evaluating each data block independently in a massively
parallel fashion and applying new software algorithms that culminate in a two-
stage vertex reconstruction. This procedure reduces the background, the
processing time and the final data size to a manageable level. The new low
energy threshold will: (1) improve SK's sensitivity to spectral distortions of
solar neutrinos due to the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein (MSW) effect, bringing
new sensitivity to to the as-yet-unobserved upturn in the solar neutrino
spectrum expected from large mixing angle MSW oscillations; (2) provide new
functionality by acting as a galactic supernova burst trigger; and (3) by adding
Gadolinium to the water, enable SK to detect neutrons with high efficiency,
significantly reducing the atmospheric neutrino background to both the
observation of proton decay and relic supernova neutrinos.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award is an example of how
advances in computing can extend the capabilities of existing instruments for
basic research, effectively extending the physics reach and leveraging existing
investments. The Kamioka Laboratory in Japan has an extensive program for
involving the public, undergraduate students and K-12 students in the excitement
of physics research. The postdoc and graduate student working on WIT will be
integrated into these activities and lectures on the physics that comes from
looking at low-energy events in Super-Kamiokande. Undergraduate students from
the U.S. will work with this group in Japan during the summer for one to two
months to help implement WIT and to help analyze the first data. They will
maintain a collaborative relationship with faculty at a local undergraduate
institution. They will also participate in the effort by attending Super-
Kamiokande collaboration meetings, taking shifts at the experiment and
participating in the scientific research.