* 1242215
* Conference Meeting:  International Symbiosis -July 22-28, 2012 in Krakow, Poland
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Douglas Zook, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 05/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

Symbiosis, intimate associations among different life forms in nature - is
increasingly appreciated as a central biological phenomenon, with important
effects on ecosystems, and the evolution of life on earth. Examples include
ecologically important symbioses such as reef-building corals associated with
symbiotic algae, and symbioses between land plants and fungi associated with
plant roots. Human beings depend heavily on healthy symbiotic systems for
productive crops and fisheries, insect controls, medicines, and ecosystem
maintenance. This award will support participation by prominent American
symbiosis researchers, as well as selected American pre-college teachers and
graduate students in a unique international conference sponsored by the
International Symbiosis Society, to be held July 22-28, 2012 at Jagiellonian
University in Kraków, Poland. Hosting symbiosis researchers from over twenty-
five countries, the meeting will stimulate new ideas and new research
collaborations, and include discussion of economic, ecological, and societal
implications of symbiotic associations. International, interdisciplinary
exchanges will be fostered not only through formal presentations of cutting-edge
research, but also through numerous opportunities for informal person-to-person
discussions. The Polish venue of the conference will further enhance potential
international collaboration by enabling exchanges with central and eastern
European scientists who have had relatively few opportunities to attend
international conferences. Focused themes at the Congress include the
significance of partnership-building in evolution; how symbiotic systems may be
applied in climate change adaptation; the role of fungal-plant associations in
restoring toxic industrial waste sites; the human body as an ecosystem; and
innovative ways to teach about symbiosis. Special plenary lectures include a
tribute to renowned symbiosis pioneer and thinker Lynn Margulis; a visual
journey of Antarctica from a woman symbiologist who has based her research there
over many years; and, the key roles of viruses in the biosphere from the
perspective of a medical doctor.