* 1242498
* I-Corps:  Functional Microscale Medical Adhesives
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

In this project, the team will use two photon polymerization and micromolding in
order to prepare functional microscale medical adhesives that overcome
complications associated with liquid wound sealants and other conventional wound
closure materials. In recent work, the team created two-pronged, eight-pronged,
ten-pronged, and sixteen-pronged out of an acrylate-based polymer using an
indirect rapid prototyping approach that involved two photon polymerization and
micromolding. In current work, they are creating "functional tissue barbs" by
modifying tissue barb materials with rose bengal. Rose bengal is a biocompatible
material that has been used to facilitate tissue bonding and wound sealing after
photoactivation by green light. Resources from the I-Corps project will support
two photon polymerization/micromolding of polymeric tissue barbs containing
photoactivated tissue bonding agents as well as characterization of functional
tissue barbs using biological, mechanical, and functional (e.g., cadaveric swine
skin joining) studies.

Wound site inflammation and scar formation are complications that are associated
with conventional wound closure materials. An indirect rapid prototyping
approach that involves a combination of two photon polymerization and
micromolding will be used for high-throughput replication of functional tissue
barbs from rose bengal-modified polymers. These barbs must exhibit
biocompatibility and appropriate mechanical properties for clinical use.
Functional tissue barbs containing photoactivated tissue bonding agents will be
inexpensively produced using two photon polymerization and micromolding for use
by medical practitioners in a variety of clinical settings, from the primary
care physician's office to the surgical suite. If successfully commercialized,
this technology has the potential to significantly impact, in a positive way,
the way the health care industry treats a wide area of wounds.