* 1242221
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI): Linking Microbiology, Engineering, and Mathematics for Water Research; Sao Paulo, Brazil, July 2013.
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Charles Haas, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2013
* USD 99,986.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in July 1-10, 2013
at the School of Public Health at University of SÃ£o Paulo (USP), Brazil. The
principal investigator, Dr. Joan Rose (Michigan State University) will be joined
on the organizing committee by scientists from the U.S., Brazil, Mexico, Panama,
and Venezuela. This PASI will engage 25 post-doctoral scientists, advanced
graduate students and junior scientists and engineers from a diverse set of
fields including environmental engineering, microbiology, environmental science,
epidemiology, environmental health, veterinary medicine, and emergency
preparedness. Participants will gain hands-on experience with mathematical
software and statistical approaches for addressing water pollution and control.
Additionally, the participants will attend lectures from top scientists in the
field of quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA), engage in specific
exercises, and become familiar with probabilistic
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will build upon the World Health
Organization's recent publication that recommended that QMRA be used to
implement the water safety plans by engaging more scientists and engineers from
across the globe to gain experience with QMRA. In addition, countries such as
Brazil, Chile and Mexico are in a position to construct their water service
systems implementing the new technologies that will be discussed and assessed in
the institute. Global access to program materials will be created via a website
and contributions to the QMRA wiki. Additionally, an environmental science and
engineering career program will be developed to discuss post-doctoral
scientists' pathways for engaging in water research, particularly in Central and
South America.