* 1242909
* EAGER Collaborative Research:  Bringing Together Computational and Linguistic Methods to Extract 'Dark' Geosciences Data for the EarthCube Framework
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Christopher Jenkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2013
* USD 69,452.00

A large percentage of vaulable geoscience data is based on the analysis of
discrete samples and is collected manually (e.g., paleontological collections,
structural/tectonic data, petrographic/mineralogic data, economic data,
geochemical measurements, rock mechanics, etc.) Often, these data are reported
only in tables in the published literature or in .pdf or spreadsheets on
individual investigator websites. Commonly these data are not registerd on or
entered into standardized, publicly accessible databases. As a result, for this
data to be discovered and used/reused, researchers or other interested parties
must manually comb through the text, figures, and appendices of journal articles
or websites of individual investigators, sometimes having to sift through raw
experimental data. This process is extremely time intensive and slows down the
time needed to make scientific discoveries or allow verification of research
results. As a result the vast amount of surface earth geoscience data is
currently inaccessible. This inaccessible data is termed "Dark Data". This EAGER
combines the expertise of top-notch computer scientists and geoscientists whose
goal is to create a search algorithm to bring this dark data to light in a way
that will enable the next generation of integrative geoscience research. The
approach will involved development of an innovative search engine "crawler" that
will comb the geoscience literature and bring dark data to light from the text
and figures in this corpus. The cyberinfrastructure tool being developed will be
able to interpret the semantics of English text and the concepts of geoscience.
The tool will be piloted by examining entries on the Macrostrat database, a
structured spatial database of lithologic and geochronologic information, and
then employing a geoscience ontology by means of the Hazy framework for
information extraction. Questions to be addressed will be to find out to what
extent dark data is presently accessible and if it can be extracted and placed
into an accessible format and repository where it can be discovered by web
services or other search engines. Broader impacts of the work include training
of graduate students and increasing the infrastructure for science through the
development of a new and much needed data search tool.