* 1242839
* Collaborative Research:   CubeSat:  A U.S. CubeSat Constellation for the QB50 Mission (QBUS)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Aaron Ridley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 04/30/2018
* USD 289,227.00

This project by a consortium of six institutions describes an initiative, named
QBUS, to participate in the international QB50 cubesat
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QB50 is an international network of 50 CubeSats
for multi-point, in-situ measurements in the largely unexplored lower
thermosphere. Led by the Von Karman Institute (VKI) of Belgium, the QB50 project
is predominantly funded from a FP7 Grant by the European Union (EU) and includes
international participation from more than 30 countries. The idea behind the
project is that the EU grant will supply the science instruments and a joint
launch for all 50 satellites, which will be provided by participating teams that
will secure their own independent funding for CubSat production and ground
station operation. The plan for QB50 is that all 50 CubeSats will be launched
together in 2015-2016 on a Shtil-2.1 from Murmansk in northern Russia into a
circular orbit at 320 km altitude, inclination 79ยบ. Due to atmospheric drag, the
orbits will decay and the CubeSats will be able to explore all layers of the
lower thermosphere without the need for on-board propulsion, down to 90 or 100
km, depending on the quality of their thermal design. It is expected that the
network will spread around the Earth (in a single orbit plane) providing a range
of spacing and temporal revisit times. The lifetime of the CubeSats from
deployment until atmosphere re-entry will be less than three months. Each QB50
satellite is required to carry one of three standardized sensor packages: a
plasma package, a neutral package or a composition package. The plasma package
is based on a miniaturized Langmuir probe providing plasma density, the neutral
package measures the atomic and molecular Oxygen density, and the composition
package is an Ion-Neutral Mass Spectrometer (INMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
partners of the QBUS consortium (3 research universities, one Hispanic minority
undergraduate university, and 2 national laboratories) all have significant
CubeSat and Ionosphere-Thermosphere (IT) science experience. The QBUS team will
build 4 identical 2U CubeSat flight units based on a joint design, with
participating members providing various components of the usual satellite
functions (attitude determination and control, uplink and downlink
telecommunications, power subsystem including a battery and body-mounted solar
cells, on-board data handling and storage by a CPU). Of the three available
options, the QBUS team has been approved by the QB50 project to fly the INMS
sensor built by the Mullard Space Science Laboratory (MSSL). This instrument
will measure atmospheric composition via abundance determination of neutral
atomic O, molecular O2 and N2. QBUS as part of QB50 offers a unique opportunity
for dense and distributed in-situ measurements of the most poorly characterized
state parameter: neutral and ion composition from 100-320 km. The project will
use measurements from QBUS, QB50, and complementary ground-based observations to
characterize and understand how compositional changes are created by energy
inputs, propagated and ultimately equilibrated within the IT system.
Specifically, it will be possible, for the first time, to quantify the effect of
composition changes (primarily O/N2) on electron density changes across temporal
scales (minutes to months) and spatial scales (10-s km to
global).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project constitutes a particularly creative
and cost-effective approach. The multi-university and national Laboratory
solution proposed entails partners sharing and leading by their specific
strengths. Efficiency of numbers and division of labor by experience will result
in tremendous program costs savings. In addition, QBUS constitutes substantial
leveraging on the international QB50 project. As a result of U.S. funded
participation in QB50 the entire U.S. science community will have the
opportunity to access the full constellation dataset from QB50. The QB50/QBUS
program also serves as impetus for unprecedented coordination between NSF-
sponsored facilities and instruments for in-situ and ground based campaigns to
enable IT discovery. The project has tremendous educational impacts. It will
directly support the training of the next generation of instrument engineers and
geoscientists at 4 universities (one of which is minority serving) in the
consortium, expecting to provide around 200 students hands-on involvement in the
development, testing and operations of the QBUS CubeSats. It will facilitate
additional student participation across the United States and internationally
through use of derived data products from the entire QB50 mission.