* 1242948
* Science Program Overview (SPO):  Southern Andes - ANtarctic GRavity wave InitiAtive (SAANGRIA)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/09/2012,08/31/2014
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2014
* USD 22,689.00

Gravity waves (GWs) extend through great atmospheric depths--under some
conditions exceeding 100 km in vertical extent, most notably above major
mountain ranges--and embody oscillatory air motions and associated
thermodynamic, chemical, microphysical and plasma properties. They are key
communicators of momentum and other forms of energy between the lowest and
highest reaches of earth's atmosphere. GWs also constitute a significant source
of severe turbulence encountered by aircraft, play a role in formation of polar
stratospheric clouds that in-turn contribute to ozone destruction, and
systematically influence the larger-scale atmospheric circulation. In response
to a submitted Scientific Program Overview (SPO) document for the Southern Andes
- Antarctic Gravity wave InitiAtive (SAANGRIA) project, this preliminary effort
will focus on travel required for coordination of potential SAANGRIA
investigators and limited site surveys needed to identify suitable location(s)
for operations involving research aircraft, supporting surface-based
observations and associated personnel. If ultimately supported, the SAANGRIA
field campaign will trace GWs from their generation above orographic escarpments
and within active baroclinic zones to their high-altitude breakdown in the
mesosphere and thermosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If supported, SAANGRIA will
utilize the NSF/NCAR GV aircraft as a platform for combined dropsonde, in situ
and remote-sensing measurements of GW generation, propagation and dissipation.
The project's intellectual merit is centered on advancing our understanding of
GW sources and vertical coupling, GW instabilities and interactions, impacts on
Antarctic ozone, and impacts of GW-modulated transport and deposition of
momentum on large-scale atmospheric dynamics. Broader impacts of the planned
field program will include training of graduate students, increased
collaboration and coordination among multiple research agencies and research
subdisciplines, improved understanding and forecasts of atmospheric turbulence
and airflow, and associated societal benefits.