* 1242851
* EAGER: Blackout: An educational experiment in gaming the power grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Sean Meyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,954.00

Power grids are getting dramatically more complex, as they reorganize around
market mechanisms and become increasingly coupled with the environment. This
rising level of complexity poses a challenge to the engineering education
community, which currently does not have an appropriate vehicle to teach how to
approach the design and regulation of large-scale infrastructures. Building on
the proven educational benefits provided by games, the researchers propose to
address the need for a new instrument by developing Blackout, a persistent, web
browser-based, multiplayer online game about dynamic markets for electric
power.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on concept
development for Blackout, in collaboration with an experienced game design
professional with a proven track record. This design process emphasizes rules
and play experience instead of other, often more costly aspects of game
development, such as art, programming, marketing, documentation, and so on. The
researchers and graduate students will be actively involved at various stages of
this iterative design process, and draw on their respective expertise in
distributed control systems and pricing, and power system dynamics and control,
to specify the objectives and ensure that the rules of play and environment,
while simplified, retain the main essential features and challenges as real
power systems. At the conclusion of concept development, the researchers
anticipate the creation of a working multiplayer prototype, playable from a
remote Web browser. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;If successful, games
like Blackout will play a significant role in raising the public awareness about
the challenges and significance of infrastructure design and regulation, and in
training the next generation of engineers and scientists. The final prototype
game will be made available online to the general public and the research
community. The project will provide an opportunity for the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students and will result in a teaching vehicle that
is likely to help engage nontraditional engineering students.