* 1242355
* LTREB RENEWAL:   Collaborative Research: Population- and community-level mechanisms of range limitation in a variable and changing environment
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Daniel Doak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 259,607.00

Anticipating the effects of global climate change requires an understanding of
how the abundances and geographic distributions of plants and animals will
respond to altered weather patterns. This project continues a long-term study of
two alpine plants from northern Alaska to the high alpine of New Mexico. Data
collected to date show that near their southern limits, both species show
declining survival but higher growth. These compensatory responses mitigate
climate effects in most years, but break down in the warmest years. Over the
next five years, the project will gather more detailed data to tie these
ecological responses to local and regional climate and use climate change
predictions to project the future range limits of the species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how climate, and climate change, determine
ecological dynamics is a central requirement for understanding when, where, and
why climate change will or will not have serious consequences. This research
will build capacity to anticipate climate change impacts, including the
development of field and population modeling methods that can be extended to
other species and ecosystems. Beyond the applied benefits of this understanding,
the work will contribute to long-standing questions about the forces that
naturally set range limits and determine patterns of biological diversity. The
research incorporates both formal training in field and modeling methods to
graduate and undergraduate students and informal education to the general
public. The latter includes active involvement in non-profit education centers,
public lectures through the National Park Service, and a series of articles
written for the popular media.