* 1242171
* NUE:  Improvement of Nanoscale Device Education via Theory, Experimental Design, and Characterization
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Michael Harris, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: Improvement of Nanoscale Device Education via Theory,
Experimental Design, and Characterization", at Purdue University under the
direction of Dr. Michael T. Harris, will develop a new path for undergraduate
students interested in developing a strong nanotechnology background that starts
in their First-Year Engineering courses and can continue throughout their career
at Purdue University. The components of this program span from classroom
instruction through laboratory experiments and finally, to hands-on summer
research programs for interested students. In particular, the educational
thrusts will focus on the fabrication of novel devices for clean energy
generation and storage applications, advanced bioengineered devices, and the
development of sensing platforms for enhanced homeland security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the inherently interdisciplinary nature of
nanoscience and nanoengineering education, the proposed projects will allow for
unique extensions in the fields of chemistry, materials engineering, chemical
engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, and bioengineering.
Specifically, 100% of first year engineering students will be impacted (~2000
undergraduate students/year), ~200 sophomore and junior engineering students per
year (~10% of all undergraduate engineering students/year), ~1% of all
undergraduate students (20 engineering students/year) will participate in
3-month faculty-led research experiences through this program. Successful
education of these talented undergraduate students will lead to a well-trained
nanotechnology-based workforce capable of manufacturing devices for the next
generation of biomedical and energy-generating devices.