* 1242238
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute on Cells to Ecosystems: Frontiers in Collaborative Quantitative Physics-Based Multiscale Modeling of Complex  Biological  Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* James Glazier, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 11/30/2014
* USD 96,960.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in July, 2013 at the
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) in Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do
Sul, Brazil. Organized by Dr. James A. Glazier of the Physics Department at
Indiana University in Bloomington, the institute will focus on many of the key
mathematical approaches currently used in modeling biological phenomena in
contemporary biology. The development and function of tissues and organs rely on
a complex web of interactions that occur on a multitude of scales ranging from
individual proteins to tissue networks. The PASI will gather leading researchers
from a variety of modeling disciplines to teach their methodologies through
lectures and computer laboratories, and to promote interdisciplinary
collaborations among participants in order to address key biological problems.
PASI participants will include experimental biologists, computational
biologists, and mathematical biologists at the advanced undergraduate, graduate
and post-graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will introduce
students to many important techniques in the above subjects. In addition to the
exposure and mentoring of young scientists to state-of-the-art methods, the
activity will foster international collaboration among researchers from the US
and different countries in the Americas. The results from the PASI, including
presentations and videos, will be disseminated through a website and other media
to serve as a resource for students and researchers interested in biological
modeling.