* 1242084
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI): Toward a Sustained Operational River-To-Shelf Observation and Prediction System for the Amazon; Niteroi, Brazil, 2013.
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Michael Bruno, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 99,830.00

A Pan American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI) entitled "Toward a Sustained
Operational River-to-Shelf Observation &amp; Prediction System for the Amazon"
will be held in Niteroi, Brazil, in 2013. The Principal Investigator, Michael
Bruno (Stevens Institute of Technology), will be joined on the organizing
committee by Alberto Figueiredo (Universidade Federal Flumenense, Brazil),
Belmiro Castro (Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil), Pedro Walfir (Universidade
Federal do Para, Brazil), Christophe Proisy (Institut de Recherche pour le
Developpement, French Guiana), and Charles Nittrouer (University of Washington,
Seattle). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is intended to inform U.S.
participants of the unique physical oceanographic, hydrodynamic, sediment
transport, and coastal sedimentation that affect the ecosystems characteristics
of the Amazon fluvial-coast-shelf region, and to build working relationships
between the region?s scientists and engineers and their U.S. counterparts, as
well as among scientists working in various disciplines. The PASI will lay the
groundwork for sustained scientific exchange among the faculty and students of
the participating U.S. and Latin American universities and organizations. The
Amazon River system (river-to-shelf) represents an extraordinary opportunity for
the scientific community to gain insights and understanding of the complex
interactions among freshwater outflows, significant sediment loading, a complex
coastline, and an energetic coastal ocean out to the shelf break. The Amazon
River fluvial-coast-shelf system produces unique sediment transport processes
(e.g., fluid muds in the river delta) and physical oceanographic dynamics (e.g.,
estuary-like phenomena that extend onto the continental shelf break and produce
complex open-ocean dynamics). Lessons learned in the Amazon River system can be
extrapolated to fluvial-coast-shelf systems elsewhere in the world, including
those occurring in human-altered environments and those that have remained like
the Amazon largely pristine. Enhanced understanding of the Amazon system will
also support local efforts to manage and preserve this vital natural resource
for future generations.