* 1242683
* Mirror Symmetry in the Midwest 2012
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Yong-Geun Oh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal is for a conference entitled Mirror Symmetry in the Midwest II to
be held at University of Wisconsin from November 8-11, 2012, which is a
continuation of the one held in Kansas State University in November 2011. Mirror
symmetry is a relatively new subject that has attracted a great deal of
attention over the past two decades. Mirror symmetry has its roots in string
theory and is the study of a duality between the complex and symplectic geometry
of certain objects. The number of ways to approach the subject has grown vast
over the years and today many researchers can be said to be studying a subject
inspired in some way by mirror symmetry. The rapidly expanding field of mirror
symmetry has inspired a great deal of the research in complex, algebraic and
symplectic geometry over the past twenty years. These ideas--the algebraic and
geometric theories inspired by mirror symmetry--form the scientific focus of the
conference. Important innovations include Gromov-Witten invariants, Fukaya
categories and tropical geometry. In addition, mirror symmetry has cast renewed
attention on and greatly expanded the scope of existing disciplines--Floer
theory, derived categories, and special Lagrangian geometry are a few examples.
An explanation of mirror symmetry would not only provide a link between complex
and symplectic geometry, but it would also have a deep impact on a wide range of
current subjects.

The goal of the proposed conference is to bring together researchers studying a
wide range of aspects of mirror symmetry. The conference will lead to increased
collaboration among researchers in the Midwest and special attention will be
paid to recruiting participants from the Midwest to further this aim. An
important additional point of the conference is to bring in experts from outside
the region. The conference will attract a wide range of participants with a
diversity of backgrounds. An essential feature of the conference will be
education. A portion of the talks will constitute a ``mini-course'', aimed at
graduate students and non-experts and intended to give an introduction to some
aspect of the field. The goals of the mini-course are two fold: One, to open and
facilitate lines of communication between researchers with different areas of
expertise; and two, to get graduate students involved, excited and actively
participating in the scientific activities of the conference. In addition to the
impacts highlighted above--increasing collaboration among researchers in the
Midwest and teaching graduate students and young researchers about the subject--
it is hoped that the conference will lead to the founding of an annual Midwest
mirror symmetry conference. Another intent of the the conference is to expand
the regional ties between University of Wisconsin group of mathematicians
working on the areas related to mirror symmetry and the M-Center (Mirror
Symmetry Center) at Kansas State University. Mirror symmetry has its roots in
high-energy physics and string theory and the mathematics involved has an impact
on these sciences. To take advantage of these ties, the conference will feature
physicists and mathematicians.

More information can be found on the conference website
http://www.math.wisc.edu/~oh/uw-ksu-index.html