* 1242257
* Pan-American Advanced Study Institute on Software Quality, San Jose, Costa Rica, July 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Linda Ott, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2013
* USD 98,002.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place on July 2013 at the
University of Costa Rica in San José, Costa Rica. Organized by Dr. Charles R.
Wallace and Dr. Linda M. Ott, both from Michigan Technological University, the
PASI will bring together software engineering researchers, industrial
representatives, students and practitioners in the area of software quality.
Junior researchers will be exposed to state-of-the-art research in a personal,
interactive setting that is conducive to building long-term relationships.
Connections formed at the PASI may lead to a community of professionals
committed to collaboration to enhance software quality throughout the Americas.

This PASI will introduce students to many important techniques in software
quality. In addition to the benefits from developing long term synergistic
relationships among faculty members, post docs, and senior PhD students, the
PASI is intended to help initiate student exchanges between the programs and
institutions involved. It will help make advances in several dimensions:
research, teaching, and industrial practice. Information from the institute will
be available on a website hosted at Michigan Tech, which will showcase the
activities that result from the PASI and will include a membership option to
allow subscribers to locate others with common interests and communicate with
one another through a wiki.