* 1242584
* LTREB Renewal:  Collaborative Research: Density-Dependent and Density-Independent Effects on the Non-Breeding Season Dynamics of a Migratory Bird
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Peter Marra, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 345,755.00

This project continues a 25-year study of long-distance migratory birds during
the non-breeding season in Jamaica. Over the next five years, the researchers
will measure how birds' physical condition and survival are influenced by
population size and climate. Survival is expected to decrease as population size
increases, a phenomenon known as regulation. However, survival also responds to
factors such as weather that act independently of population size, a process
known as limitation. Understanding how population regulation and limitation
influence survival and abundance is necessary to predict how future
environmental change will affect migratory birds. Since climatologists forecast
increasing drought in the Caribbean, results from this research will provide
critical insights into the consequences of climate change on the behavior,
abundance, and ultimately the evolution of these
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will facilitate the professional
training of two graduate and over 20 undergraduate students in the US, as well
as Jamaican students and scientists. The investigators will continue their
existing collaborations with Jamaican wildlife agencies and local conservation
groups, and will communicate their research results to scientists, policy
makers, and citizens in the U.S. and the Caribbean. Data from the project are
available electronically.