* 1242815
* Instrument-Cluster Studies of Equatorial Spread F
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Roland Tsunoda, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2018
* USD 684,953.00

The investigators will study the cause of the day-to-day variability in the
development of plasma structure in the equatorial layer referred to as
equatorial spread (ESF). The study will be based on the hypothesis that ESF
originates from large-scale wave structure (LSWS). LSWS is an altitude
modulation of isodensity contours in the bottomside layer that grows to large
amplitudes. The modulation alters the background conditions that control
development of ESF and features such as equatorial plasma bubbles (EPBs), a
behavior that is of considerable interest to space weather. LSWS has been
ignored almost completely by researchers for good reasons. Experimentalists have
been unaware of its existence, and theorists have not considered it because its
importance remained questionable. However, recent observations have shown that
LSWS is real, occurs frequently in the evening equatorial layer, and appears to
play a substantial role in the day-to-day variability of ESF and EPBs. The
objectives of the study are twofold: (1) to extract as much information as
possible about LSWS from well-designed experiments, data analysis, and
theoretical studies, and (2) to investigate the day-to-day variability problem
through a series of tasks that can test the working hypotheses. New paradigms
will be constructed following those tests, and that cycle will be repeated
throughout the course of the project. The studies will revolve around the
analyses of unique databases and new experiments that will take advantage of a
unique cluster of instruments, which is capable of extracting the properties of
LSWS. The cluster is unique because it can distinguish spatial from temporal
variations, and LSWS is essentially a stationary spatial structure during its
growth phase. The goal of the project is to obtain a comprehensive description
of LSWS, and derive considerable insight about seeding, LSWS amplification, and
the development of EPBs. The results will also validate the crucial need for
instrument clusters in studies of ESF.