* 1242442
* Student and young scientist presentations at the 10th International Congress on the Biology of Fish.  July 15-19, 2012, Madison WI
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Jay Nelson, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,000.00

Fishes are the most successful vertebrates on the planet, comprising more than
50% of current vertebrate diversity and supplying an ever-increasing percentage
of human protein needs. Unfortunately, many fish species and populations are
threatened by human activity and yet our knowledge of their basic biology can be
considered rudimentary when compared with mammals. The 2012 "Living Planet
Report" lists tropical marine and freshwaters as the most degraded ecosystems of
the past 40 years. The first step towards managing, growing or saving any fish
species or population is to understand its basic biological functioning. This
grant is intended to help early career scientists present their research results
at the only meeting devoted entirely to understanding how fish work, the
International Congress on the Biology of Fish (ICBF). Although there are other
meetings that deal with fisheries management issues, and meetings that focus
more broadly on vertebrate function, no other international meeting focuses just
on the organismal biology of fish. The ICBF highlights innovative fish research
and its application to address societal and environmental issues. The meeting is
attended by leading fish physiologists and organismal biologists from over 50
nations. Presenting their research results at this meeting and interacting with
more senior scientists is an important step towards building the careers of the
next generation of functional fish biologists who will help solve the inevitable
fish-related problems of the next century. This conference award will support
the travel of students and researchers. Candidates for travel awards will be
evaluated on a combination of the scientific quality of their abstract,
relevance to the symposia of the meeting, and financial need. Each candidate
will submit their abstract and a description of financial need. Scientific
quality and relevance will each be judged by members of the Physiology Section
Executive Committee or symposia organizers from previous congresses.