* 1242272
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Wall Crossing, Stability Hodge Structures and TQFT- Natal, Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Maxim Kontsevich, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 99,963.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in February 1-10,
2013 at the Institute of Physics of the Federal University of Rio Grande do
Norte in Natal, Brazil. Organized by Dr. Ludmil V. Katzarkov, the 10-day
institute will bring together leading researchers in the world in the area of
homological mirror symmetry, a deep and still mysterious part of the evolving
interaction between algebraic geometry and string theory. Experts from a variety
of disciplines including symplectic geometry, algebraic geometry, topology,
physics, mathematical physics, representation theory, and other areas of
geometry are expected to participate. The opportunity for interaction, joint
research, and reporting of recent progress at this singular event will help
generate further breakthroughs in one of the most challenging, fastest moving,
and very compelling areas in algebraic geometry and its interaction with
mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI is expected to enhance the
infrastructure for research and education on the topics mentioned above through
collaborations developed before, during and beyond the activity, and by sharing
resources. The PI, Dr. Kartzarkov has a track record of organizing meetings that
bring together outstanding individuals in nearby fields, leading in turn to
important developments. The co-PI, Dr. Maxim Kontsevich, a Fields medalist, is
one the initiator of many of the ideas that will be discussed at the PASI and
his influence on the field is far reaching. The PASI will attract a large number
of junior researchers, and give them access to the pace-setters in the field.
Their influence on graduate students and young researchers is likely to help
steer the field's development in the future.