* 1242027
* Collaborative Research: Development of a rapid access ice drilling (RAID) platform for research in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* John Goodge, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,301,630.00

Intellectual Merit: The PIs propose to design and build a new mobile drilling
platform for use on Antarctic ice sheets. This new Rapid Access Ice Drilling
system (RAID) will enable rapid access to deep ice (up to 3300 m depth),
followed by coring of the ice-sheet bed interface and bedrock substrate below.
RAID will provide a new tool to obtain in situ measurements as well as samples
of ice, glacial bed, and rock for interdisciplinary studies. RAID will be
mobile, logistically autonomous, and capable of drilling to deep ice within a
few days. Once a borehole is created, down-hole logging, drilling of short ice
and rock cores, and other sampling can follow. Holes can be kept open for
several years to facilitate re-entry. The drill is being designed so that
several holes may be completed per field season. Once built, the drilling system
will be established as an NSF-sponsored facility. RAID will provide an
interdisciplinary capability to study lithospheric composition, heat flow, ice-
sheet dynamics, climate history and atmospheric greenhouse gas composition over
the past 1.5 million years, paleothermometry, extremophile organisms, and
particle physics.

Broader impacts: RAID will enable scientists to address critical questions about
the deep interface between the Antarctic ice sheets and the substrate below and
address many of the unknowns associated with general stability of the Antarctic
ice sheets in the face of changing climate. Once developed, RAID will help train
students in scientific drilling operations.