* 1242210
* Pan-American Studies Institute: Applying Computational Models to Real-Case Scenarios for Volcanic Hazard Assessment; University of Colima, Mexico, January 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Jose Palma, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 10/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in January 2013 at
the University of Colima in Mexico. The PASI will be organized by Dr. Eliza S.
Calder (SUNY Buffalo), aided by other scientists from her institution, as well
as scientists from the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico at Queretaro,
Mexico, the University of the West Indies, Trinidad, and the Universidad de
Colima in Mexico. The institute will advance the understanding of the range of
methodologies and procedures currently available for undertaking rigorous hazard
assessments. It will combine lecture-based, field and hands-on computational
modeling sessions, which will step through the complete process, from collection
of rudimentary information about the volcano?s past activity to providing a
hazard assessment based on computational modeling using a suite of up-to-date
simulation tools. The PASI will bring together 22 instructors who are
international experts covering five major discipline groups (geoscience,
computational engineering, mathematics, and geography), and who also include
senior scientists or directors of six international government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will introduce students to many
important techniques in the subjects above. In addition to mentoring and
exposing junior scientists to state-of-the-art methods in modeling, it will
foster international collaboration among researchers from the US and the
Americas. Junior researchers will participate in advanced workshops taking
advantage of a major cyber-infrastructure resource, which provides an assortment
of simulation tools and tutorials in an accessible environment, as well as an
organizational and storage structure for data and dissemination of the results.