* 1242918
* CubeSat: Electron Losses and Fields INvestigation (ELFIN)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Vassilis Angelopoulos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 650,823.00

This project is to design, develop, operate and analyze the results of a CubeSat
mission named Electron Losses and Fields Investigation (ELFIN). The mission is
designed to investigate the physical mechanisms responsible for removing high-
energy electrons from the Earth?s radiation belts through precipitation into the
upper atmosphere. Electrons at very high energy (near the speed of light) are
part of the radiation environment in near-Earth space that poses a danger to
satellite systems and instruments. The amount of radiation is highly variable
especially during solar and geomagnetic storms known as space weather. It is
governed by a delicate balance of acceleration and loss processes none of which
are well understood at present. ELFIN measurements will provide unique
observational evidence to help understand the physics behind the loss mechanisms
at play. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its impact on radiation belt physics,
ELFIN aims to demonstrate that major breakthroughs in our understanding of the
space environment can result from low-cost missions with meaningful student and
young researcher participation. The project will form part of an effort to
develop an inter-disciplinary program of education surrounding microsatellites.
ELFIN will be used as an educational vehicle for dozens of undergraduate and
graduate students from Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Earth and Space
Sciences (ESS), either being employed on the project or receiving independent
study credit. Outreach to local K-12 schools will be conducted as part of on-
going efforts at UCLA. The project also builds on an established collaboration
with the Aerospace Corporation on-going CubeSat development program. Components
will be purchased through a subcontract to Aerospace, and mentorship will be
provided by named participating collaborators at Aerospace. The project is also
receiving partial support from NASA?s Low Cost Access to Space (LCAS) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ELFIN cubesat is specifically designed to provide the
first pitch-angle resolved, high energy-resolution measurements of relativistic
electron fluxes in the loss cone, extending to the high energies critical for
understanding radiation belt dynamics. It will carry an energetic particle
detector, measuring 50-500keV ions and 0.1-5MeV electrons and a flux gate
magnetometer, which will be located at the end of a 0.75m extendable boom. Both
instruments are miniaturizations of instruments developed by the PI and the
proposing team for several previous NASA and DOD missions. The proposed
measurements of electrons within the loss cone as a function of energy and
pitch-angle will be examined and compared to recent theoretical predictions to
determine whether the precipitation bears the characteristic signatures of
resonant scattering by electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC) waves or is due to
other processes. In this way, the project aims to provide a crucial test of
equatorial pitch angle scattering by (EMIC) waves as a leading candidate for
radiation belt electron losses.