* 1242643
* LTREB Renewal:   Long-term Investigation of Territorial Behavior and Population Dynamics in the Common Loon
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Charles Walcott, Chapman University
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2019
* USD 449,688.00

This long-term project focuses on common loons, diving birds that breed on lakes
in the northern U.S. and are famous for their loud, humanlike vocalizations.
Both sexes defend territories from intruders, which often take them by force.
About one-third of all male takeovers are fatal for the displaced breeder;
females seldom fight to the death. Current theory predicts that lethal battles
should be frequent in short lived animals because they have few reproductive
opportunities, but organisms such as loons should never fight to the death
because they are long-lived and territories are plentiful. Over the course of
ten years, the project is testing three hypotheses to account for fatal
fighting: 1) fatal battles constitute a 'terminal investment' for old, declining
males, 2) males that fight to the death defend chicks well, which offsets their
hyper-aggressiveness, and 3) extreme familiarity with a territory causes fatal
battles. To test these hypotheses, the researchers follow and observe a large
number of marked individuals, measure body mass of captured loons, and analyze
territorial fights, usurpations and survival patterns across time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will help scientists understand
lethal contests in animals, aggressive behavior, and the process of aging.
Though loons are common within their range, they are considered of special
concern by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, and are declining
across their range. Long-term data and results from this project will inform
conservation and management programs. In addition, the project will train a
large number of undergraduate students who, by initiating independent field
projects, will learn about experimental design, data collection and statistical
analysis. Discoveries about this popular bird will be shared with the broader
public via popular articles, T.V. and radio interviews, and a project website.