* 1242939
* Collaborative Research: Laurentian and Non-Laurentian (Baltican) Components of Terranes in NW Washington?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/28/2015
* USD 62,968.00

Growth of the ancient North American continent (Laurentia) along its western
margin in Paleozoic times occurred by addition of materials of both local and
exotic origins: a sedimentary apron derived from erosion of the western flank of
the continent (the miogeocline), and also a complex of accreted terranes
displaced by plate tectonics from other parts of the globe and faulted into the
continent. Research of this study will examine the history of the accreted
Chilliwack terrane in northwest Washington about which preliminary studies
suggest that at least parts came from northwestern Europe. A primary tool in our
work is acquisition of U-Th-Pb ages of zircon grains in igneous and sedimentary
rocks. Preliminary data from igneous rocks in the Chilliwack terrane yield ages
not known in western North America, but common in ancient Scandinavia (Baltica).
In sedimentary rocks, age distributions of zircons are in some rocks similar to
North America and in other rocks point to an exotic (European or other)
homeland. Additional zircon ages will clarify these possible correlations.
Further Hf isotopic data from zircons will be used to test possible derivation
of parts of the Chilliwack terrane from a primitive oceanic island arc,
specifically the early Paleozoic Alexander arc terrane accreted in southeast
Alaska, as opposed to evolved continental crust (Laurentian or other). Field
mapping of rock units will evaluate the genetic and structural relationship
among parts of the Chilliwack terrane that have North American vs. exotic
affinities. The fundamental goal of the project is basic knowledge of mechanisms
of plate tectonics and processes of formation of an active continental
margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is designed to address the
scientific issue described above, and also to enhance the education and training
of students and elevate interest and understanding of earth history of the
Pacific Northwest in the general public. Project funds will support
undergraduate students as assistants in the field and laboratory, and pay for
students to attend a professional meeting. Student research on the project will
likely form the basis of senior theses. Knowledge gained from this study will be
incorporated into course work in the classroom, on field trips, and off-campus
Pacific Northwest field courses taught at Western Washington University. With
respect to the broader community, and aside from technical publications and
lectures, results of the proposed study will be integrated into and will enhance
frequently occurring field trips for professional groups, such as the Geological
Society of America, National Association of Geology Teachers, and Northwest
Geological Society. The public lands of the San Juan Islands and Cascades are
global tourist destinations, presenting opportunity for reaching a broad
audience through geologic displays in parks and in popular geologic literature.
The scale of continental margin tectonics on display in western Washington is
fascinating at any level of knowledge.