* 1242004
* RAPID: Assessing Resiliency among Rural, Suburban, and Urban Communities Following the Thailand Floods Of 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Sudha Arlikatti, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2014
* USD 73,607.00

During the 20th century, floods were the cause of the most number of lives lost
and property damage from natural disasters in the United States (US). This trend
will continue in the 21st century as more Americans migrate to coastal
communities and floodplains. Unfortunately there is no consensus on what makes
some communities more resilient to floods than others. Generally, the term
"community resiliency" refers to the capability to rebound from an adverse
situation. The concept has gained widespread interest since the adoption of the
Hyogo Framework for Action (2005-2015), which calls on nations to build greater
community resiliency. While disaster scholars have developed numerous indicators
to measure resiliency and broadly classified the dimensions as ecological,
social, economic, institutional, infrastructure, and community competencies
(Cutter et al., 2008; Cutter et al., 2010; Chang & Shinozuka, 2004; Manyena,
2006; Morrow, 2008), these studies have been limited to the US and to static,
secondary data.

The proposed project aims to fill these gaps by assessing how communities in
Thailand responded to the 2011 floods. The severe floods that plagued Thailand
for over eight months in 2011 were triggered by Tropical Storm Nock-ten. The
storm water overflows along the Mekong and Chao Phraya River basins resulted in
severe inland flooding, affecting 65 of the country's 76 provinces and over 12
million people. Our project examines the disparities in the abilities of rural
(Pathum Thani), suburban (Ayutthaya), and urban (Bangkok) communities, to
rebound after such prolonged flooding. It is guided by the Disaster of Place
(DROP) model, proposed by Cutter et al. (2008), which used county level spatial
data (in the US) to describe disaster resilience in specific geographic areas
and across political boundaries.

The US research team and Thai collaborators will interview key participants from
45-50 public, private, and non-profit organizations, using semi-structured
interviews. We will document the earliest processes, programs, and policies used
to address the needs of the populace as they transitioned from short-term to
long-term recovery. Ephemeral data will be collected documenting how decisions
were initially made and/or changed by organizations serving rural, suburban and
urban flood victims. These data will be used to understand ad hoc policies and
fluid governance mechanisms that are likely to explain variations in community
resiliency to floods across jurisdictions and geographic units. Upon return to
the US, an e-survey will be sent to 300 other organizations in Thailand to
gather information from a larger sample.

This research makes theoretical and practical contributions by, 1) Helping to
validate the DROP model and testing its applicability in an international
setting, 2) Augmenting or modifying the indicators used in the DROP model with
real-time data gathered at the organizational level in flood impacted
communities, 3) Emphasizing the attributes of multi-sector organizations in
building community resiliency during the transition from short-term to long term
recovery and, 4) Allowing for cross cultural understanding, and international
knowledge exchange that supports the broader efforts of NSF and disaster
scholars from around the world.

This award was jointly funded by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation and the Office of International Science and
Engineering's Global Venture Fund.