* 1242339
* Formation and Structure of Wall Clouds Observed During VORTEX2
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Nolan Atkins, Lyndon State College
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2018
* USD 234,308.00

This research focuses on the formation and structure of wall clouds associated
with supercell thunderstorms that were observed during the Verification of the
Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment II (VORTEX2). The study will be
accomplished through analysis of photogrammetrically analyzed photos and high-
definition video of the hook region of supercells that were also concurrently
being scanned by mobile Doppler radars. The objectives below will be met by
integrating the visual data with high-resolution single and dual-Doppler
analyses of the supercell hook region. The Ground Based Velocity Track Display
(GBVTD) technique will be used to obtain axisymmetric wind fields for storms
with good visual data and coverage with only one radar. Sounding, mobile
mesonet, and surface station data will also be incorporated to document the
thermodynamic characteristics of the environment and supercell hook region.

The first objective is to understand the processes responsible for wall cloud
formation. Current understanding of wall cloud formation is based on idealized
numerical simulations published more than 25 years ago and visual observations.
Three hypotheses will be tested. The first is that lower Ã¨e air behind the
supercell gust front is ingested into the updraft and saturates at a lower
altitude than the primary cloud base. Second, the wall cloud is formed by the
adiabatic cooling associated with the pressure deficit created by circulation
that may be present in the wall cloud. Third, wall cloud formation is due to
rising low-level scud that attaches to the primary cloud base.

The second objective is to document the three-dimensional structure of the
precipitation (reflectivity), vorticity, vertical motion, perturbation pressure,
angular momentum, and horizontal wind fields within tornadic and non tornadic
wall clouds. This analysis will, for the first time, document the differences
and/or similarities between tornadic and nontornadic wall clouds. It will also
help to define the relationship between the scale and intensity of the wall
cloud relative to the updraft, low-level mesocyclone, and precipitation
distribution within the hook region for lower precipitation, classic, and high
precipitation supercells sampled during VORTEX2. Finally, it will be possible to
compare the visual characteristics of the wall cloud with the kinematic
structure derived from the Doppler radar data.

Intellectual Merit: The wall cloud associated with supercell thunderstorms has
been visually documented in many observational studies. It is generally accepted
to be associated with the low-level updraft and is often the location of
tornadogenesis. Amazingly, no observational study to date has systematically
examined wall cloud formation, structure, and evolution relative to the low-
level updraft, mesocyclone, and precipitation distribution within the hook
region. Hence, realizing the above stated objectives would enhance our
fundamental understanding of the low-level visual structure and evolution of
supercell thunderstorms.

Broader Impacts: It is anticipated that results from this research will be
incorporated into the National Weather Service Skywarn storm spotter training.
Skywarn spotters are vital to the accurate dissemination of visual weather
information during severe weather situations. The project will expose a number
of undergraduate students to the research process and will enhance the research
infrastructure (also used in teaching) at Lyndon State College. Research results
will be incorporated into many of the undergraduate classes.