* 1242269
* Pan-American Studies Institute (PASI): Magma-Tectonics in Latin America; Managua, Nicaragua, 2013.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Peter LaFemina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 09/30/2015
* USD 100,000.00

A Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI) will be held in Managua,
Nicaragua, in 2013. The organizing committee consists of the Principal
Investigator, Dr. Peter La Femina (Pennsylvania State University), Dr. Angelica
Muñoz (Instituto Nicaragüense de Estudios Territoriales, Nicaragua), Dr. John
Stix (McGill University, Canada) and Dr. Freysteinn Sigmundsson (University of
Iceland). The PASI will address fundamental issues related to magma-tectonic
interactions, in order to improve understanding of volcano-magmatic systems and
thus help mitigate associated hazards, risks, and vulnerabilities. In
particular, the institute will address four key scientific aspects, which will
allow the scientific community to improve the science in significant ways: (1)
Magma-tectonic interactions; (2) Deep vs. shallow magma plumbing systems; (3)
Eruption trigger mechanisms; and (4) New approaches, methods, and technologies
for volcano monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arc volcanism is an ongoing threat
along the backbone of the Americas from the Alaskan Aleutians to near the
southern tip of South America. The hazards highlight the significant risk to
people living close by, to civil aviation in terms of volcanic ash, and also
regionally in the case of particularly large eruptions. Volcanic systems are in
close-proximity to subduction zone fault systems. As seen in the recent past,
subduction zones can generate large magnitude earthquakes that could potentially
trigger eruptions. In order to examine these issues in a meaningful and novel
manner, this PASI will have sessions on three distinct yet clearly related and
overlapping themes: (1) geophysical processes, (2) geochemical processes, and
(3) integrated studies of magma-tectonic interactions. Using these three
approaches in an interdisciplinary fashion will provide new and important
insights into subsurface magma behavior before eruptions, inter-relationships
and feedbacks between magmatic and tectonic processes, and the events that
initiate periods of volcano restlessness, including eruptions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PASI will bring together scientists from across the
Americas for training in the latest scientific advances and technologies in
volcano monitoring and modeling of magmatic and tectonic processes. It will give
advanced graduate students and post-doctoral researchers from the U.S. the
opportunity to initiate collaborations with their Latin American counterparts,
and will enable Latin American colleagues to promote a professional network of
scientists from across the region. Furthermore, it will utilize data from the
NSF MARGINS program and the COCONet initiative to investigate magmatic and
tectonic systems across the Americas.