* 1242949
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying KHI, Turbulence Processes and Radar Biases Using Radar Observations and In Situ Measurements at JRO and Very-High-Resolution DNS
* GEO,AGS
* 05/09/2012,08/31/2015
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 284,997.00

This is a 3-year project to undertake experimental and theoretical studies of
Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability (KHI) dynamics and their implications for
turbulence and mixing in the Earth atmosphere. KHI is known to occur throughout
the lower atmosphere as well as the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) and
to contribute significantly to the dynamics. In addition, KHI evolution affects
VHF Doppler radar wind measurement errors by producing strong, persistent
layering and a systematic tilting of refractive index surfaces on scales
comparable to VHF radar Bragg scales. This project addresses both of these
aspects. Observations will be performed at the Jicamarca Radio Observatory (JRO)
in Peru, which provides an exceptional combination of sensitivity and resolution
throughout the lower atmosphere and the MLT. High range resolution and
sensitivity at mid-tropospheric heights provided by the SOUSY Radar (at JRO),
coupled with concurrent, quantitative, high-resolution, in situ measurements
made using a newly developed unmanned aerial system, named the micro-autonomous
vehicle (MAV), will provide an unsurpassed assessment of both high resolution
KHI dynamics and radar measurement errors. The relatively high-resolution and
higher-power capability provided by the powerful JRO transmitter and large
antenna array will then extend the SOUSY results into the MLT. Finally, these
observations will be used to initialize a series of numerical assessments of KHI
radar backscatter and associated dynamical parameters using a new capability to
perform direct numerical simulations (DNS) to characterize, and guide
corrections of, measurement errors accompanying these dynamics for general flow
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inaccuracies in radar wind measurements
from KHI is a limiting factor in understanding atmospheric dynamics on
essentially all scales of motion, including: mean motions, wind shears, large-
scale tidal and planetary wave activity, smaller-scale gravity wave dynamics,
and small-scale instabilities and turbulence-generating processes. The results
from this project, therefore, will improve practically all applications of VHF
radar observations to great benefit of the scientific community as well as
weather and climate modeling applications. The project also will result in
improved quantitative understanding of interactions between waves and
instability dynamics that drive motions throughout the atmosphere and at all
scales. This will lead to better parameterization of small-scale dynamics in
weather and climate models.