* 1242747
* Workshop: Abrupt grass-woodland transitions: Determinants and consequences for ecosystem services - December 15-17, 2012 in Maldonado, Uruguay
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Osvaldo Sala, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 49,798.00

Our understanding of abrupt transitions in ecological systems has grown
dramatically in recent years as a result of the discovery of new mathematical
tools and characteristics of ecosystems that yield early warning signals. While
new statistical tools may help predict tipping points, identifying best actions
to avoid or to take in the face of them requires more detailed understanding of
the systems themselves. Water limited ecosystems include a variety of
grasslands, shrublands, and open and closed-canopy forests with a range of woody
vegetation. Many grasslands and savannas worldwide are undergoing rapid shifts
in dominance from herbaceous to woody plants driven by social and economic, as
well as environmental and ecological factors. The objective of this workshop,
cofunded by NSF's Biological Sciences Directorate and Office of International
Science and Engineering, is to synthesize current understanding of the
transition from grasslands to woodlands, its coupled social and ecological
determinants, and the consequences for the provisioning of ecosystem services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is sponsored by the South American Institute
for Resilience and Sustainability Studies, an international research institute
in Uruguay. Though mainly foucsed on the state of the science, the last day of
the workshop will be open to the general public, focusing ing on policy makers,
conservation organizations and industry representatives from the private and
public sectors in Uruguay, Argentina and Brazil. Products will include a
synthesis paper co-authored by all participants, multiple scientific papers, and
the public session. All of the presentations and results from the workshop will
all be archived and made freely available on the Institute's web
page.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasslands, shrublands and savannas cover about half
of the land on Earth and while characterized by low precipitation, represent
about a third of the productivity on land and contain a third of the human
population. Dry land systems produce a range of ecosystem services that are
expected to change as the systems shift. The one day conference with decision
makers has already attracted substantial local and regional interest. And this
project will also support a graduate student from Arizona State University as an
active participant and workshop organizer.