* 1242484
* I-Corps:  Bio-inspired Underwater Surveillance Vehicle (BUSV)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Shashank Priya, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The program builds upon the breakthroughs made in improving the efficiency of
light and mechanical energy harvesting at NSF I/UCRC: Center for Energy
Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS). Sun light and natural wave
oscillations are promising source of energy for recharging the onboard
batteries. Current photovoltaic conversion technologies have challenges in terms
of material utilization, long term stability, conversion efficiency, energy
storage density and most importantly cost competitiveness ($/Watt). Dye-
sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been shown to be better alternative if
price/performance ratio is compared. DSSC can absorb diffused sunlight and can
convert it efficiently into electricity. DSSCs can also work in cloudy weather
and low-light conditions. Efforts will be made towards integration of the DSSC
module with the bell of the proposes robot without affecting the rowing
propulsion mechanism. Secondly, non-linear magnetic levitation based inductive
energy harvester will be incorporated in the appendages of the robot to harvest
the wave energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team has the expertise and knowledge
and desire required to develop the Bio-inspired Underwater Surveillance Vehicle
(BUSV). The outcome of the I-Corps project will be technology demonstration and
a clear go/no go decision regarding viability of BUSV. If successful, a spin-off
company resulting from the I-Corps effort will lead to creation of high tech ?
high paying jobs and contribute to the national economy. In addition to many
defense applications, civilian industries related to water quality sensing,
pollution monitoring, chemical spill such as oil spills cleaning, and robotic
aquariums will benefit from the proposed technology.