* 1242064
* Effects of Viruses on Coral Fitness
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Rebecca Vega, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2014
* USD 318,835.00

Corals are important ecosystem engineers, providing habitat and nutrient
recycling to tropical reefs. However, coral species richness and abundance are
in decline world-wide, due in large part to anthropogenic impacts stemming from
global industrialization and human population growth. Over the past several
decades, global coral cover is estimated to have declined between ~20 to 60%,
and approximately one-third of all known reef-building corals currently face an
elevated risk of extinction. Coral disease is a major contributor to this
decline of tropical reefs, and therefore, investigations into the causes of and
remedies to these diseases are of critical importance. Currently little is known
about viruses that infect corals. This project will address this
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Herpes-like viruses have been shown to be produced
in coral tissues after acute episodes of stress.Viral diversity
characterization, however, does not inform scientists about the effects of viral
infection on coral hosts. This project will investigate whether viral infection
in corals leads to disease and/or reductions in coral reproductive fitness.
Specifically, this project aims to compare and contrast the relative abundance
and diversity of viruses present in coral tissues during episodes of diseases,
particularly, growth anomalies in Porites species and white plague disease in
Montastraea species. Pyrosequencing of viral DNA will be conducted on healthy
and diseased corals to: i) characterize new viral types, ii) determine whether
viral types are associated with particular diseases, and iii) address the
central hypothesis that viruses contribute to reduced coral fitness. Sequence
analysis and functional annotation of coral viromes will determine the
phylogenetic and evolutionary relationships of these viruses and identify viral
mechanisms of host infection and disease. The role of viruses in host fitness
will be further explored using coral fecundity and larval survivorship and
settlement experiments on the model coral, Acropora millepora. Viruses will be
isolated from adults, egg bundles, and larvae, in order to determine the
transmission mode and ontogenic fitness effects of viral
infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will expand the coral taxa,
diseases, developmental stages, and geographic regions from which viruses have
been characterized, broadening our general knowledge about the diversity of
these coral parasites. The examination of viral consortia in healthy and
diseased corals combined with viral inoculation experiments will then take the
next step and provide scientists clues about the ecological roles that viruses
play in coral reef ecosystems. This combination of high-throughput sequencing
and microscopy-based methods will lead to a more comprehensive picture of the
diversity and role(s) of coral viruses in holobiont fitness and disease. Lastly,
insight into how viruses are transmitted will give policymakers better
information about how to control viral outbreaks, including limiting the spread
of infection and disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent metagenomics work has
begun to uncover unique viral assemblages associated with a variety of
ecosystems. To a large extent, this work has focused on phages from the open
ocean and temperate coasts. This project will use similar methods to investigate
viruses in tropical stony corals, a group of highly threatened organisms which
provide a multitude of ecosystem services to marine organisms and local
communities. The characterization of viral consortia in healthy, diseased, and
different life stages of corals will provide scientists clues about the roles
that viruses play in the establishment, health, and resilience of these critical
ecosystem engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida International University (FIU)
is one of the largest minority and urban-serving institutions in the country.
During the course of this project, mentorship will be provided to
undergraduates, graduates, and postdoctoral researchers. This project will
provide funds to begin the hands-on training of two female graduate students, a
postdoctoral researcher, and two undergraduates in marine science, molecular
biology, developmental biology, coral reef ecology, and bioinformatics. Such
interdisciplinary training will help these young scientists develop a broad and
technologically savvy academic career in the marine sciences. Lastly, this
project will provide a solid foundation for the scientific career of a young
female minority investigator.