* 1242239
* PASI on Modeling, Simulation, and Optimization of Globalized Physical Distribution Systems; Santiago, Chile, July 2013
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Alice Smith, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 03/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in July 2013 at the
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile in Santiago, Chile. Organized by Dr.
Alice E. Smith, Professor of Industrial and Systems Engineering and Dr. Jorge F.
Valenzuela, Professor and Chair of Industrial and Systems Engineering, both at
Auburn University, the institute will focus on the transport and distribution of
manufactured goods to customers, known as physical distribution systems.
Managing distribution systems in globalized business environments is challenging
due to the increasing complexity of production systems and supply networks,
traditional efficiency concerns, quality, storage and transport aspects, and
holistic approaches involving sustainability, security, and human factors. Thus,
the modeling and design of physical distribution systems require a mastery of
cutting edge technical tools and understanding of new approaches to design and
operation. The PASI will provide participants with educational modules on
various aspects of physical distribution systems, with an emphasis on
multinational distribution systems at both the micro and macro levels. The micro
level addresses such topics as warehousing, material handling, and facility
layout while the macro level refers to facility location, supply networks,
routing optimization, and collaborative logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PASI brings together outstanding scholars and students from throughout the
Americas to learn about many technical facets involved with complex distribution
systems. It encompasses traditional small classroom experiences, hands-on group
projects taken from actual distribution systems, and intensive field
experiences. Knowledge will be disseminated widely through first hand contacts
and through an open access web page of all educational materials and project
outcomes. As such, it will benefit many other students and early career
researchers in the fields of industrial engineering, systems engineering,
operations research, operations management, applied mathematics and logistics.
Additionally, the PASI will promote sustainable international collaborations
among senior and junior researchers of different countries and regions.