* 1242294
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: Parallel Evolutionary Radiations in Protea and Pelargonium in the Greater Cape Floristic Region
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Carl Schlichting, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2016
* USD 512,753.00

Current approaches to predicting changes in community structure and function
fail to consider relationships between species' attributes that affect their
ecological function, genetic variation underlying those functional traits, and
the dynamics of the communities of which they are part. This project will focus
on Protea and Pelargonium, two South African plant genera that have undergone
dramatic diversification and currently span two biodiversity hot spots, the
fynbos and succulent karoo biomes in the Greater Cape Floristic Region (GFCR).
This project will develop an understanding of functional trait variation in both
genetic and evolutionary contexts, allowing predictions of the characteristics
of communities in which they occur and the resilience of those communities to
climate change. The project will examine detailed relationships between
functional traits, photosynthesis, water use efficiency and leaf life span,
including the genetic basis of trait variation and rates of trait
diversification. This information will be used to examine effects of taxonomic
and trait diversity on ecosystem resilience in response to fire cycle
interval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expose postdoctoral scholars,
graduate students, undergraduates and high school students to international
research, including students actively recruited from underserved populations
both in the US and South Africa. It will actively enhance conservation
infrastructure by working closely in all aspects of the project with the South
African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) to promote biodiversity science,
policy and conservation action.