* 1242090
* The CGWA in the Era of Multimessenger Astronomy
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2020
* Mario Diaz, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 10/31/2020
* USD 5,857,399.00

The Center for Gravitational Wave Astronomy (CGWA) was established at The
University of Texas at Brownsville in 2007 as a NSF Center of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST). The Phase II Center will initiate
a new era, greatly expanding and improving its educational and research
activities. Since its creation, the CGWA has become a major group-member of the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) Scientific
Collaboration (LSC), the world-wide collaboration of 800 scientists from more
than 30 institutions and thirteen countries that seeks to make the first direct
detection of gravitational waves and use them as a new window onto the universe.
The next five years will see the CGWA involved in research in which
gravitational-wave observations are routinely conducted in astronomy. This new
era is also ushering in a new multi-disciplinary approach to study astrophysical
phenomena, called multi-messenger astronomy. The CGWA will pursue theoretical
and experimental research activities, which seek to complement gravitational-
wave detections with independent observations using optical and radio astronomy.
The proposed research consists of: (i) Astrophysics, in collaboration with UTB's
new Center for Advanced Radio Astronomy (CARA), that seeks to tie gravitational-
wave observations to electromagnetic observations and astrophysical evolutionary
theory; (ii) Data Analysis that concentrates on improved methods to search for
gravitational waves, which can then be used as triggers for electromagnetic
observations; and (iii) Detector Instrumentation that focuses on individual
subsystems of the detectors and their noise-limited performance, with the goal
to provide scientific guidelines for the concept and design of the next-
generation of gravitational-wave detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Astrophysics Subproject supports multi-messenger astronomy
by concentrating on the electromagnetic follow-ups of future triggers generated
by gravitational-wave detectors such as advanced LIGO. The observational efforts
at the Center include radio and optical follow-up of suspected gravitational
waves from the collapse of compact binary stars. The population modeling aims at
developing an astrophysical framework to understand the process of formation of
such compact binary stars. The Data Analysis Subproject utilizes advanced
statistical techniques to model realistic noise sources and provide improved
estimates of astrophysical factors, such as the sky location of a gravitational-
wave transient. The Instrumentation Subproject focuses its research on
subsystems of current and next-generation gravitational-wave detectors. In
particular, investigations of certain optical components, and experiments with
test mass suspensions are crucial for finding the limitations of current and
future gravitational wave detectors. Their relevance to LIGO, and to the
scientific community in general, is only heightened by the fact that recent
improvements in the growing network of gravitational-wave detectors greatly
increase the probability of first detections shortly after the advanced
detectors come on-line around 2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;A major educational impact will be realized with the CGWA
Instrumentation effort, which involves students in experimental physics research
and provides hands-on training in gravitational-wave detector subsystems. The
CGWA Optics and Material Science laboratories offer unprecedented research
experiences for students at UTB. The scholarship program for undergraduates, run
by CARA, will provide mentorship for students and monitor their success through
CARA's highly successful Arecibo Remote Command Center Program. The CGWA will
also sustain a robust outreach effort to the community by providing access to
its astronomical observatory to the general public. The CGWA visitors and
conference program will provide a valuable resource for other interested
scientists to get involved in the new field of the multi-messenger astronomy.
The University of Texas at Brownsville is a Hispanic serving institution and
consequently the CGWA's research and educational programs will play a major role
in attracting Hispanic students to STEM disciplines in the Rio Grande Valley,
one of the most educationally and socially underserved regions of the USA.