* 1242802
* EAGER: Nano-Patterned Coupled Spin Torque Oscillator (STO) Arrays - a Potentially Disruptive Multipurpose Nanotechnology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Jiwei Lu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

As conventional CMOS technologies are running into multiple barriers that are
likely to slow down or even stop Moore?s Law scaling sometime during the next
decade, there is a need for new material discoveries and new nanodevice and
circuit paradigms that allow new applications that would be impractical or even
impossible using traditional methods. This work focuses on modeling, fabrication
and applications for spin torque oscillators (STOs), with an emphasis on nano-
arrays. Using multiferroic materials and an electric field, the team will tune
both the frequency of a spin torque oscillator and also the coupling between
adjacent STOs. This electric field will change the coercive field of the free
layer which, in turn, will adjust the precessional frequency of the STO and the
coupling between STOs. When presented with a continuous stream of real-time
disparate data records that could come from different types of environmental
and/or biological sensors an STO array can extract knowledge by analyzing the
stream and providing a degree of match information about various data instances
in the stream and their class membership. The associative memory capabilities of
STO arrays are agnostic to the source of data, thus they can be used for
computation and composition of data streams from hybrid sources working in
different modes of operation. This special form of machine learning can be done
in real time with no need for excessive local buffering of data. It can also
accommodate concept drift as the underlying statistics used for data mining can
easily be changed over time by controlling the inputs to the individual STOs.
Such applications as real-time data stream mining as enabled by the proposed
technology are critical to the safety and security of the country.

The multidisciplinary activities exploit fundamental nanoelectronics and
spintronics concepts through contributions in materials science, circuit design
and novel nano-computing paradigms. The PIs have a strong track record of
collaborating across disciplines and of involving their undergraduate and
graduate students in these collaborative activities, and this project will
enable further collaboration between material scientists, physicists, and
electrical and computer engineers.