* 1242524
* EAGER: Elucidating Protein - Colloid Interactions for Enhanced Bio-Energy Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 10/31/2013
* USD 95,173.00

PI: Somasundaran, Ponisseril Proposal Number: 1242524 Institution: Columbia
University Title: EAGER: Elucidating Protein - Colloid Interactions for Enhanced
Bio-Energy Applications

An emerging trend in alternative energy technologies is the use of enzymes or
other functional proteins to generate energy; this can already be seen in bio-
fuel efforts, where enzymes are used to break down crystalline cellulose into
simpler sugars. More radical approaches to ?bio-energy? include bio-fuel cells,
where enzymes are the catalysts that oxidize sugar to generate a current; or
bio-solar which takes advantage of photosynthetic proteins to capture and
harness photonic energy. The ecological advantages are apparent: enzyme
catalyzed processes are low temperature and require no harsh solvents. However,
the challenge lies in finding ways of maximizing their stability and function
outside of a biological environment.

The goal of this EAGER project is to explore the unknown interactions that arise
from protein ? colloid interactions; specifically those that enable active
portions to seemingly ?perceive? their environment through the protein structure
in which they are embedded. Whatever mechanisms responsible for these
macromolecular sensory phenomena may be responsible for the synergistic
interactions which occur between non-ionic surfactants and enzymes, resulting in
increased enzyme activity.

PI hypothesizes that surfactant aggregates (micelles) interact with the external
structure of enzymes to affect changes in fluctuations, causing sub-angstrom
scale dynamic motions which ultimately affect the active site position and range
of motion. The PI will study this novel concept through a exploratory research
plan - starting with a foundation in comparing enzyme kinetics, to understanding
colloid and protein structure behavior, and then molecular dynamic modeling.
From these observations, the PI intend to develop a thorough model of the
physical interactions that occur between the enzyme structure and surfactants as
well as surfactant-aggregates, with the ultimate goal of determining if there is
a connection between non-ionic surfactant micelles, enzyme structure flexibility
and enzyme activity.

This previously unexplored concept attempts to build a bridge between the bulk
interactions of enzyme kinetics in crowded colloid systems with the atomic scale
motions and forces that dictate elements of protein flexibility and selectivity.
Because the PI are seeking to find agreement between two extremes of observable
phenomena, a multidisciplinary approach is required; including but not limited
to studying the bulk macromolecular phenomena that are indicative of the state
of protein structure dynamics, such as reaction kinetics, static structure
spectroscopy and colloid physics. The PI will then correlate these findings with
investigations with novel techniques in 2d spectroscopy and molecular dynamics
modeling to investigate pico-scale spatial and temporal phenomena, stopping
short of regions where quantum effects begin to complicate observations.

This project has implications for biofuel and for several fields outside of
alternative energy, such as: home-personal care, waste management and medicine,
possibly reducing the chemicals consumed for various applications by taking
advantage of synergies between them and protein structural conformation
dynamics. The PI will use this project to train and engage undergraduate
students, particularly those from targeted groups, who have become attracted to
such Green projects. In as much as this has yet to be substantiated, this broad
interdisciplinary scope of investigation, coupled with emerging instrumental
techniques, and prospective implications to the tangent fields mentioned above,
mark this project as a ?high risk and high reward? situation, and an appropriate
EAGER submission.