* 1242394
* I-Corps:  Next Generation "MultiDot" Quantum Dots for Biological Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Jessica Winter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Fluorescent probes comprise a $3.1B market, with quantum dots (QDs) forming an
increasing share. With photostability superior to that of fluorescent dyes QDs
have made a significant impact in biomedical imaging. However, despite their
success, customers have identified three limitations in QD use: (1) insufficient
brightness, (2) instability in harsh environments, particularly exposure to UV
or laser illumination typical of many biological experiments, and (3)
"blinking", an intermittent loss of fluorescence that limits application in
single molecule tracking. The MultiDot technology, developed at Ohio State
University under 4 separate NSF grants, can potentially address these
challenges. MultiDots are composite QDs, similar in size to commercial QDs, but
displaying 5 times the brightness, dramatically increased stability, and reduced
blinking compared to commercial particles.

The MultiDot has significant commercial potential, most notably in the
biomedical imaging and diagnostic point-of-care test markets, which offer
initial market entry points. The primary outcome of the I-Corps program will be
market research and product development toward those markets, with the goal of
(1) a go/no go decision, and if applicable, (2) identification of minimum
customer-desired features and development and testing of a product with those
features and (3) development of a business plan for appropriate markets. Because
the MultiDots can be seamlessly substituted for QD competitors, it is
anticipated that MultiDots could enter the market within a year. Additionally,
this research will permit critical validation experiments to be performed that
will enhance licensing potential. If successful, this research will not only
advance the commercialization of the MultiDot technology, but will also provide
a new method of large scale nanomanufacturing that can potentially be applied to
other nanocomposites.