* 1242538
* I-Corps:  ZeroTouch: High-Performance Sensing for Multi-Touch and Free-Air Interaction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Andruid Kerne, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed technology is a high-performance optoelectronic architecture for
multi-finger interaction. As computing resources grow cheap and ubiquitous, the
importance of embodying interaction grows, so that people can express themselves
to computers with their bodies, in the same rich ways that we communicate with
each other. Multitouch and free-air are important new sensory modalities for
embodied interaction. Most multi-touch devices on the market are smartphones and
tablets using capacitive multi-touch sensing technologies. However, these
technologies do not scale well to large displays because of cost issues and
technological challenges. They also cannot sense gloved fingers, precluding
their use in many application scenarios. In contrast, the proposed effort
encompasses a sensing structure that has a competitive cost structure when
scaled to large displays, increasing linearly with display size, as opposed to
the quadratic increase in costs exhibited by capacitive sensing. The technology
does not require actual touching, only interruption of a sensing plane, enabling
gloved interaction in emerging markets such as automobiles. It can work outdoors
in sunlight, and in hazardous conditions. It is suitable for TV, tele-operation
and 3-D scanning. Beyond multi-touch sensing, the technology enables other new
modalities, such as pen+touch, haptics+touch, and free-air interaction. The
range of potential markets is wide and deep.

The proposed technology can transform the impact of embodied interaction on
society. Potential integration with large scale LCDs can transform users'
experiences of media in living rooms and conference rooms alike. The high
precision and many-finger tracking of the team?s approach in large formats in
social innovation-oriented contexts will enable the development of new forms of
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Play in the information age workplace,
education, and home. Integration with automobiles will first enable easier
interaction by gloved hands on small control panels; more innovative solutions
will use the platform for interaction across the whole dashboard, and using the
windshield as a heads-up display. If successfully commercialized, the technology
has the potential to open up a new broad array of industrial applications.