* 1242013
* Herbivore outbreaks in warmer forests:  soil biogeochemical responses to soil warming and an ephemeral, intense outbreak of leaf-feeding insect herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Christopher Frost, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2013
* USD 164,060.00

This study uses a soil warming experimental facility in an oak-dominated forest
to examine for the first time how insect outbreaks affect nutrient cycling and
availability to trees under both current temperatures and warmer soils expected
in the future. In the southeastern United States caterpillar outbreaks have
inflicted high rates of damage to oak trees, including up to 100% defoliation of
individual trees. Species involved in this outbreak, black-dotted brown (Cissusa
spadix) and common oak moth (Phoberia atomaris), were never known to outbreak
before (Cissusa) or only rarely (Phoberia). However, in May 2010 Cissusa broke
out for the first time ever recorded in the southeastern U.S., and in May 2011
both caterpillars exhibited outbreak numbers and caused extensive defoliation.
In April 2012 these caterpillars broke out again but a month earlier than
previous years, likely due to the mild winter of 2011-2012. Such large numbers
of leaf-eating insects in a few weeks produce large quantities of excrement
(frass) and other soil nutrient additions that may impact nutrient
biogeochemical dynamics over an entire year or more. This study will be the
first to address how insect outbreaks and warmer soils affect the availability
to trees of important nutrients.

Insect outbreaks have been occurring more frequently and are projected to
increase in frequency as climate warms. Understanding how forest ecosystems
respond to outbreaks of foliage-eating insects concerns forest managers, timber
harvesters, hikers, campers, and local and regional property owners. This work
will have relevance for understanding soil nutrient availability to trees under
current and future warmer conditions and, therefore, for future ecosystem
services important to society. These services include, but are not limited to,
provisioning of timber, forest carbon sequestration, wildlife habitat, and
watershed integrity. During several weeks of outbreak each year, falling frass
abundant enough to sound like drizzle and nightly climbing of thousands of
caterpillars (per tree) up tree trunks garners much public interest and
generates extensive media coverage, providing an excellent opportunity for
discourse with the public.