* 1242501
* National Ocean Sciences Bowl: Inspiring Tomorrow's Leaders
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Kristen Yarincik, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 152,753.00

This award to Consortium for Ocean Leadership (COL) provides continued funding
of the National Ocean Sciences Bowl (NOSB), a national competition for high
school students that focuses on their knowledge of ocean science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Ocean Sciences Bowl (NOSBÂ®)was established in
1998 by COL. The program runs a nationally recognized high school academic
competition that provides a forum for students to excel in science, mathematics
and technology and introduces team members, their teacher/coaches, schools and
communities to ocean sciences as an interdisciplinary field of study and a
possible future career path. The basic model for NOSB is that of a two-tiered
timed competition in which pairs of four-student teams answer multiple-choice,
short-answer and critical thinking questions within multiple categories related
to the oceans. The primary goals for the program are to: (1) Cultivate
environments which develop knowledgeable ocean stewards that understand the
ocean's impact on daily life and the importance of current scientific research;
(2) Foster the use of the ocean as an interdisciplinary vehicle to teach science
and mathematics and encourage the inclusion of the ocean sciences in curriculum;
(3) Reach out to and support the involvement of under-represented and
geographically diverse communities in the ocean sciences; and (4) Provide
students with interactive education and career opportunities that develop
critical thinking and workforce development skills, and provide exposure to
ocean science professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most funding for the NOSB is
provided by NOAA via a separate grant to COL. Other agencies provide support for
various aspects of the program. This award provides funds to 1) create online
professional development seminars for teachers and student mentors that focus on
current research and on the fundamental principles and concepts of ocean
literacy and STEM education; (2) enhance the Regional Coordinators (RC) training
program; and (3) execute a research study on career paths and outcomes for
participants to document and assess the role that the program plays in
encouraging talented students to enter the STEM
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NOSB has received national recognition for
both the high quality of the competition content and the mentoring and other
enhancements provided for students and teachers. This award will support several
activities that are important to the overall success of the NOSB. Year-to-year
evaluations of the program consistently indicate that NOSB is well organized and
well run and that it is successful at encouraging students to consider STEM
degrees in college. The program will provide opportunities for hundreds of high
school students and their teachers to improve their interest and understanding
of science, particularly ocean science and ocean science careers.