* 1242729
* EAGER:  Chemical Design for Controlling Electronic Properties of Organic Semiconductors and Molecules via Edge-On Gating
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Luping Yu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Electronic and Photonic Materials
Programs in the Division of Materials Research, is aimed at investigating the
edge-on chemical gating effect on electronic properties of semiconducting
molecules and materials. The molecular system proposed resembles a field effect
transistor, but allows using ultrafast spectroscopic techniques to investigate
the gating effect. Extensive synthetic efforts are proposed to prepare a series
of new compounds with different gating moieties. Electron transfer rate
constants (corresponding to conductance) will be correlated with linear free
energy Hammett parameters. If the synthetic approach is proved feasible,
numerous kinds of molecular materials will be developed based on the chemically
edge-on gating concept. This research effort will impact the design and
development of new solid state materials and molecular electronics. It is
possible that after a short period of research, this EAGER project will find
firm footing for expanding into a full scale research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moore's
law in microelectronics is rapidly approaching its limitation. This EAGER
project is aimed at developing and investigating molecular-scale field effect
transistors, the smallest possible electronic devices. The PI will investigate a
new concept to control charge transport in single molecules, namely an edge-on
gating effect. The proposed work involves synthetic efforts to create prototype
molecules that allow gating-control and spectroscopic studies to determine
electron transfer rate constants (corresponding to conductance). This project
will provide basic knowledge for controlling the charge transport process in
organic semiconducting materials and lead to development of new semiconducting
molecules, materials and new molecular transistors. It will also provide a new
perspective on solid state assembly and structure/property relationships in
these materials. New materials generated will have impact on sustainable energy
and electronics industries. It offers a broad spectrum of research and
educational opportunities for students who will be well prepared to be future
leaders in the area of organic/material chemistry and organic electronic
materials. This EAGER proposal will financially support 2 graduate students and
involve 2 undergraduate summer research students through the University of
Chicago's Leadership Alliance's Summer Research Early Identification Program
(SR-EIP) targeting underrepresented groups.