* 1242289
* Travel Support for Domestic Invited Speakers to Attend the "Emerging Areas in Polymer Science and Engineering" Program at the 2012 AIChE Fall Meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Thomas Epps, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2013
* USD 6,100.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for two special sessions at the annual American Institute of
Chemical Engineers (AIChE) meeting that will be focused on "Emerging Areas in
Polymer Science and Engineering." The PIs have organized these sessions to
highlight recent advances in polymer science, focused on experimental,
theoretical, and simulation topics of interest to the broad polymer community.
Each session will contain academic researchers from various stages in their
careers discussing timely and important topics. Furthermore, these sessions will
emphasize the breadth and depth of on-going and emerging polymer-related
activities in the chemical engineering community. The sessions will take place
during the 2012 Fall AIChE Meeting (October 28-November 2) in Pittsburgh,
PA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the two special sessions is to highlight
new areas of polymer science and engineering, as well as to underscore emerging
opportunities and unexplored themes in more established areas of polymer
science. Though the talks cover an array of polymer science topics, the overall
theme is the use of nanoscale engineering of polymer systems to manipulate
materials structure, properties, and function. The combination of the talks in
each session will highlight recent theoretical, simulation, and experimental
advances in polymer science and engineering, providing an overview of several
cutting-edge methodologies being employed to tackle key problems related to
energy storage and generation, drug delivery, nanoscale templating, coatings,
nanocomposites, and biomaterials. The speakers represent a diverse group of
polymer scientists in terms of research topics, research methodology
(experimental/theoretical/simulation) career status, gender, and ethnicity.