* 1242516
* I-Corps:  Drug-eluting Sutures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Douglas Hirt, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

There are many applications where a drug-eluting suture can prevent infection
and ultimately save lives. The team's initial target application is a cervical
cerclage (suture), which is utilized to prevent premature birth by bolstering
the strength of a mother's weak (incompetent) cervix from the beginning of their
third trimester. Despite closing the cervix with a cerclage, devastating
infections are known to occur from bacteria that migrate through the cervix and
infect the fetus. Typically oral antimicrobials or vaginal pessaries are
prescribed to prevent infection. However, the oral route may adversely affect
healthy stomach bacteria, and both methods rely on patient compliance. By
incorporating a localized drug delivery for the full three month duration needed
to bring the fetus to term this new technology can usurp current treatments.

In 3% of all surgical and traumatic wounds a patient develops an infection,
necessitating an average 6.5-day hospital stay, adding $35-40 billion in
expenses in the United States alone. While orally-administered antibiotics have
an established efficacy towards preventing infection, they come with inherent
risks. Instead, the technology developed in this effort delivers the minimally-
effective dose of a powerful broad-spectrum antimicrobial directly from a
suture, minimizing side effects. Further, administration of the antimicrobial
from the suture ensures 100% patient compliance with the drug regimen. At the
end of the project, the team will have a woven, prototype suture that has been
examined more thoroughly for drug release and strength and has gone through
preliminary in vivo animal trials at the Medical University of South Carolina.
The team will also have a go/no go decision with regard to potential
commercialization of the technology.