* 1242901
* CubeSat:   The Optical Profiling of the Atmospheric Limb (OPAL) CubeSat Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Michael Taylor, Utah State University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,039,316.00

This is a 3 year effort to design, construct, and operate a 3U CubeSat mission
named Optical Profiling of the Atmospheric Limb (OPAL) designed to understand
the thermospheric temperature signatures of the dynamic solar, geomagnetic and
internal atmospheric forcing. OPAL will measure lower thermospheric temperatures
from 90?140 km altitude by observing the daytime O2 A-band (near 762nm) emission
with a high-sensitivity, hyper-spectral limb imager. The instrument will be
incorporated into a 3U Colony 2 CubeSat provided by the National Reconnaissance
Office.

The lower thermosphere is an important interface between the lower and upper
atmosphere, but progress in our understanding has been hindered by a paucity of
measurements in this critical region. The OPAL mission will help fill this gap
by providing much needed global observations of the neutral temperatures, which
in turn will lead to an improved understanding of the physical processes that
are responsible for day-to-day changes in the I/T system on global, regional,
and local scales. In particular, it is important to measure how energy
propagates from high to lower latitudes and to quantify the wave coupling
between the lower and upper atmosphere. OPAL will directly measure the thermal
response at low and middle latitudes to geomagnetic activity. OPAL will quantify
the global characteristics of waves from below within the lower thermosphere by
measuring their temperature signatures.

The mission is being proposed jointly by the Space Dynamics Laboratory at Utah
State University (USU/SDL) and the University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES),
the Hawk Institute for Space Sciences (HISS) and Dixie State College of Utah
(DSC). A majority of the OPAL mission will be developed and implemented by
graduate and undergraduate students with professional staff serving as mentors.
The program will combine USU/SDL, UMES, HISS, and DSC student training and
participation. Physics students will play a major role in the science team, data
analysis, and publication of the scientific findings. Engineering students will
produce spacecraft and instrument design drawings, develop, integrate and test
hardware, and calibrate the instrument. The OPAL mission also would be the first
cubesat to fly a scientific hyper-spectral imager payload. Hyper-spectral
imaging measurements are extremely important to many areas of research,
including atmospheric chemistry, ocean depth and temperature, land-use, ecology,
astronomy, and surveillance. It's a challenging payload for a cubesat mission
due to the requirements (power, attitude control, data rates, etc) the imager
poses on the cubesat system, making this a high-risk-high-reward project.