* 1242798
* SHINE: Systematic Evaluation of the Coronal and Heliospheric Models Installed at the Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/04/2012,09/30/2015
* Lan Jian, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 09/30/2015
* USD 205,443.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and her collaborator will evaluate the success
of several models now being hosted at the Community Coordinated Modeling Center
(CCMC) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, to determine how these models can
best be used and how they could be improved. This effort will specifically focus
on the Wang-Sheeley-Arge (WSA) coronal model, the Magnetohydrodynamics-Around-A-
Sphere (MAS) coronal model, the ENLIL heliospheric/solar wind model ("Enlil" was
the Sumerian wind god), and the Space Weather Modeling Framework (SWMF), in
order to systemically evaluate their capabilities in simulating the solar corona
and solar wind structure for the solar minimum period of 2007-09. To compare
model output with multi-spacecraft observations, the PI's team will test about
246 model runs for each solar Carrington rotation and for each available
spacecraft as an observation source, in order to fully assess the differences in
model output caused by the varying solar boundary conditions measured by
different spacecraft, as opposed to variations caused by different physics or
numerical treatments in the various models. Because these team members are not
involved in developing specific models, they can provide an unbiased evaluation
of the advantages and disadvantages of each model and in this way, assist the
original developers with model validation and enhancement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will advance the community's ability to use
the models at the CCMC to accurately simulate solar wind evolution in the inner
heliosphere and to connect phenomena occurring on the Sun with solar wind
structures. This evaluation of the CCMC's solar corona and solar wind models is
a necessary step in validating the tools needed for further advances in space
physics research and in space weather forecasting. The PI is a young female
postdoc who will receive mentoring and career development through this project,
thereby enhancing the participation of underrepresented groups in the physical
sciences. The Co-PI also will incorporate these results into his courses
teaching undergraduate and graduate students. The team will disseminate these
research results broadly through participation at annual scientific meetings and
workshops.