* 1242089
* An Iterated Homogenization Method to Study Cavitation in Soft Solids
* MPS,DMS
* 04/20/2012,08/31/2014
* Oscar Lopez-Pamies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 08/31/2014
* USD 67,974.00

Lopez-Pamies DMS-1009503

Experimental evidence has shown that loading conditions with sufficiently large
triaxialities can induce the sudden appearance of internal cavities within
elastomeric (and other soft) solids. The occurrence of such instabilities,
commonly referred to as cavitation, can be attributed to the growth of pre-
existing defects into finite sizes. Because of its close connection with
material failure initiation, the phenomenon of cavitation has received much
attention from the materials and mechanics communities. Cavitation has also been
a subject of interest in the mathematical community because its modeling has
prompted the development of techniques to deal with a broad class of non-convex
variational problems. While in recent years considerable progress has been made
via energy minimization methods to establish existence results, fundamental
problems regarding the quantitative prediction of the occurrence of cavitation
in real material systems remain largely unresolved. In this project, the
principal investigator develops a novel framework to study cavitation that: (i)
is applicable to large classes of nonlinear elastic solids of practical
interest, (ii) allows for 3D general loading conditions with arbitrary
triaxiality, (iii) incorporates direct information on the initial shape, spatial
distribution, and mechanical properties of the underlying defects at which
cavitation can initiate, and (iv) is, at the same time, computationally
tractable. This is accomplished by means of an innovative iterated
homogenization method that allows for the construction of exact solutions for
the mechanical response of nonlinear elastic materials containing random
distributions of initially infinitesimal cavities (or defects). These include
solutions for the change in size of the underlying cavities as a function of the
applied loading conditions, from which the onset of cavitation can be
determined. In spite of its generality, the analysis of the proposed formulation
reduces to the study of tractable Hamilton-Jacobi equations in which the initial
size of the cavities plays the role of time and the applied load plays the role
of space.

This project makes available a fresh methodology radically different from
existing approaches to investigate the influence of defects in solids. This is a
core topic in mechanics, of great importance for understanding and predicting
the failure of real-world materials. More generally, the project aims to develop
analytical techniques that link the macroscopic properties of soft heterogeneous
materials directly to their microscopic properties and underlying
microstructures, a central issue in many fields of modern science. Beyond
putting forward fundamental understanding of how microscopic behavior influences
macroscopic behavior, these techniques provide engineers and scientists with
mathematical tools to characterize and predict the mechanical response and
failure of a broad spectrum of soft composite materials, including elastomeric
composites (e.g., filled elastomers) and biological tissues (e.g., arterial
walls).