* 1242510
* LTREB Renewal:   Long-term Research on Environmental Gender Determination in a Model System (Chrysemys)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Fredric Janzen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 580,100.00

In several major groups of vertebrates, environmental temperatures experienced
during embryonic development determine offspring gender. Temperature-dependent
gender determination will be addressed with a multi-year field study of a wild
population of the painted turtle, Chrysemys picta. The project will investigate
several aspects of this unusual phenomenon: (1) the impact of long-term climatic
variation on population structure, particularly the ratio of males to females,
(2) the effect of lifetime patterns of nesting behavior on offspring gender
ratio, and (3) climatic effects on variation in predator numbers and
differential predation on nests, and hence shifts in population gender ratio. A
team of student researchers will record nesting date and vegetation cover over
nests, follow females across years to evaluate nesting behavior, monitor nests
to investigate the influence of predators on offspring recruitment, and relate
these data to information on climate and human habitat use.

The findings of this research will have important implications for the impacts
of climate change and human habitat use on the biology and conservation of
species with this gender determination system. This long-term research program
will also continue to provide extensive first-hand and on-line educational
opportunities for numerous students, including many underrepresented minorities
and women, and the public.