* 1242681
* 2012 Cellular &amp; Molecular Fungal Biology Gordon Research Conference, 17-22 June 2012, Holderness, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Judith Berman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Cell and Molecular Fungal Biology focuses on
the biology of fungi, including but not exclusively filamentous fungi. It brings
together established and young researchers, researchers from academia and
industry and education, and those who work on fungi that infect people and
plants, those that recycle polymers, and those that synthesize biofuels. These
eukaryotes serve as models for biology and are socially important as symbionts
(mutualists, parasites, and pathogens) and in industry (food, chemical, and
pharmaceutical manufacture, including enzymes important for conversion of plant
biomass to transportation fuels). Featured topics at this year's conference
include symbioses (mutualists and pathogens) and defense from viral and
horizontally transferred DNA; areas of new research in fungal small RNA and
fungal population genomics; areas of new research in filamentous fungal systems
biology; areas of recently revitalized interest, inlcuding fungal conversion of
plant biomass; and the core area of filamentous growth and development, that is,
cytoskeleton and motors, membrane trafficking, and polarity. This conference is
unique among regularly scheduled meetings on filamentous fungi in that it is
small, that it emphasizes discussions led by experienced researchers, that it
consciously avoids duplication of topics with other meetings, and that it has a
large percentage of young scientists making oral presentations to the entire
group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference organizers are dedicated to
broadening the research community by emphasizing women and members of
underrepresented groups in inviting speakers. The small size of the meeting and
the emphasis on discussion encourages active participation. Poster sessions are
featured without competing events to focus attention on the most junior
scientists, who often have the newest data. Shortly before the meeting, one
quarter of the speakers will be chosen from those submitting poster abstracts to
bring the work of the youngest scientists to the attention of the entire
meeting. This conference also is dedicated to research that applies basic
knowledge to socially important questions involving filamentous fungi,
particularly mutualisms with plants (mycorrhizae), parasitism on plants (plant
pathology) and animals (animal pathology), and industrial mycology (enzyme
production). The interactions among researchers focused on both basic and
socially important research will accelerate research aimed at solving social
problems caused by fungi and research aimed at improving social benefits
provided by fungi.