* 1242441
* Conference:  2012 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins GRC; to be held July 8-13, 2012 in West Dover, VT
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Rohit Pappu, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is the second the Gordon Research
Conference on Intrinsically Disordered Proteins (IDPs) to be held between July
08 and July 13, 2012. Biological functions are based on molecular recognition
and complex networks are organized around a series of inter-related protein-
protein and protein-nucleic acid interfaces. The traditional view posits that
molecular recognition is achieved through a combination of shape complementarity
and specific interactions between a protein and its binding partner. Traditional
views are, however, being challenged by observations that roughly 30% of
eukaryotic proteins fail to fold autonomously and their inability to fold is
required for function. Such proteins, referred to as intrinsically disordered
proteins or IDPs are implicated in a wide variety of functions that include
fundamental processes in biology. IDPs add a new dimension to molecular
recognition because they undergo large-scale conformational changes and they
raise the question of how specificity in recognition is achieved despite the
absence of precise pre-organized shape complementarity. This an opportune time
to bring together scientists in the IDP field to identify the important
questions, take stock of current progress, and chart the course for rapid and
meaningful progress in the study of conformational heterogeneity and its role in
protein function. The Gordon Conference on Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
features an outstanding and diverse group of scientists at the forefront of
research in the IDP field. The conference is organized around thematic sessions
focusing on transcriptional regulation, signaling pathways and modules, IDP
phase behavior and molecular recognition, emerging technologies for studying
IDPs, IDP quality control and homeostasis, regulated self-assembly and mis-
assembly of IDPs, and IDP targeting, trafficking and processing. Novel
technological advances are needed to study IDPs therefore the conference will
showcase the development of state-of-the art biophysical methods, advances in
theory and computation, and the synergy with novel tools from molecular biology,
for studying IDPs and developing a quantitative understanding regarding their
functions in vivo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Gordon Research Conference will promote
research of IDPs at different levels and in various fields. The meeting has a
highly relevant and synergistic focus on understanding the mechanisms by which
IDPs function and the development of new integrated methods for studying and
characterizing IDP form and function. In the final program, 12 of the 40 invited
speakers and discussion leaders are women. The program has a balanced mixture of
established and young scientists. Of the two program slots set aside for
postdoctoral speakers, the conference chairs will strive to fill at least one
with a woman / member of an under-represented minority community. The conference
chairs will also ensure that at the stage of selection of participants in the
meeting, minority participants will be selected to attend the meeting. When the
attendees are selected from the pool of applicants, principles of affirmative
action with respect to minority groups, women and junior scientists will be used
as criteria, in addition to the date of application and the scientific
background of the applicant.