* 1242241
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER:  Using ultraconserved elements (UCEs) as genomic markers to study shallow levels of evolutionary divergence
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Travis Glenn, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,670.00

This project will investigate the utility of using ultra conserved elements of
the genome (UCEs) as primary data for genetic and evolutionary studies of
populations and species. UCEs are regions of the genome that rarely change, and
that are shared across very divergent organismal groups (from humans to
lizards). Thus, UCEs could potentially provide hundreds to thousands of data
points that are universal across large taxonomic groups for analysis. This
project will capture and sequence the DNA of 2,386 UCE areas of the genome
across 18 species (from three organismal classes) in order to test the utility
and power of UCEs as universal data markers for organismal population
studies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UCE's will provide a unique and important new
tool for in-depth genetic studies of biodiversity and evolution while also
helping to address problems in conservation biology and wildlife management.
Development of UCE-based approaches may: produce data from thousands of genes
across entire orders and classes of organisms; enable previously impossible
apples-to-apples comparisons of genomic diversity among thousands of species at
a time; and provide quantum increases in speed and decreases in cost for
population genomic studies. This project will support a bioinformatics training
workshop in Alaska, release all data and source code to the public, and publish
results in peer-reviewed journals.