* 1242284
* NSF workshop:  Drilling, sampling, and imaging the depths of the critical zone
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Jon Chorover, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2014
* USD 75,013.00

Understanding the chemical, physical, and biological processes that modulate
Earth's surface is important across a diverse range of problems, from assessing
soil sustainability over human timescales, to understanding weathering-related
feedbacks in Earth's longterm&lt;br/&gt;climatic evolution. Increasingly, these
problems are being tackled in exciting, crossdisciplinary studies of the
"critical zone" (CZ). Although, the CZ is considered to extend to the lowest
limits of freely circulating groundwater, most subsurface CZ research
has&lt;br/&gt;focused on just the upper 1-2 m or so of weathered rock and soil
in landscapes. Hence the deep CZ (i.e., anything that is too deep to readily
access and sample by hand) represents a crucial frontier for advances in
watershed hydrology, geobiology, geomorphology, soil&lt;br/&gt;science, and low-
temperature geochemistry. One of the hurdles in studying the deep CZ is depth
itself; regolith, pore waters, and subsurface biota are difficult to
characterize in situ because they are mostly buried at difficult-to-access
depths. Tackling the challenge of deep CZ research will require coordinated
investigations that exploit recent advances in drilling, sampling, monitoring
and imaging of the subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a
workshop designed to develop a community-wide, crossdisciplinary consensus on
how to overcome the traditional difficulties of deep CZ research. The workshop
will bring together 45 people, including CZ researchers and near surface
geophysicists, as well as engineers with experience in drilling, coring and
borehole instrumentation. It exploits the chance alignment of: (i) an increasing
need for advances in deep CZ research, voiced in a recent consensus of CZ
scientists from around&lt;br/&gt;the world; (ii) recent advances in near-surface
geophysics, including improved techniques for imaging the deep CZ and
interpreting geophysical properties in terms of CZ architecture; and (iii)
recently renewed momentum behind establishing a formal program&lt;br/&gt;of
continental scientific drilling in the US. To be effective, the workshop will
need to bridge gaps, fostering productive new collaborations among scientists
and engineers from diverse disciplines.