* 1242152
* Bioenergy Center
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Abolghasem Shahbazi, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 06/30/2018
* USD 5,099,984.00

NSF CREST Bioenergy Center at North Carolina A&amp;T State University
(NCA&amp;T)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bioenergy Center at North Carolina A&amp;T
State University (NCA&amp;T) will be an educational and research resource for
the United States in the field of thermochemical conversion of biomass to
bioenergy. The efficient and economic production of energy from biomass and
other renewable natural resources is necessary to transform the U.S. energy
industry to energy independence and sustainability. Thermochemical catalytic
conversion of biomass to liquid fuels and hydrogen is widely recognized as a
technology critical to achieving these goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
focuses of the Bioenergy Center will be on developing advanced thermochemical
biomass conversion technologies for the production of liquid transportation
fuels and hydrogen and educating the engineers and scientists who will be needed
to propel the biofuels industry forward into the 21st century. The overarching
goals are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) through research, education and outreach,
spur development and commercialization of advanced thermochemical biomass
conversion technologies for the efficient and economic production of liquid
transportation fuels, hydrogen and chemicals; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) provide
education and training in the field of bioenergy for underrepresented
undergraduate and graduate students, and career development for underrepresented
scientists in the field of bioenergy; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) serve as a
pipeline for students from kindergarten up through graduate level into bioenergy
related STEM disciplines and careers; and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) create an
interdisciplinary community of learning, discovery, and engagement at NCA&amp;T
that will promote excellence and internal and external collaboration in the
bioenergy area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide a national resource for
improving the efficiencies and economics of thermochemical biomass conversion
technology, the Bioenergy Center's research is focused in three thrust areas:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(I) Production of high-quality synthesis gas (a mixture
containing varying amounts of carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen (H2) by biomass
gasification, &lt;br/&gt;(II) Conversion of synthesis gas to liquid fuels and
hydrogen, and &lt;br/&gt;(III) Reforming and processing of biofuels for fuel
cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative aspects of the research projects include
development of: &lt;br/&gt;(1) thermochemical processes that have minimal carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions with high energy efficiency; &lt;br/&gt;(2)
microreactors for catalyst screening and higher yields of liquid fuels from
synthesis gas; &lt;br/&gt;(3) novel multi-metallic catalysts that produce H2
with minimal CO formation; &lt;br/&gt;(4) membrane-reactor systems that produce
high-purity H2 from reforming reactions; &lt;br/&gt;(5) Proton exchange membrane
fuel cell (PEMFC) electrodes that have CO-tolerant, high-surface area, low
platinum (Pt)-loading electrocatalysts; and &lt;br/&gt;(6) economic analysis of
technology choices that will be explicitly concentrated on biomass and energy
prices as well as bioenergy policy provisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, there will be a focus on using evaluation
data to contribute to the scholarly literature on best practices for the
recruitment, retention, and professional development of underrepresented
students and faculty members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bioenergy Center will
involve 10 faculty members from 6 academic departments (Biological Engineering,
Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Mathematics, Economics and Energy &amp;
Environmental Systems) and 1 faculty member at Louisiana Tech (Chemical
Engineering). A seed grant program will bring in additional faculty from among
minority groups who have been heretofore underrepresented in the STEM
disciplines. Funding will be used to equip 4 bioenergy research labs, further
develop two existing interdisciplinary Ph.D. programs, and support
underrepresented minority students and faculty members. The research, education
and industry partnerships emerging from the Bioenergy Center are expected to
move North Carolina and the Southeast closer to leadership in the bioenergy
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research, education and outreach will be
achieved through a wide and diverse family of partners, including Louisiana
Tech, the new Guilford County Schools system's STEM Early College on the
NCA&amp;T campus, the N.C. Community College biofuels initiative, the Biofuels
Center of North Carolina, the Kenan Fellows Program for Curriculum and
Leadership Development, the Natural Science Center of Greensboro, federal labs
and several bioenergy companies. Educational materials about the center's
research will be disseminated to partners. Effort will be expended to include
other HBCU and minority serving institutions in online seminars and courses, as
well as an international bioenergy conference, to insure broad, equitable access
to the myriad economic and educational opportunities that bioenergy promises.