* 1242829
* RAPID: Testing Geophysical Prospection and Mapping Methods for Early Christian Cemeteries in Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Brian Damiata, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2013
* USD 28,680.00

This is a RAPID project to conduct geophysical survey of the Viking Age
Christian cemetery at Stora-Seyla, Iceland, prior to excavation this summer by
the Skagafjordur Heritage Museum. the research team states that currently there
is no geophysical methodology to find buried churches and cemeteries that can be
applied on a regional scale in Iceland. Apparently the most useful geophysical
method to detect Viking Age Christian cemeteries in Iceland is ground
penetrating radar (GPR). However, the problem is that for GPR to be effective,
it is necessary to strip off the grass in advance of survey; such activity is
expensive, potentially destructive to archaeological contexts, and most
importantly requires that the location of buried church complexes be known
before survey. The research team states that electromagnetic (EM) surveying with
new multi-sensor instrumentation could provide an alternative that could be
applied on a regional scale and would not require the removal of turf prior to
survey. While the EM methods have been used successfully to find buried turf
walls, the proposed application is untested in Iceland but its results could
yield a methodology for finding buried cemeteries and characterizing individual
burials. Planned excavation will provide a unique opportunity to ground-truth
this innovative EM application. Therefore, the research team is receiving RAPID
funds to conduct exploratory EM surveys of this churchyard before the Heritage
Museum's excavation, which is being supported by the Icelandic Archaeological
Fund.