* 1243536
* PIRE:  U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research and Education in Intermittency-Friendly Community-Scale Renewable Energy Micro-Grids
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Ronnie Lipschutz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,730,536.00

Uncertain resource supplies, global change and energy market volatility call for
strategies directed at developing alternative energy solutions. Anticipated
requirements for reduction in fossil fuel consumption and carbon emissions from
large-scale centralized power generation, point to the need for fundamentally
sound ways to increase renewable energy sources along with facilities for
delivery and distribution. This Partnership for International Research and
Education (PIRE) project addresses the technical, social, and economic aspects
of community-scale renewable energy micro-grids. The partnership involves
researchers from the U.S. and Denmark who, together, will serve as a
cooperative, virtual research, development and education center. Primary
partners are the University of California-Santa Cruz, the University of
California-Davis, Aalborg University and the Technical University of
Denmark.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the core efforts of this PIRE focus
on integrating engineering design and deployment principles with sociological
elements of energy user behavior. This will be achieved through a collaborative
research framework that collects supply and demand data in both countries,
models micro-grid-user operation, and analyzes the effects of intermittency and
variable demand. In doing this, the U.S.-Danish team will focus on system
optimization based on site-specific solar, wind, heat pumps, cogeneration and
storage, and intelligent agents for load managing. Integrated with the five-year
research effort is a well balanced educational program for student and junior
researchers, professional development focused on sustainability engineering,
renewable energy, and ecological design, as well as workforce development
seminars for industry professionals. Junior participants have access to hands-on
design and operation opportunities, reinforced by jointly prepared video-linked
courses on renewable micro-grid fundamentals and operation. Overall, the
anticipated broader impacts include the practical refinement of an innovative
approach to power generation that takes into account local and regional
variations, while complementing the existing power grid. If successful, future
applications could lead to a measurable increase in carbon-free energy capacity
with potentially lower environmental and regulatory requirements. Furthermore,
through outreach and instruction for communities, schools, colleges and
industry, via workshops, specialized workforce development activities, and new
education modules, the combined results are expected to provide an accessible
and open resource to assist entrepreneurs, decision makers and educators who
foresee similar needs and challenges in their own local communities or regions.
The project is funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE) through the PIRE program.