* 1243687
* RNA Editing in Physarum Mitochondria
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jonatha Gott, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2016
* USD 754,762.00

Intellectual Merit. RNA editing, the specific alteration of an RNA molecule
relative to the gene from which it was copied, is widespread, and has been most
extensively studied in mammals, plants, flies, viruses, and trypanosomes.
Observed sequence changes include base conversions, base substitutions, the
deletion of encoded nucleotides, and the insertion of additional residues. The
only organism known to carry out each of these forms of editing is the primitive
eukaryote Physarum polycephalum (Pp). The sequence of virtually all of the
mitochondrially-encoded mRNAs, rRNAs, and tRNAs in Pp differs from that of the
mitochondrial genome, and a number of the RNAs contain so many non-encoded
nucleotides that their genes escaped identification for years. Previous work has
shown that extra nucleotides are added to these RNAs during their synthesis and
that the specificity of editing depends on template elements that flank editing
sites; however, the underlying mechanism is still mysterious. This project has
two broad aims: the identification of factors that participate in nucleotide
insertion and the adaptation of a newly developed mitochondrial transformation
system for use in editing studies. The coupling of editing with RNA synthesis by
the mitochondrial RNA polymerase inform the approaches to be used to enrich for
editing factors, which include affinity selection of active transcription
complexes and immuno-affinity purification of the polymerase and associated
proteins. Long-term goals for the project include the development of an in vitro
system assembled from defined components for use in mechanistic studies and the
definition of the specific roles played by both template elements and auxiliary
factors. Successful completion of these studies will significantly advance the
RNA editing field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to
providing insight into RNA editing mechanisms, this project will provide
training opportunities at many levels. The principal investigator is a former
eighth grade science teacher committed to broadening the participation of under-
represented groups in the sciences. She has significant experience mentoring
high school women, minority students, and undergraduate students and will
continue to participate in the highly successful Scientific Enrichment and
Opportunity program for minority high school students and outreach programs
geared towards minority undergraduates. The project will engage undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral associate, in various aspects
of the research. Undergraduate students will carry out research throughout the
academic year, culminating in a capstone research project during their senior
year. Graduate students and the postdoctoral associate will learn optimization
methods and master state-of-the-art techniques. Graduate students and post-docs
will also be encouraged to participate in outreach activities and, when
appropriate, participate in mentoring undergraduate students to gain relevant
supervisory experience. Opportunities for developing presentation skills will be
provided for all laboratory members through participation in lab meetings,
student symposia, and regional and international meetings, with active
encouragement and coaching by the principle investigator. Research results will
be written jointly for dissemination to the larger scientific community.