* 1243970
* RAPID: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Ecological &amp; genetic recovery from a massive invertebrate die-off along the central coast of California
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Michael Dawson, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2014
* USD 76,969.00

The potentially important role that larval dispersal may play in determining
gene flow, distributions, and population structure of marine invertebrates
remains unclear despite many hundreds of descriptive comparisons of pelagic
duration and population genetic structure. This lack of clarity suggests many
factors may influence population genetic structure and their interactions may be
complex. Difficulties studying these factors include (under normal
circumstances) distinguishing local from exogenous recruitment and therefore the
true distribution of dispersal distances. For example, experiments that normally
could be undertaken to explore this issue are very small scale relative to the
distances that many marine taxa may disperse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In August
2011, a large-scale natural removal experiment was initiated along a 100 km
stretch of the central California coast. The PIs propose to use this rare
opportunity to clarify the effects of dispersal and species interactions on
marine population genetic variation and community structure. They propose to
study three species that suffered very high rates of mortality: an ecosystem
engineer (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, ~100% mortality), a keystone species
(Pisaster ochraceus, ~10-70% mortality), and one of its competitors
(Leptasterias sp., ~100% mortality). Their objectives during this first year
following the natural large-scale die-off are to [1] quantify the abundance and
distribution of the target species at sites across the impacted range and
reference sites to the south and north, [2] develop and use genetic markers to
identify the sources and dispersal distances of new recruits of P. ochraceus,
Leptasterias sp., and S. purpuratus that recolonize the impacted range, and [3]
describe changes in abundance of these three species and their prey and
competitors at sites throughout the impacted range.