* 1243369
* U.S.-India Advanced Studies Institute on Thermalization: From Glasses to Black Holes, Bangalore, Summer 2013.
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Matthew Headrick, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2017
* USD 93,309.00

1243369&lt;br/&gt;Bulbul Chakraborty &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
the U.S.-India Advanced Studies Institute on Thermalization: From Glasses to
Black Holes to be held at the Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore, Summer
2013. The Advanced Studies Institute (ASI) is an endeavor developed jointly by
Brandeis University and the International Centre for Theoretical Sciences (ICTS)
under the leadership of USPI Bulbul Chakraborty and Indian counterpart Spenta
Wadia, renowned string theorist and Director of the ICTS, a new
interdisciplinary institution of India's premier Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Mumbai. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of the macroscopic
world is based mostly on analyses of equilibrium states. These, however, are
distinctive in that they retain no memory of the initial state, and are
stationary in time. Despite the centrality of the concept of thermal equilibrium
to modern physics, basic questions regarding the fundamental process of
thermalization and how it emerges from reversible microscopic dynamics are still
unanswered. Nonetheless, in recent decades significant progress has been made
due to new experimental techniques and the contributions of theorists from
statistical mechanics, string theory, and quantum information theory. The
proposed school will promote an intensive discussion of thermalization ranging
from its conceptual foundations to modern-day applications in complex condensed
matter systems, quantum information theory, and string theory. The scientific
goal of the ASI is to provide a cross-disciplinary view of the problem of
thermalization and create a forum for the cross-fertilization of ideas that have
emerged in the different fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer institute will
engage a cadre of junior scientists in the discussion of both the fundamentals
of classical and quantum thermalization and the current state of understanding
of these questions. Experts across subfields have been chosen to lecture at the
school and provide students with core knowledge needed to appreciate the
challenges in the field. The organizers from Brandeis and ICTS have a proven
record in leading collaborative research and organizing international summer
schools. Their role at the ASI is to build bridges between the subfields through
tutorials and small group discussions, which will tie together topics covered in
lectures. Participants will be competitively selected from theoretical physics
and include advanced graduate students, postdocs and junior faculty.
Thermalization is timely and an area of high importance among theoretical
physicists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include fostering
international collaborations among the scientific communities of senior and
junior scientists from the U.S. and India. The ASI will introduce a new
generation of talented young scientists to a fundamental question in theoretical
physics and to some world leaders in the field. The dissemination plan includes
the professional production of videos that will be made available online. The
partner institution in India, ICTS is providing administrative, intellectual,
and generous financial support that will ensure the success of the summer
institute. The ASI's impact will be further enhanced by the recent launching in
Bangalore of GLORIAD that provides dedicated high-band-width fiber-optic
connectivity for research and education.