* 1243425
* I-Corps:  Predictive Technology for Failure Prevention of Industrial Machinery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jay Lee, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed study focuses on the commercialization of predictive technology for
failure prevention of industrial machinery. The commercialization of this
technology has the potential to represent a significant development that will be
leveraging years of scientific and engineering research in the area of
Prognostics and Health Management (PHM). The enhanced reconfigurable and
modularized software platform is an important step for achieving the goal of
rapid and low-cost solutions for predicting and preventing failures in
industrial machinery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the proposed effort
during the I-Corps study addresses a significant need expressed by industry for
having a commercialized solution for predictive maintenance. The successful
demonstration during previous projects showed the feasibility of the technology.
However, in order to demonstrate the full economic benefits regarding cost,
asset availability, and downtime reduction that industry desires, the technology
must be cast in a form that can be more easily deployed and implemented.
Successful implementation of this technology in manufacturing facilities has the
potential to result in lower cost and higher quality products, thus providing a
benefit to the end users of the manufactured goods. In addition, manufactures
who implement this technology will likely have a competitive advantage in the
market place due to the higher quality and productivity they could achieve by
preventing costly equipment failures.