* 1243413
* Estimating the Policy Preferences of United States Courts of Appeals Judges Across Circuits and American Political Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 05/10/2012,08/31/2013
* Ryan Owens, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 19,254.00

The federal circuit courts are, for all intents and purposes, the final arbiters
of federal litigation in the United States. They render thousands of decisions
yearly, making the likelihood of Supreme Court review for any individual case
minimal. The sheer number of cases they decide, combined with the improbability
of being reviewed by the Supreme Court, make circuit courts the engines of legal
policy making in the United States. Yet, scholars lack sophisticated data on the
United States Courts of Appeals and the policy preferences of the judges who
serve on them, leaving them unable to examine empirically how law evolves on the
United States Courts of Appeals, whether circuit court judges render decisions
based on the law or their policy goals, what leads judges to bargain with one
another and accommodate their colleagues' requests, and whether circuit judges
fear retribution from Congress and the president.

To estimate circuit court judges' preferences, the investigators employ the most
current and sophisticated measurement techniques, and do so in a way that
facilitates comparisons across the twelve U.S. circuits, the Supreme Court,
Congress, and the president. These scores enable researchers to determine how
liberal or conservative a particular circuit court judge is, and to compare that
judge's underlying ideological propensity with other judges in their circuit,
judges in alternative circuits, and with members of Congress and the president.