* 1243719
* Structure Function Correlation of G-Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Arieh Warshel, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2018
* USD 873,317.00

The objective of this project is to obtain quantitative correlations between the
structure and function of G-proteins. Obtaining a reliable detailed molecular
description of the action of G-proteins can have a far reaching impact on the
understanding key processes in the cell, by providing a more quantitative
picture on the communication of information in the cell. Previous studies
conducted in this project developed computer simulation methods to study GTP
hydrolysis that is controlled by G-proteins. These simulations explored the key
role of protein residues whose mutations lead to major change in activity and
indicated that these residues act by modulating the coupling between the barrier
for the chemical step and structural changes. This idea has been further
validated by studies of the activation of the EF-Tu protein, which is involved
in the elongation of the amino acid chain during protein synthesis. Attempts to
confirm the above findings and to reach more unique conclusions involved
systematic quantum mechanical ab initio studies of phosphate hydrolysis in
solution, as well as a preliminary combined quantum (ab initio) / molecular
mechanics (QM/MM) study of the activation of the protein Ras by the protein GAP.
These studies reproduced key experimental findings while giving new insights
into the nature of the free energy surface of the reaction. Further advances
have been made in studying the conversion of chemical energy to work by the
protein F1-ATPase and in studies of the unique unidirectional motions in this
and in related systems. This project is placed now at a pivotal point, where it
is poised to exploit the above progress and to move in parallel on the following
fronts: (i) Further exploration of the activation of EF-Tu and the related
protein EF-G , during the protein synthesis process. (ii) Continuing the studies
of the chemical and conformational coupling in F1-ATPase. (iv) Exploring the
action of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) which are responsible for the
majority of cellular response to hormones and neurotransmitters. (iii)
Conducting comparative studies of the action of different G-proteins and
determining both the common and different catalytic factors (v) Exploring the
information transfer in RasAGP and related systems by double mutations analysis
(vi) Pushing for a consensus on the nature of the GTPase reactions by systematic
ab initio QM/MM free energy calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advances in
the above research will be integrated into teaching and training programs. The
PI will develop a computer-modeling course for students. Movies that illustrate
the process of cellular signal transduction and its molecular foundations will
be produced. The movies will be distributed to high schools, where they should
encourage young people to pursue research in this field.