* 1243428
* Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Deletions and Double-strand Break Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Elaine Sia, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 752,800.00

Intellectual merit: Eukaryotic cells contain mitochondria, the membrane-bound
organelles that produce energy for the cell. Like the nucleus of the cell,
mitochondria contain DNA genomes, whose maintenance without error is essential
to the normal function of cells. Deletions of large segments of the
mitochondrial DNA are common mutations in many types of cells. In many species,
these mutations accumulate with age and are associated with metabolic syndromes.
Deletions of this type are also commonly observed in the mitochondrial DNA of
baker's yeast. The molecular tools available for research in yeast have made it
a powerful model for the study of mitochondrial biology. The long-term goal of
this project is to understand the fundamental cellular processes that contribute
to mitochondrial deletion mutations. Studies are directed at understanding the
proteins involved in this process and their activities, as well as understanding
the role of double-strand breaks in the generation of deletion mutations.
Completion of this work will provide information on the broad area of
mitochondrial DNA transactions, including replication, recombination and
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This work will have a positive
impact on the education of undergraduates in the biological sciences at two
institutions, as this project represents a collaborative effort between labs at
two local universities. Dr. Elaine Sia, at the University of Rochester, and Dr.
Rey Sia, at SUNY-Brockport have a history of undergraduate mentorship of
undergraduates in the laboratory, with a combined record of advising 20
undergraduates in independent study in the past 2.5 years. Studies with yeast
are well suited to undergraduates with little experience, allowing them to learn
a large number of techniques and concepts in a summer or semester. Special
effort will continue to be made to recruit individuals from groups
underrepresented in science, or first generation college students via
connections with CSTEP/McNair, and summer REU programs. The PI and co-PI
continue to honor their commitment to scientific education with the involvement
of undergraduate biology majors at SUNY Brockport and the University of
Rochester in this project.