* 1243849
* Alternative polyadenylation and non-stop mRNAs in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Arthur Hunt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2017
* USD 530,446.00

Intellectual Merit: Among the many ways that genes are regulated in eukaryotes
is via a process termed as alternative polyadenylation; this process entails the
differential choice of sites along a primary RNA transcript at which the
messenger RNAs will end (and to which the canonical poly(A) tail will be added).
Previous NSF-supported research resulted in the discovery of a novel class of
alternative polyadenylation sites that are prevalent in genes associated with
stress responses in plants. These sites are predicted to reflect novel gene
expression and regulatory mechanisms. To test this prediction, the formation and
properties of mRNAs that end at these sites will be studied. The hypotheses to
be tested in this project are: mRNAs that end at these novel sites are formed by
canonical mechanisms of polyadenylation; mRNAs that end at these sites alter the
functionalities of the associated mRNAs; and polyadenylation at these sites is
required for the functions of genes that possess such sites. This research will
involve biochemical assays, high throughput sequencing of DNA tags that query
mRNA-poly(A) junctions as well as the positions of RNA polymerase II along the
genome, transient gene expression studies in Nicotiana benthamiana, and
experiments utilizing Arabidopsis mutants and transgenic plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research addresses a new
mode of regulation of genes involved in responses of plants to stress. The
knowledge gained from these studies will apply to most crop plants, and it is
reasonable to expect that new strategies for managing disease and abiotic stress
in crop plants will be forthcoming. The research involves a wide range of
approaches; trainees will thus gain first-hand experience in biochemistry,
genomics and computational biology, and molecular genetics. The research methods
and results will be integrated into graduate and undergraduate classes at the
University of Kentucky. Additionally, the methods and results will be made
available to faculty at a number of undergraduate-focused institutions as part
of outreach efforts to develop curricular modules for high throughput DNA
sequencing and genomics.