* 1243433
* PIRE: Water and Commerce- Technologies to Enable Environmental Sustainability in Global Markets
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Joan Rose, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2019
* USD 4,750,443.00

International maritime trade, energy production, and the manufacture and global
circulation of new materials urgently require creative technological solutions
to enable environmentally sustainable commerce. This interdisciplinary PIRE
project Water and Commerce: Technologies to Enable Environmental Sustainability
in Global Markets will perform innovative research and educate young US
scientists and engineers in an international context to provide these solutions.
Participating U.S. institutions are Duke University, Michigan State University,
and North Carolina Central University. Foreign partners include Istanbul
Technical University and Gebze Institute of Technology (Turkey), National
University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological University (Singapore), and
Centre Européen de Recherche et d'Enseignement des Géosciences de
l'Environnement (France). The specific objectives of the Partnership are to: (i)
educate students to work within and manage projects executed by international
teams; (ii) perform innovative research with foreign collaborators and
industrial partners to develop new technologies and methods that enable the
sustainability of water resources and to carry out life cycle assessments of
various energy/technology mixes, (iii) develop the awareness of global issues
and sustainability, and (iv) increase the number and diversity of students
entering careers in science and engineering. Research within the project is
organized by international research teams that engage industrial partners to
address critical elements of energy transport and production including treatment
of ballast water, methods for diagnosing and fingerprinting contamination, and
advanced technologies for oil-water separations. Life cycle assessments will
produce a multi-level analysis of impacts and trade-offs resulting from energy
production and transport scenarios and from the technological innovations
developed by the PIRE team. This effort addresses fundamental advances in
membrane materials design, methods for controlling the dispersion of non-
indigenous and potentially invasive species in ballast water, means for
decreasing the environmental footprint of the oil industry, recovering oil, and
developing a suite of technologies to diagnose and mitigate the chronic and
acute impacts of oil exploration and transportation. Our educational program
directly addresses the need for a diverse STEM workforce with the capacity for
international collaboration and leadership. The Partnership will cement
collaborations between academic participants and industrial partners to form a
synergistic Industry/University consortium as an integral part of education and
research. Collaborations with industrial partners will help reduce technologies
to practice and provide students with opportunities for internships. Students
will obtain certification in a rigorous plan of study in science, engineering,
management, environmental policy, and systems analysis that emphasizes
environmental sustainability in commerce viewed from the perspective of
materials, energy and transportation. Leveraging highly successful recruitment
programs at Duke, MSU and NCCU (86.7% minority enrollment) and closely
coordinating research and education activities between all partner institutions
will expand opportunities for underrepresented groups of students to participate
in multiple university and global learning/research activities with the goal of
increasing the number of these students entering into STEM related fields. The
project is funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE) through the PIRE.