* 1243522
* Functional Specialization of the Mediator-Associated Kinases CDK8 and CDK19
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Joaquin Espinosa, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,079,999.00

Intellectual Merit: A major challenge in modern biology is to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms employed by cells to regulate expression of thousands of
genes in various contexts. Accurate regulation of gene activity is a key element
of every major biological process. Specialized protein machineries regulate gene
activity by decoding the information carried in DNA to satisfy the ever-changing
needs of the cell. One such protein complex, known as Mediator, is recognized as
a critical regulator of gene activity from yeast to humans, yet little is known
about its mechanism of action. This research project investigates the function
of two proteins within the Mediator complex, CDK8 and CDK19. Preliminary results
demonstrate that CDK8 and CDK19 regulate the activity of different groups of
genes involved in diverse cellular functions. This project aims to define the
molecular mechanisms by which CDK8 and CDK19 enable cells to adjust the activity
of different gene sets in response to changes in the cellular environment. This
research is expected to have a transformative impact on the understanding of
Mediator in particular and the evolution of gene expression control mechanisms
in general. Given the quasi-universal role of Mediator in the control of gene
activity, the discoveries arising from this project will have far reaching
implications in the fields of cellular and molecular biology. Moreover, the
innovative techniques developed in this project for the study of Mediator in
human cells will produce a positive ripple effect in the gene expression field
by enabling similar studies of other gene
regulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is carried out by
a teaching-research team that strongly promotes science education and diversity
in academia. This collaborative team involves trainees at the undergraduate,
graduate and post-doctoral levels who work in an environment displaying gender
balance and inclusion of minorities. Both the host institution and the Principal
Investigator participate actively in programs that aim to: a) increase the
number of minority students earning PhDs, b) provide hands-on research
experience to undergraduates, c) prepare undergraduate students to pursue PhDs
in the biosciences, and d) increase the representation of women in leadership
positions in academia. The success of these endeavors is documented by multiple
undergraduate authors in the high impact publications from this laboratory and
by the fact that most of the 30+ undergraduates trained in this group have
advanced to graduate school, medical school or teaching positions. The Principal
Investigator is an active member of the local Hispanic community and a
recognized life science educator at the University of Colorado at Boulder, where
he is the Instructor of a large undergraduate course and co-Instructor of
several graduate courses. Members of this team promote scientific literacy in
the public via regular contributions to the popular press and outreach
activities at the state and national level.