* 1243957
* Investigation of the Causal Relationship Between Chromatin Structure Fluctuations and Gene Expression Noise by Electron and Fluorescence Microscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2021
* Grant Hartzog, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,022,426.00

Intellectual Merit: Animal, plant and fungal cells alike package their DNA by
spooling it in regular intervals about a protein core, forming a jointed chain
of DNA spools (nucleosomes). The spooling renders the DNA less accessible and
thus interferes with the reading of its genetic information. How then does DNA
spooling affect gene activity and regulation? This research addresses this
question by investigating the structure of isolated single-gene molecules and
gene expression at the single cell level. The essential tools for this research
are electron and fluorescence microscopy, combined with mathematical modeling,
and yeast genetics. Surprisingly, recent studies have provided evidence that
active genes randomly toggle between states during which the gene is either ON
or OFF, rather than being on all the time. This random toggling causes the
number of gene products produced from a single gene to fluctuate over time.
These fluctuations can provide insight into how the gene is activated, but the
molecular basis of ON/Off toggling is not understood. One possibility is that
random spooling and unspooling of DNA--analogous to the continued opening and
closing of a door at randomly chosen time points--may underlie the ON/OFF
toggling of active genes. Testing of this hypothesis requires analysis of DNA
spooling at the level of single gene molecules. To this end, this research will
investigate the structure of specific genes within single cells of baker's yeast
by isolation of the gene molecules and subsequent analysis by electron
microscopy. The molecules will be isolated from cells that bear mutations in
critical biochemical components for DNA spooling, including the proteins that
make up the core of the DNA spool. These structural investigations will be
combined with analysis of gene expression of single cells by fluorescence
microscopy and mathematical modeling to reveal the dynamics and functional
significance of DNA spooling for gene expression and regulation.

Broader Impacts: In this project a postdoctoral fellow and one graduate student
will be trained. In addition, undergraduate students will be trained through
academic-year or summer internships. Student interns will be recruited from
underrepresented groups through existing campus programs. These students will be
overseen by the PIs, both directly in the lab and in biweekly joint group
meetings, and by the post-doctoral fellow and the graduate students of this
project. Students will be trained in fluorescence and electron microscopy, yeast
genetics and, importantly, in approaching biological problems by quantitative
means. Daily interactions with scientists at different stages of their careers
will benefit the undergraduates through multiple layers of supervision and will
allow the graduate student and post-doctoral trainees to have the opportunity to
supervise beginning students. The graduate student and post-doctoral trainee
will be given the opportunity to present their work locally and at national
meetings.

This project is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Applied Mathematics and
Mathematical Biology Programs in the Division of Mathematical Sciences.