* 1243220
* Collaborative Research: EaSM2--Wildfires and Regional Climate Variability - Mechanisms, Modeling, and Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Yuhang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2019
* USD 1,215,546.00

Wildfire is a key component of the climate system and plays an important role in
regulating regional climate variability. The overarching goal of this project is
to elucidate the role of wildfire in decadal climate variation and prediction.
On the basis of wildfire observations in the past decade, the regions that the
variability of fire is large will be selected for targeted modeling analysis.
The working hypotheses are that the observed fire variability is regulated by
regional climate variation and that the climate feedbacks from fires increase
regional climate variability. Consequently, the simulation of wildfires and
their feedbacks is essential for predicting regional climate variability on a
decadal scale. These hypotheses will be thoroughly tested and the mechanistic
process will be carefully analyzed using an extensive suite of observations and
selected ensembles of climate model simulations. In this project, the modeling
capability of wildfires and their climate forcing will be developed by building
a new Region-specific Fire Model with Ecosystem Feedbacks (RFMEF). Regional
climate forcing by wildfires and fire feedbacks to regional climate variability
will be quantified. Lastly fully interactive regional fire-climate variability
feedbacks will be investigated to understand the projections of decadal regional
climate variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Understanding the interannual and
decadal-scale regional climate variability is critical for designing and testing
(regional) adaptation and mitigation strategies. Many atmospheric, oceanic, and
ecosystem factors contribute to regional climate variability and most of these
factors are already captured in the earth system models. One such factor not yet
well represented is wildfire. The two-way interactions between regional climate
variability and wildfire not only are important in improving the decadal-scale
climate model simulation and prediction but also are necessary when applying the
climate model to examine adaptation strategies targeted at the vulnerability
induced by enhanced climate variation (due in part to these interactions) and to
investigate the effectiveness of mitigation strategies of forest management
practices. The open-source RFMEF fire model that will be developed for the
Community Earth System Model (CESM) system and the climate modeling data that
will be generated in the project will enable policy experts to conduct more in-
depth analysis of climate policies in regions strongly affected by wildfire and
allow other scientists to conduct climate simulations and prediction that
include the fire-ecosystem-climate interactions and that are more suitable for
their research and assessment needs.