* 1243842
* Ion-selectivity and Mechanisms of P-type IIC ATPases
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Pablo Artigas, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2015
* USD 139,999.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;All cells maintain ion gradients across the plasma
membrane, which provides energy for multiple physiological processes. This
gradient is established and maintained by the Na/K pump, a P-type 2 ATPase.
Members of this protein class are present in all phyla and transport different
metals with nearly identical mechanisms. Ion recognition and ion driven
conformational changes are an essential part of this universal mechanism that
gives singularity to each ATPase and are poorly understood. This project focuses
on P-type IIC ATPases, proteins expressed by all animals, whose function is
essential for adaptation to different salinities, digestion and cellular
homeostasis. The research will use a combined approach of molecular biology,
high-temporal resolution electrophysiology and fluorescence techniques to study
the molecular mechanisms that allow recognition of the transported ions by
P-type IIC ATPases and how ion transport is controlled by protein conformational
changes. In particular, structural information from crystal structures of P-type
IIC ATPases will be used to target changes in the regions that bind ions and in
intracellular regions of the proteins, with functional affects monitored by
voltage clamp techniques combined with fluorescence. The results from this
project will provide critical insight and hopefully resolve prevailing models
regarding the molecular mechanics of the P-type ATPase superfamily.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
goal of this project is to inspire undergraduate students to pursue careers in
fundamental basic sciences, and to develop the technical skills and attitudes
towards discovery through scientific research. The PI's laboratory has a history
of involving undergraduate and graduate students in scientific discovery, with
trainees serving as co-authors on articles in high-impact journals, as well as
presenting their findings at national scientific meetings. Several of trainees
have pursued scientific careers. This project will involve undergraduate
students from various programs and disciplines, including a focus on the
recruitment of underrepresented minorities from institutional programs such as
the Plains Bridges to Baccalaureate program. The results from this project will
be disseminated by publications in high-impact journals, courses, invited
lectures and presentations at high visibility national and international
scientific meetings.