* 1243855
* RUI:   Hydra TRP Channels:   Expression and Functional Analysis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Susan McLaughlin, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 02/28/2018
* USD 182,608.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT Transient receptor potential (TRP) channels are a superfamily
of cation channels that regulate processes as diverse as olfaction, thermal
perception, pain, synaptic transmission and development. They can be activated
by both environmental stimuli (e.g. chemicals, light, temperature, pressure) and
intracellular stimuli (e.g. calcium and G protein coupled receptors). More than
50 different TRP channels have been identified in organisms ranging from yeasts
and protists to mammals. The experiments in this project will extend the study
of TRP channels into one of the most primitive metazoans with a nervous system,
the cnidarian Hydra. A characteristic of all the Cnidaria is the possession of
stinging cells called cnidocytes, which in Hydra are responsible for prey
capture, adhesion and locomotion. Although significant progress has been made in
understanding development and regeneration in Hydra, the molecular mechanisms
that control Hydra behaviors such as its feeding response and cnidocyte release
are as of yet poorly understood. An examination of the Hydra genome revealed the
presence of multiple candidate Hydra TRP channel genes. Whole mount in situ
hybridization will be used to localize TRP channel expression to specific Hydra
body regions. TRP channel function will be examined by testing known chemical
TRP channel activators and inhibitors to determine if they affect Hydra feeding
behavior or cnidocyte release, and if they affect the ability of Hydra to
regenerate or to form buds during asexual reproduction. In addition, RNA
interference will be used to silence the expression of specific Hydra TRP
channels. The resulting TRP(-) hydra will then be tested in the functional
assays to determine the effect of TRP channel gene silencing. The study of Hydra
TRP channels could answer fundamental questions about the signal transduction
systems involved in Hydra behaviors and development. A comparison of the
primitive TRP channels in Hydra with the more recently evolved TRP channels of
higher organisms will provide a useful mechanism for both structure-function
analysis and for studying evolutionary relationships.

BROADER IMPACTS Queensborough Community College (QCC) is an urban community
college with a student population comprised of nearly equal numbers of Asians,
Caucasians, Latinos and African Americans. Many of QCC's students come from low-
income families, and are the first in their family to attend college. One of the
goals of this project is to afford QCC undergraduates the opportunity to do
research in a scientific laboratory. In the course of their research, students
will learn Hydra culture methods, basic molecular biology techniques and
DNA/protein sequence analysis. As the research in this project spans the
spectrum from DNA sequence to development and behavior, students will learn how
to make connections between events at the molecular level and those occurring at
the level of the entire organism. In addition, since the TRP channel gene family
is found in both very simple organisms such as yeast and in complex organisms
like mammals, students will need to think in evolutionary terms when analyzing
TRP channel function. Firsthand experience gained by working in a laboratory
allows students to connect the theoretical concepts they learn in the classroom
with real-world experiences. This will enhance their understanding of scientific
concepts, and will give them the opportunity to apply their knowledge to their
experiments in the laboratory. Student participation in research increases
retention and graduation rates, a particularly important benefit at a community
college like QCC, and undergraduates who are exposed to research early during
their college careers are more likely to choose STEM majors and to remain in
STEM careers.