* 1243918
* Mechanism of Eukaryotic Transcription Initiation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Eric Galburt, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2018
* USD 793,017.00

Intellectual Merit: The expression of information coded in cellular genomes
requires DNA to be transcribed into RNA by RNA polymerase (RNAP). Thus, the
initiation of transcription plays an essential role in the establishment and
regulation of cellular phenotypes in all organisms from bacteria to man. This
process consists of several steps including recruitment of RNAP to DNA promoter
sequences, melting of double-stranded DNA, determination of a transcription
start-site, initiation of NTP hydrolysis by RNAP, and transition into processive
transcription elongation (promoter escape). Eukaryotic TATA-dependent promoters
are conserved from yeast to man and direct the assembly of a pre-initiation
complex that minimally consists of RNAP II, TATA-box binding protein, TFIIB,
TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH. While structural and biochemical approaches have
resulted in a robust model of how initiation proceeds, many mechanistic details
of eukaryotic transcription initiation remain unclear. This project aims to
determine the kinetics of DNA structural transitions induced by pre-initiation
complex formation using factors from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and single-
molecule biophysical approaches. These techniques allow one to monitor
individual active molecular complexes in real-time and determine both the nature
of intermediate DNA structures and the rates at which the system moves between
them. More specifically, the focus of this work is to determine the mechanism of
this central molecular process by determining how the PIC manipulates promoter
DNA during (1) DNA binding, (2) open complex formation, (3) start-site scanning,
and (4) promoter escape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project has
a direct impact on the training of postdoctoral researchers and graduate
students for careers in research or science education. The single-molecule
biophysical techniques used in the lab provide opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate and high school students to gain experience in a unique
biophysical methodology. Specifically, undergraduate students from the
departments of physics and biomedical engineering work in the lab gaining
exposure to these approaches in addition to molecular biology and biochemistry
techniques. Additionally, undergraduate involvement also provides opportunities
for postdocs and graduate students to gain experience as mentors. This first-
hand experience allows them to more realistically consider career paths in
science education at all levels. Participants include students and teachers from
the Young Scientist Program at Washington University, which brings high school
seniors and educators into the laboratory for summer research experiences.
Conveniently, as transcription initiation represents a critical node in the
central dogma of molecular biology, students at all levels are exposed to a wide
range of concepts and experimental techniques involving DNA, RNA, and
protein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research.