* 1243015
* Collaborative Research EaSM2: Mechanisms, Predictability, Prediction, and Regional and Societal Impacts of Decadal Climate Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Joseph Tribbia, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 2,630,185.00

Intellectual Merit Skillful decadal climate predictions have the potential to
provide enormous social, economic, and environmental value. Such efforts,
however, are in their infancy and many formidable scientific and technical
challenges exist. Decadal prediction represents a combined initial value and
boundary value problem in which prediction capabilities must be largely derived
from the intrinsic variability of the climate system. In this project, through
an interdisciplinary collaboration, the investigators seek i) to produce an
improved and reliable decadal prediction system within the Community Earth
System Model (CESM) framework, including predictive capabilities for marine
ecosystems and biogeochemical constituents and ii) to advance the use of decadal
prediction simulations in regional and societal impact studies. Attainment of
these goals and developing a well-founded decadal prediction system will rely on
improved understanding and technical capabilities in four fundamental areas.
Thus, the research aims at (1) improving the understanding of intrinsic decadal
variability and mechanisms; (2) evaluating the inherent predictability
constraints of the current forecast model; (3) evaluating practical forecast
system design methods; and (4) generating capabilities for incorporating fully-
coupled data assimilation and ocean ecosystems and biogeochemistry into the NCAR
decadal prediction system. The insights, knowledge, and capabilities developed
from these objectives will then be used to establish a modeling and
initialization strategy for making multi-decadal predictions. Regional and
societal impact studies using the output from these decadal prediction
experiments will be performed to advance the science of decadal prediction by
pursuing and integrating research developments and insights across multiple
relevant disciplines: climate dynamics, predictability, low- and high-resolution
coupled climate modeling, data assimilation, biogeochemical and ecosystem
modeling, regional weather forecasting, population dynamics, and fish habitats.
The end result will be improved understanding of the limits and practical
potential of decadal prediction, well-founded modeling and initialization
strategies for making predictions, and advanced capabilities for downscaling and
interpreting physical climate predictions for societal benefits.

Broader Impacts This project will produce a well-founded decadal prediction
system within the CESM framework that incorporates DART (Data Assimilation
Research Testbed) and WRF (Weather Research and Forecast model). The prediction
system, enhanced modeling capabilities, and results and data from our
simulations will be made available to the broader research community via regular
CESM and DART community releases as well as project web pages. These
developments will serve as important community resources. This research project
in its entirety is aimed at studying decadal climate variability in a socially
relevant context. Specifically, the impacts of predicted decadal changes on
winter storm events, summer heat waves, ocean ecosystems and biogeochemistry,
human population, and fisheries' species ranges will be examined with a focus on
North America and surrounding areas. Early career scientists, including a
postdoc, will conduct much of the proposed work, and all the partnering
institutions are are committed to mentoring activities to ensure success. In
addition, two Ph. D. studies will include work from this proposal. Finally, at
NCAR, the project team will host an annual student in the UCAR SOARS
(Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science;
www.soars.ucar.edu) program to entrain a diverse community for the scientific
workforce of the future.