* 1243436
* INSPIRE: Evaluating the Effect of Cyberinfrastructure on Universities' Production Process
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Paul Wilson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Science of Science and Innovation
Policy Program in the Division of SBE Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences and the NSF Office of
Cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project undertakes an
interdisciplinary and novel approach to the problem of measuring the effects of
investment in cyberinfrastructure to universities' production processes of
research outputs and vital educational services. A decision to support funding
of the infrastructure that supports research, or a decision to support funding
of focused research activities, is an increasingly critical decision with far-
reaching impacts not only to the institutions receiving those funds, but also to
national competitiveness. While it is generally agreed that cyberinfrastructure
is essential to scholarly inquiry in some science fields, the scope of
cyberinfrastructure's broad effects on the growth of knowledge, to the academic
enterprise, and to areas of science has not been explicitly quantified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work extends the state of knowledge of frontier
efficiency analysis (FEA) techniques, a rigorous statistically-grounded
approach, and uses FEA in a novel application to examine the returns to
cyberinfrastructure investments in research institutions. Such work is strongly
interdisciplinary: experts in econometrics will be working collaboratively with
experts in computing and cyberinfrastructure to apply and extend the state-of-
the-art in data management, extend our developed Unified Data Framework, and
prepare and curate a significant new body of data of great interest to decision-
makers in cyberinfrastructure investment and science policy. This research also
makes a contribution to statistical estimation theory, developing new central
limit theorem results applicable to means of nonparametric frontier efficiency
estimators, permitting testing of hypotheses regarding returns to scale and
other aspects of universities' productivity. To overcome the problem that
nonparametric frontier efficiency estimators are biased in finite samples and
have slow convergence rates that depend on dimensionality of the particular
problem, this project uses subsampling ideas to construct new statistics for
hypothesis testing in nonparametric frontier efficiency estimators for which
central limit theorem results can be obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the
project makes a dual contribution to science and innovation policy and to
cyberinfrastructure investment decisions, using frontier efficiency analysis
(FEA) techniques to evaluate the productivity (i.e., efficiency in transforming
inputs into outputs) of research institutions who have received various amount
of cyberinfrastructure investments. Project personnel will collect and curate a
large body of data on educational and research institutions' productivity and
performance as a part of this analysis. The analysis of this data will allow
examination of important science-policy questions on investment in
cyberinfrastructure, such as "Does cyberinfrastructure enhance universities'
research and educational output? If so, how, where, and by how much? Are returns
to scale in cyberinfrastructure investment increasing, constant, or decreasing?
What might be a method of allocating future scarce cyberinfrastructure resources
efficiently across universities?" The project will support 50% of a postdoctoral
associate and a full-time Ph.D. student in interdisciplinary econometric and
computer-science research. The techniques and tools utilized in this research
are to be incorporated into a newly-developed course in Data-Enabled Science,
which, over the course of the project, is expected to reach over 40 students in
a variety of science and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall project is potentially transformative to the science of science policy:
the project's development and demonstration of the use of formal measures for
capturing the effectiveness of investment has the potential to significantly
change the processes used to construct portfolios of funded scientific-research
projects, and to add significant quantitative support to the policies by which
these decisions are made. The specific case study (the effect of
cyberinfrastructure investments on research and educational outcomes) can
immediately inform institutions, states, and governmental funding bodies about
opportunities for high-priority future investments in this area, particularly by
identifying overlooked opportunities where modest investments will yield
significant returns.