* 1243372
* CAREER: Establishment of Replication Timing and Patterning in Mammalian Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,01/31/2023
* Supriya Prasanth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2023
* USD 875,073.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The structure of chromatin, the complex of genomic
DNA and proteins found in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, governs cellular
processes including DNA replication, transcription and post-transcriptional gene
regulation. But, how that is accomplished is an important question that remains
to be clearly elucidated. In mammalian cells, chromosomal domains occupy a
specific nuclear position and replicate at defined times during S-phase of the
cell division cycle. The spatiotemporal pattern of DNA replication within a
given cell type is heritable and is established during the G1 phase of the cell
cycle. There is, however, minimal understanding of the events and molecules that
govern the spatiotemporal patterning of DNA replication. The Origin Recognition
Complex (ORC) plays critical roles in the initiation of DNA replication,
chromatin organization and cell cycle progression. The binding of the largest
subunit of human ORC, Orc1 to chromatin is an obligatory step for pre-RC
assembly during G1. Similarly, Orc2-5 display dynamic association with chromatin
in a cell cycle-dependent manner. The interplay between ORC and chromatin
structure that govern replication timing and patterning remain to be elucidated.
The objective of the present project is to determine how ORC contributes to
and/or reads epigenetic marks during G1. The project will address the role of
ORC in establishing spatial patterning and timing of replication in G1 and
determine the role of chromatin architecture in modulating ORC binding to
chromatin. This research is innovative in its combination of molecular biology
and biochemistry with state of the art live cell imaging. This project is highly
significant as it aims to advance our understanding of how chromatin
organization and replication are coordinated in living
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a
strong and active outreach potential, since it utilizes extensive high-
resolution microscopy as well as time-lapse live cell imaging that is crucial
not only to understand key biological questions on replication, but also to
serve as a platform for undergraduate students to appreciate biology. This
approach will be applied in several ways including by teaching undergraduate
students, by providing research opportunities to University of Illinois and
community college students, by mentoring future researchers, and by organizing a
symposium for students to appreciate the excitement of basic research. These
activities will all involve women and minority students. This project integrates
the use of Biochemistry, Cell Biology and Molecular Biology to capture the
interest of students from varied backgrounds, including Biology, Physics,
Chemistry and Bioengineering. With a small investment of time, exposing young
and bright students to research early on in life will be highly beneficial and
instill in them a sense of scientific awareness.