* 1243963
* Extreme Virus Morphology:  The Structure and Assembly of SSV1, the Prototypical Fusellovirus
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Kenneth Stedman, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 402,150.00

Many viruses of Archaea have a spindle or lemon-like shape, which is very
different from other viruses. This unique virus shape may help these viruses
remain stable in the extreme environments in which they thrive. However, very
little is known about the structure and assembly of spindle-shaped viruses. This
project will study the structure and assembly of Sulfolobus Spindle Shaped Virus
1 (SSV1), the best-known of these so-called fuselloviruses. SSV1 replicates in
extremely hot (80&amp;#730;C or 176&amp;#730;F) and acidic (pH = 3) conditions.
The research will use cutting-edge genetic and biochemical tools pioneered in
the Center for Life in Extreme Environments (CLEE) at Portland State University
(PSU) and state-of-the art cryo-electron microscopy tools in collaboration with
the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston Texas (UTMB). The major aims
of the project are to determine the structure of the whole virus to &amp;#8804;
10 Ã… resolution, determine the location and kinetics of production of the major
coat protein in vivo and characterize the major coat protein in vitro.
Understanding the structure of SSV1 and characterizing the major coat protein in
vivo and in vitro will provide insights not only into protein stability and
assembly of macromolecules in extreme environments, but also virus evolution.
The work also has implications for the development of nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Primary research will be performed in
revamped teaching laboratory courses in new space. Research results will be
incorporated in undergraduate lectures to at least 100 students/year. This
project will directly support postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate and high
school students in CLEE at PSU and at UTMB. Many PSU students are first
generation college students and underrepresented minorities. These students will
be directly involved in the research in collaboration with the Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Partnerships and McNair scholarship programs. The project
will also provide access for PSU students to the unique facilities at UTMB.