* 1243887
* EAGER: Development of a Software Engineering Curriculum for Computational Science and Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Jeffrey Carver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 99,999.00

There is an increasing amount of non-traditional software being developed by
developers, i.e. software developed by people not formally trained in software
engineering practices and developed in environments that place different
constraints on software development than are found in more traditional IT
software development environments. Software developed for Computational Science
and Engineering is a prominent and important type of non-traditional software.
Computational science and engineering software supports the investigation of
topics that impact our vital national interests (e.g. cancer research,
maintenance of nuclear weapons, climate research, and astrophysics). The
development of CSE software has some unique constraints that make it a good
example of a non-traditional software development environment. To address the
growing interest and need for high-quality computational science software, the
goal of this proposal is to develop and deliver curriculum modules focused
specifically on software for large scale computational science. In this work,
the PI will develop a curriculum consisting of software engineering modules
tailored for use by computational scientist developers. These modules will be
designed to educate non-traditional developers about relevant software
engineering tools and techniques. They will be packaged for use either in the
university environment, embedded in existing courses or as part of a new course,
or in the field, as training courses offered at various national labs and
appropriate conference venues like the international meeting, Super Computing.
The work uses a case study approach coupled with an interdisciplinary workshop.
The plan is to cover the topics of validation and verification and agile methods
by focusing on test-driven development and software inspection as well as the
general problem of requirements gathering coupled with
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will result in packaged, reusable SE
modules created specifically for nontraditional developers. These modules will
address the most pressing needs of CSE developers. The modules will be delivered
in a variety of venues and the material evaluated during use, as well as
measures of participant learning. Providing support for the development of high-
quality CSE software will have broad impacts in advancing scientific and
engineering knowledge in many domains.