* 1243482
* PIRE: USA/Europe Partnership for Integrated Research and Education in Wind Energy Intermittency: From Wind Farm Turbulence to Economic Management
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Dennice Gayme, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,302,110.00

This U.S.-European Partnership for International Research and Education (PIRE)
will engage graduate and undergraduate students, post-docs, and faculty from ten
institutions to address pressing research questions that arise when adding the
inherently intermittent wind-energy source to our power systems. The partnership
includes U.S. researchers from Johns Hopkins University, Texas Tech University,
Smith College, and the University of Puerto Rico. International partners in
Europe include research groups in wind energy at the Danish Technical University
and Risø Laboratory in Denmark, the Energy Research Center of the Netherlands
(ECN), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in Switzerland, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven in Belgium, and Comillas Pontifical Universidad in Spain.
The team's cooperative research efforts will be tightly integrated with a
training program that includes carefully designed international experiences.
Overall, the intent is to jointly generate tools to better understand,
characterize, and manage the consequences of wind power fluctuations. Results
should help define more efficient methods for utilizing wind as a sustainable,
cost-effective power source. By focusing on statistical tools to examine
predictability, multiple time scales, and spatial and temporal variability of
wind fluctuations, the US-European team expects to gain new and timely knowledge
about the physical sources of variability and intermittency, such as atmospheric
turbulence, and about the effects of various wind-farm parameters such as inter-
turbine spacing, orientations, ground roughness, and wind conditions. To
accomplish this, computational fluid dynamics tools will be developed and
validated with laboratory and field observations. Secondly, results from
parametric model runs will be used to develop basic understanding and obtain the
necessary statistical characterizations of variability as functions of wind-farm
parameters, using tools such as response-surface estimation, statistical multi-
scale methods, and co-spectra. Thirdly, these characterizations will be coupled
to production costing and planning models of the power grid for validation and
further development. The PIRE research partners expect these models to help
determine how wind farm parameters affect ancillary service requirements and how
storage and demand response can be used most effectively. For broader impact,
the new grid modeling tools that incorporate improved statistical
characterizations of wind-farm output variability should help optimize future
resource siting and design. Fourth, results are to be integrated with models of
power markets and economic impacts. Econometric methods and market data may be
used to propose potential, new policy levers and market designs to support
practical, cost-effective adoption of renewable, highly intermittent energy
sources. Central to the PIRE activities are core education, training and
mentoring components. U.S. student participants will benefit from innovative
courses in wind energy, computer modeling, power networks, economic management
and economics, several taken abroad at partner institutions. Additionally,
periodic research-focused site visits to European institutions and installations
by U.S. students, faculty, and post-docs will facilitate access and ensure more
rapid transfer of relevant technical knowledge to advance current understanding
of wind power variability and its management. The U.S. PIRE project will operate
under the aegis of Johns Hopkins University's Environment, Energy,
Sustainability and Health Institute (E2SHI), which promotes cross-disciplinary
research, outreach, and education for critical sustainability issues.
Furthermore, the project will leverage close ties between Texas Tech
University's National Wind Resource Center, several industries and national
laboratories, as well as a number of utilities and agencies in the U.S. Mid-
Atlantic, Northeast and Texas. This level of engagement provides a straight
forward means for expediting the translation of promising results into practice.
The project is funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE) through the PIRE.