* 1243803
* Allosteric Modulation of Ion Channel Domains
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Brad Rothberg, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2017
* USD 447,436.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT The flow of potassium across cell membranes is controlled by
potassium channels (K channels). By regulating the flow of charged potassium
ions, K channel proteins play a fundamental role in gating electrical impulses
in excitable cells, and play a fundamental role in controling electrolyte
balance in virtually all cells. In this project, research will focus on defining
the structural basis for activation of a large subfamily of K channels that
contain regulator of K-conductance (RCK) domains. RCK domains are modulatory
ligand-binding domains that control gating of K channels in a wide range of
prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms by binding calcium ions and other ligands.
Despite their fundamental importance, the key molecular interactions that lead
to ligand-dependent opening of the channel have yet to be clearly defined.
Mechanisms of activation in RCK-containing K channels will be investigated
through a combination of electrophysiological and X-ray crystallographic
analysis. The approach will involve atomic resolution determination of a series
of structures representing different conformations of the RCK domain from the
prototypical K channel MthK from the archaebacterium Methanobacterium
thermoautotrophicum. Studying the MthK channel has unique advantages over other
systems, and will yield high-resolution atomic structural data that can be
directly linked to channel function, which will hopefully lead to a profound
understanding of basic mechanisms of activation in this ubiquitous class of ion
channels.

BROADER IMPACTS This research will use methodologies that straddle the
interfaces of biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics, and the goal is to
continue to promote training of beginning investigators in approaches that
combine these disciplines. The PI's laboratory has a strong record of training
personnel at the undergraduate, post-baccalaureate, graduate, and post-doctoral
levels in the fundamentals and theory of ion channel biology and membrane
biophysics, as well as the practice of experimental techniques in the
laboratory. Past trainees have continued in successful scientific careers in
academia, industry, and government agencies. Notably, the majority of the PI's
previous trainees have been women and/or minorities, and this project will
continue to recruit and train young scientists from underrepresented groups from
among outstanding undergraduate participants at Temple University's
Undergraduate Research Program (URP), in addition to training of graduate
students. The PI also participates in activities that promote science education
in local secondary schools in the Philadelphia area, and will broaden these
activities in the context of this research proposal.

This project is jointly supported by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life
Processes program in the Chemistry Division.