* 1243170
* INSPIRE: Tools, Models, and Innovation Platforms for Research on Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Robert Mason, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,013,118.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Human-Centered Computing Program
in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering, the Political Science Program
in the Division of Social and Economic Sciences in the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences, and the multi-directorate Social-Computational
Systems Program.

This project seeks 1) to develop an open-source toolkit of affordable methods
and approaches that enables researchers in the information and social sciences
to describe, analyze, and visualize how information flows within and between
social media platforms and across geographic locations; and 2) to apply these
methods and tools to create and analyze a dataset of tweets, posts, related
messages and sites. The initial focus is on Twitter data associated with the
social movement that began as "Occupy Wall Street" but broadens to include other
venues and even other topics. This research will both develop tools for social
media research and demonstrate how these tools improve our capabilities for
research in this social media space.

Social media platforms are transforming how we work, live together, and govern
ourselves. The many modalities offered by social media platforms such as
Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook create a complex infrastructure, resulting in a
dynamic ecosystem of information flows within and across platforms and among
individuals and groups. The resulting socio-technical system enables both rapid
and emergent organizational and relational transformations, but its scope and
dynamic structure present conceptual and practical challenges for researchers
studying the mechanisms of the transformations. The combination of volume,
scope, complexity, and ephemeral nature of message flows require an
interdisciplinary approach to developing research methods and tools for
curating, processing, storing, and analyzing that go beyond the typical
relational database management approaches.

The intellectual merit of the research is two-fold. First, the research will
combine knowledge of social science, political science, communications,
geography, information science, and emerging computing techniques to create a
scalable and affordable approach to the selective collection and analysis of
data from the huge flows of tweets, "likes," and links associated with the
Occupy movement. The approach will be documented and made available as an open
source toolkit for other social media researchers, thus enabling a wider scope
of inquiry. Second, the research will contribute to knowledge about grass-roots
movements, using the Occupy movement as a currently active example that can
serve as a test case, by examining the relationships of tweets, geography, and
the possible linkages to other groups. The emerging information ecosystem of
networks and linkages enabled by social media supplement traditional media such
as newspapers and television, and messages may "go viral," crossing community
and geographic boundaries with unprecedented speed and quickly reaching remote
and previously unconnected audiences. This work will provide new insights into
the mechanisms by which these viral events occur and will help us understand the
impact viral events can have on public participation in political discourse.

The broader impact of the research is both immediate and cumulative. The toolkit
for data curation, analysis, and visualization has the potential for
transforming the research questions social and information scientists can
investigate using large datasets resulting from social media. These tools can
enable us to envision different frameworks within which to understand how new
social media communities form and engage in the broader public discourse. In
this way, the research can transform how we think about and study the role of
grass roots endeavors in community formation and change. The techniques
developed through this research will lower the technical barriers and costs
encountered by other researchers and observers who conduct their own research on
such datasets. The research engages a new generation of researchers at both the
doctoral and undergraduate levels. Graduate students working on the project will
be developing the approach and methods and will be gaining experience in
managing undergraduate students who work on the team. The experience of working
on a truly transformative effort can inspire them and give them confidence to
try risky and emergent efforts in the future, and they can be leaders in what
may become an interdisciplinary area of study of large social media datasets.