* 1243680
* RUI:   Studies on the Interactions Between the yFACT and TORC1 Complexes and Chromatin During transcription Elongation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Andrea Duina, Hendrix College
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 01/31/2017
* USD 415,515.00

Intellectual merit. In order to fit within the small confines of a cell nucleus,
DNA molecules need to be compacted through interactions with a number of
proteins to form a complex referred to as chromatin. The basic unit of chromatin
is the nucleosome, a particle consisting of DNA wrapped around a disc-like
structure composed of histone proteins. In addition to directing DNA compaction
in cells, nucleosomes are also important participants in most of the processes
that occur on chromosomes, including the process of gene transcription. The
focus of Dr. Duina's research is to elucidate the mechanisms that control the
elongation phase of transcription, the phase during which DNA is copied into RNA
molecules, in the context of chromatin. The project has two aims. One is to
better define how yFACT, a complex with well-defined roles in transcription
elongation, interacts with chromatin on transcribed genes. The other aim is to
establish whether TORC1, a complex responsible for coordinating nutrient signals
with cell growth and division, has a role in promoting transcription elongation
across genes. These experiments will be carried out using biochemical and
genetic approaches in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as the model system.
Given the high degree of evolutionary conservation between yeast and human
cells, the results obtained will provide novel insights into basic biological
processes relevant to all eukaryotic organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This project will provide an exceptional opportunity for undergraduate
students to be involved in meaningful scientific research. Under the guidance of
Dr. Duina, undergraduate students will participate in the design and execution
of experiments related to this project and will be fully engaged in the critical
evaluation of the data generated from their studies. In addition, students
working in Dr. Duina's laboratory will have the opportunity to present the
results from their research at regional and national research conferences. This
project will also include the participation of undergraduate students outside
the context of Dr. Duina's laboratory, as a subset of the experiments will be
carried out by students enrolled in one of the courses taught by Dr. Duina at
the college. Collectively, these experiences will introduce undergraduate
students to the wonderful world of scientific research and will undoubtedly play
critical roles in shaping their career choices as they progress through college
and beyond.