* 1243710
* Comparative Genomics of Chromosome Replication Among Budding Yeasts
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Bonita Brewer, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2018
* USD 847,098.00

Faithful chromosome replication is a central mission of every dividing cell.
Although the machinery for DNA replication is among the most conserved across
the tree of life, the regions of chromosomes at which replication initiates
'origins of replication' vary widely across species both in their structure and
in their locations. Chromosome replication has been best studied in the model
organism baker's yeast. Replication origins in yeast are defined by short
stretches of DNA sequence, with ten to fifty origins scattered across each
chromosome. In contrast, human chromosomes have many hundreds to thousands of
origins per chromosome unspecified by DNA sequences. Despite these striking
differences in origin structures, little is known about how origins of
replication evolve, and how they may relate to chromosomal rearrangements that
take place during evolution. Baker's yeast and its other budding yeast relatives
offer an unparalleled advantage in addressing these gaps in our knowledge: many
strains and species have been sequenced and are amenable to experiments first
performed in baker's yeast. This research will capitalize on the suite of
chromosome-wide assays to discover yeast replication origins, delineate their
essential sequences, and measure the regulation at each site in its native
chromosomal context. Moreover, the opportunity to compare multiple yeast species
that had undergone a whole genome duplication (WGD) with other species that
hadn't experienced the event can provide unique insights into the forces shaping
replication and chromosome organization in the face of a massive genome
upheaval. The work will focus on how origins evolved over a 500 million year
timescale. The aims are grounded in the context of testing the following broad
hypotheses: First, post-­WGD species will show greater diversity of origin
sequences and locations than pre-­WGD species due to relaxation of selection
during genome loss following the WGD event. Second, in contrast, closely related
species will share common origin sequences but not chromosomal locations.
Finally, changes that occur to the protein machinery that recognizes origins are
responsible for driving the diversification of the DNA sequences of origins.
Given the increasingly appreciated role of origins in maintenance of chromosome
integrity, the results will add an important missing element to understand the
evolution of chromosome structure.

Broader Impacts: This work will have broad impacts in undergraduate and public
science education, inclusion of underrepresented groups, and scientific
understanding. A new partnership with Shoreline Community College has been
proposed specifically for this project and will, in particular, result in access
to research and student-­driven, inquiry-­based learning for a wider
cross-­section of students than would otherwise be possible. In particular, the
intern experience will build confidence and prepare students for jobs as
technicians in university or biotech research labs, and may spark their interest
in pursuing further education. All three principal investigators have strong
records of educating undergraduates, including women, underrepresented
minorities, and students from primarily undergraduate institutions. The methods
and molecular resources developed will be of interest to the larger scientific
community, as has been the case for other techniques previously developed by
these principal investigators. Furthermore, contributing to the understanding of
evolutionary processes is a benefit to science and society. Specifically, rapid
evolution of a highly conserved process is an under-­studied phenomenon, and the
results are likely to shed light on the natural variation found in other
essential cellular processes.