* 1243009
* A Workshop on Conservation and Natural Resource Management in an Uncertain Future: Using the Southeastern U.S. as a Model for Managing Change
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Alan Covich, Ichauway, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,000.00

Humans have great ability to affect ecological changes at global scales, yet
have had limited success in managing or predicting the outcomes. This failure is
worrisome as human populations grow and press the limits of ecological resources
and services. Scientific disciplines that should provide insight into solving
global problems, including ecology, conservation biology and restoration
ecology, have generally looked to the past for guidance about the future.
However, it is increasingly recognized that high rates of current change require
new perspectives and broader vision. Unfortunately, there have been few efforts
to synthesize what is known about managing change into the future and the
conservation challenges that result. This conference will bring together
international, national and regional leaders from the relevant management and
scientific communities to address current and anticipated future conservation
and management challenges, using the southeastern United States as a case study
for developing a regional conservation plan. This region has noteworthy
biological diversity, rapidly increasing human populations, rapid urbanization,
long history of commodities production, and mostly privately owned land with
critically important, but sparse public land.

Future regional conservation efforts must include diverse interests with the
common goal of blending economic and ecological well-being. This conference
builds on the Jones Center mission to understand, demonstrate and promote
excellence in natural resource management and conservation in the southeast. It
is an interdisciplinary partnership between the Center, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Forest Service Southern Research Station, The Odum School of Ecology
at the University of Georgia, and the Department of Defence Strategic and
Environmental Research Development Program. Participants will identify gaps in
current knowledge and develop strategies for managing social, political,
economic and ecological systems to deal with critical conservation challenges.
Focus will be on the synthesis of understanding at regional to international
scales, applications of science to regional planning, and prioritization of
approaches to meet regional conservation challenges. Outcomes and anticipated
products of the conference will reflect and benefit from the breadth of the
participants.