* 1243125
* Collaborative Research: EaSM2--Quantifying and Conveying the Risk of Prolonged Drought in Coming Decades
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2013,09/30/2020
* Diana Liverman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,366,399.00

Drought is among the most ruinous of natural disasters and is expected to become
increasingly prevalent in a warming world. In the future, natural hydroclimatic
variability will be superimposed on continued human-driven changes to regional
climate, with both long-term warming and regional drying likely to exacerbate
droughts of the future. Among the greatest challenges of decadal prediction and
climate change projection are the quantification of prolonged drought risk in
vulnerable regions and the integration of knowledge about this risk into the
decision-making processes of the many resource managers and other stakeholders
who deal with drought. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a scale of
drought variability - decadal to multidecadal - that is not well constrained by
observations, nor well represented in models. The activity relies on the
integrated use of satellite, instrumental, and paleoclimatic observations, along
with climate models and analysis, to understand both the natural and human
influences on drought, potential model biases, and the roles of land cover
change (vegetation and dust), ocean temperatures, and other factors behind
drought. The goal is to develop improved estimates of drought risk, as well as
the improved partnerships between scientists and stakeholders that are required
to reduce the vulnerability of society to drought. Key vulnerable regions will
be identified, where natural variability and anthropogenic change combine to
amplify the risk of prolonged, severe drought with large consequences:
southwestern North America (US and Mexico), Australia, the Amazon, and West
Africa/Sahel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategy takes advantage of several
unique observational, model and stakeholder resources: (1) an unprecedented
number of simulations of the past millennium from a state-of-the-art Earth
System Model (CESM; in addition to the CMIP5 archive); (2) an expanding set of
published and emerging paleoclimate datasets from multiple proxies that reveal
long observational histories of decadal-multidecadal hydroclimate variability;
(3) a longstanding network of stakeholders and collaborators in the southwestern
US, Mexico, and beyond with whom we can develop best practices in applying
drought risk estimates to real-world problems across a broad social context; and
(4) a long history of working on drought variability and stakeholder-driven.