* 1243590
* EAGER: Bio-Inspired Active Structural Color
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Rene Lopez, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,854.00

Non-technical Description: Current computer displays and televisions are windows
that offer a limited simulation of the real world. There is a need to develop a
distinct technology capable of creating real physical manifestations of
computer-created virtual objects that can be seen and touch as real things.
Nature masterpieces such as the cuttlefish's color and texture changing
abilities prove that such technology is possible, and it is up to us to learn
from nature's blueprints. The goal of this project is to develop the foundation
for a technology capable of replicating the elegant color mechanism of tropical
butterflies but be able to tune it from red to blue using materials that work as
artificial muscles following the cuttlefish lessons. Because this muscle
material is based on intrinsically soft components, it could reproduce color and
texture toward the overall integration of visual and tactile experience in, for
example, a truly artificial chameleonic skin. In addition to research, the
project promotes the development of the future science and engineering work
force by training graduate and undergraduate students to think and work at the
interdisciplinary boundary between science and engineering. In collaboration
with Morehead Planetarium at University of North Carolina, education
presentations and activities are carried out to enhance K-12 students',
teachers', and the general public's understanding of natural and artificial
color phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research
project addresses two crucial materials challenges to the realization of a
controllable and flexible structural coloration scheme using electric-field
actuated elastomers: First, a tunable photonic crystal structure with near zero
angular color dependence should be created on a soft-flexible dielectric
elastomers with a scalable method capable of patterning large surface areas.
Second, the visible-wavelength size features of such photonic structure require
the elastomers to be operated on length scales smaller than its currently proven
range. The activity addresses these issues by correlating materials properties
(dielectric strength, elastic modulus) to the photonic crystal dimensions under
electric fields and to the optical changes that result from this actuation. The
relative merits of different dielectric elastomers and photonic structure
replication methods at the required lengths scales are assessed, and the
photonic crystal structures are characterized by comprehensive electron
microscopy, diffuse and angular light reflection measurements, and perceptual
color evaluation.