* 1243559
* Geodynamics and Thermal Regime across the Central Transantarctic Mountains from Analysis of Magnetotelluric Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 11/30/2016
* USD 173,266.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to analyze a transect of 57 high-
quality magnetotelluric (MT) soundings acquired over two Antarctic field seasons
to examine competing hypotheses for the mechanism of extension and creation of
the Transantarctic Mountains. These data will also be used to characterize the
thermal regimes of rifted West Antarctica and stable East Antarctica. In the MT
method, temporal variations in the Earth's natural electromagnetic field are
used as source fields to probe the electrical resistivity structure in the depth
range of 1 to 200 km below Earth's surface. Raw MT soundings contain significant
information related to the thermal regime beneath the Transantarctic Mountains
as it relates to support mechanisms and composition. This information will
enable comparison to other rift-platform transitions, such as in the western
United States. The distinct character of the MT data will also be correlated
with regional aeromagnetic trends and tied to outcrops in terms of distinct
lithologies such as meta-sedimentary terranes and plutonic complexes.
Specifically, the goals of this research are: to establish the location of the
tectonic transition between East and West Antarctica, which may help infer a
support mechanism for the Transantarctic Mountains; to use MT data to estimate
crustal heat flux into the ice sheet base; and to determine if regional-scale
resistivity properties be used as a proxy for lithological discrimination, to
support facies extrapolation and terrane
reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project
involves international collaborations between University of Utah, GNS Sciences
Wellington NZ, and Tokyo Institute of Technology Japan. It will support a female
post-doc who will gain experience in state of the art geophysical
instrumentation, parameters of field survey design, practical logistical matters
in remote settings, modern methods of MT inversion, and the relationship between
electrical resistivity and physico-chemical state in the Earth. Heat flow
estimates could improve models of ice sheet stability.