* 1243947
* Global Analysis of RNA-protein Interactions in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Brian Gregory, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2017
* USD 753,072.00

Intellectual Merit. The product of gene expression (or transcription), RNA and
the product of these RNAs (via translation), namely proteins, often interact to
allow numerous post-transcriptional mechanisms to control mRNA expression and
translation. In fact, from the initial synthesis of transcripts in the nucleus
to their final translation and decay in the cytoplasm, mRNAs are involved in a
multitude of complex interactions with hundreds of RNA binding proteins (RBPs),
resulting in the formation of dynamic multi-component ribonucleoprotein
complexes (RNPs). The importance of these RNPs to plant biology has been
demonstrated by studies revealing that plant developmental, hormone, and stress
responses require many RBPs with diverse functions and regulatory targets within
the plant transcriptome. In fact, crop plants over- or under-expressing specific
RBPs can be made more resistant to certain biotic and abiotic stresses. Thus,
RNA-protein interactions are necessary for the functionality, processing, and
regulation of many RNA molecules in plant cells. Unfortunately, there is still
very little known about the global landscape of RNA-protein interactions in
plants. To this end, this project will use a novel technology to uncover these
RNA-protein interactions and their effect on the plant transcriptome and
translatome during hormone and stress responses. This research will also begin
to reveal the conservation of RNA-protein interaction sites within the plant
kingdom. Overall, this project will provide unprecedented insights into the role
of RNA-protein interactions in regulating eukaryotic gene expression, as well as
provide important new findings and resources for future studies focused on crop
improvement and plant-focused biofuel research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This project will have a significant impact on biological research, and
the classroom as well. Specifically, a key feature of this project is that it
provides many research opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students. Furthermore, the data obtained from this research will provide
a resource not only to other scientists, but also for use in an RNA Biology
course to develop teaching modules focused on ribonucleoprotein complexes and
for computational-based analyses of high-throughput sequencing data for use in
Genome Sciences courses. These teaching modules will be made freely available,
so that faculty and students at other institutions can make use of them. These
freely available teaching resources will also be made appropriate for high
school level learning. Overall, this project will have a broad impact on the
training and development of future scientists, with a focus on computer-aided
research methods.