* 1243182
* A Task Force to Study Operations Research as a Catalyst for Engineering Grand Challenges
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Suvrajeet Sen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 24,971.00

&lt;br/&gt;Over the past several years, a group of leading thinkers from around
the world have come together to identify some grand challenges for engineering
(under the auspices of the NAE). These challenges, broadly classified under the
themes of Sustainability, Security, Human Health, and the Joy of Living,
identify a few key areas with the potential to reinvent our way of life. The
role of the proposed Task Force is to identify new operations research (OR)
directions that will enable the NAE Grand Challenge-domains to leverage new OR
knowledge into their research. In this sense, the proposed effort will identify
OR challenges with an eye towards serving as a catalyst for the NAE Grand
Challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Task Force will convene three meetings.
The first one will be focused on distilling the NAE challenges into drivers for
OR research. Given the multi-disciplinary nature of OR, it is expected that
certain broad requirements for OR research will emerge during presentations, and
deliberations of the task force. The second meeting will be focused on in-depth
statements of OR challenges, which if met by the OR community, will allow the
NAE challenges to make progress, and even engage the OR community in the quest
for solutions to some of the more pressing problems facing the engineering
world. Finally, at a third meeting feedback from a panel of referees will be
incorporated into the preparation of a final report that is expected to be
widely disseminated in the OR community and have broad impact in shaping future
research directions. &lt;br/&gt;