* 1243983
* Regulatory mechanisms controlling photomorphogenesis and resource allocation in cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2018
* Beronda Montgomery, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2018
* USD 858,201.00

Intellectual Merit: Cyanobacteria carry out oxygenic photosynthesis in which the
inputs are carbon dioxide and light, and the product is stored energy in the
form of sugars, with oxygen being generated as a by-product. This process is
very similar to photosynthesis in eukaryotes such as algae and higher plants. As
also true of other photosynthetic organisms, cyanobacteria exhibit finely tuned
abilities to sense and respond to changes in their ambient environment,
including changes in light and nutrient availabilty, by undergoing adaptive
processes called photomorphogenesis. The molecular mechanisms for allocating
resources to balance the energy demands for photosynthesis (sugar production)
with the energy costs of responding to environmental variations
(photomorphogenesis) are not well understood, and will be the focus of this
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results from these studies
are expected to provide novel insights into the molecular bases of balancing the
energy demands of sensing and responding to environmental fluctuations in light
and nutrient availability in photosynthetic organisms. In addition to the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars and collaborative
research and mentoring interactions with students and a faculty member at an
Historically Black College and University, broader impacts of the proposed
investigations include research and instructional experiences designed to
develop the capacity of undergraduate science majors and students from
underrepresented groups, including students in the Charles Drew Science
Enrichment Program at Michigan State University, to think critically and
analytically.