* 1243175
* Collaborative Research: EaSM 2: Stochastic Simulation and Decadal Prediction of Large-Scale Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Michael Ghil, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2017
* USD 398,570.00

Under this project, large-scale, low-frequency modes (LFMs) will be studied in
observations and simulations of state-of-the-art general circulation models
(GCMs) of Earth's climate. This project will build on previous NSF- and DOE-
funded work on LFMs arising from the ocean's wind-driven and overturning
circulations in the Atlantic and Pacific sectors, as well as from their
interactions with the atmosphere and tropical climate variability. This project
will focus on: (a) improving current understanding of LFMs and interactions
between them; (b) developing, revising and testing statistical methods for
probabilistic decadal prediction based on these modes; and (c) using these
decadal predictions in conjunction with observations and GCM simulations to gain
insight into the dynamical causes of climate change and climate variability at
decadal and longer time scales. This project will continue the identification of
decadal modes in the Atlantic and Pacific, from both observations and the
simulations from the two most recent international climate intercomparison
modeling projects, using advanced, data-adaptive spectral methods. These methods
will include multi-channel singular spectrum analysis (MSSA), as well as
harmonic Koopman analysis (HKA), along with stochastic modeling based on
empirical model reduction (EMR). The investigators will further apply novel
methods for the study of synchronized chaotic oscillators developed at UCLA and
UWM, to gain additional understanding of decadal-scale teleconnections within
the Pacific and between the Atlantic and the Pacific, as well as their
relationships with the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). Using the LFMs
studied in the first part of the project, the investigators will examine their
decadal predictability and assess the skill of retrospective decadal forecasts
made with our new empirical forecast models based on EMR, MSSA and HKA. These
empirical forecasts will be compared against the initialized climate predictions
being made as part of the IPCC's 5th Assessment Report. This comparison will
help quantify potential skill due to intrinsic decadal modes and their
interactions with ENSO, as well as with climate change. The combination of these
activities will lead to advanced stochastic simulation tools for creating
benchmark scenarios of future climate, based on a combination of observed data
and the most robust and predictable elements of near-term climate change and
climate variability, out to about 2050.

The intellectual merit of this project is in developing versatile statistical
tools and methodologies for climate prediction and the validation of dynamical
climate models. The project will also advance our understanding of global
coupling between prominent large-scale low-frequency modes. An expected outcome
of the project is improved estimates of reliability of climate projections, by
developing and testing novel metrics - associated with coupling and
synchronization between multiple LFMs across the globe - for validating climate
model predictions.

The project's broader impacts lie in addressing a problem of utmost societal
importance, i.e., understanding climate variability and change. The project's
investigators are committed to making their stochastic simulations easily
available to the climate community. This work will foster scientific
partnerships between UCLA and UWM, and further the development of graduate
curricula in climate dynamics at both institutions. The principal investigators
will broadly disseminate the results by means of a dedicated web site, refereed
publications, seminars and presentations at national and international meetings.