* 1243883
* Quantifying Single Molecule DNA-ligand Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Megan Nunez, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/28/2019
* USD 954,781.00

The goal of this project is to develop single molecule methods for the
quantitative study of DNA interactions with small molecules and proteins and to
use these methods to investigate specific biologically important systems. The
investigators will use several DNA constructs (long and short double-stranded
and single-stranded DNA molecules) and data analysis methods to probe the
thermodynamics and kinetics of DNA-ligand interactions and determine the time-
dependent changes of DNA structure as proteins and small molecules bind. In
addition to method development, this work will shed light on the fundamental
biophysics of DNA-small molecule interactions as well as the biophysical and
biochemical mechanisms of multiple protein interactions involved in
retrotransposon replication and DNA damage response. This project involves three
specific aims: 1. To probe the structural dynamics of DNA-small molecule
interactions using single molecule force spectroscopy. 2. To probe dynamic
protein-DNA interactions important for LINE1 retrotransposition. 3. To probe the
protein-protein and protein-DNA binding interactions that participate in the
management of DNA polymerase switching in E. coli. The PIs will develop methods
for understanding multiple protein interactions with DNA and use these methods
to probe interactions involved in DNA polymerase management, which is critical
for cellular responses to DNA damage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has developed
innovative biophysical methods for examining DNA binding using single molecule
manipulation. The PI integrates his research into teaching experimental methods,
and he has a strong track record of training graduate and undergraduate students
in interdisciplinary research at the interface of physics, chemistry, and
biology. In addition to regularly hiring full-time 6-month physics co-op
undergraduate students, he has hosted undergraduates from several other
undergraduate institutions. The PI is hosting a professor and three of his
students from a regional university with a majority of first-generation college
students. This experience will be used to expand biophysics research and
introduce biophysics into the university's curriculum. The co-PI is a Professor
at a liberal arts college for women with a historical tradition of training
undergraduate women scientists. She will involve multiple students in
synthesizing DNA constructs and small molecule complexes that they will bring to
Northeastern and characterize by single molecule force spectroscopy. This
project is jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program
in the Physics Division.