* 1243315
* EAGER:  Duke ON-RAMPS: OpenFlow-Enabled Network Resource Access that is Manageable, Programmatic, and Safe
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Chase, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This project will deploy a pilot Software-Defined Science Network (SDSN) to
interconnect research computing resources on the Duke campus and link them to
national WAN circuit fabrics. This pilot deployment will support both Computer
Science applications such as GENI and domain sciences such as Duke's Institute
for Genome Sciences and Policy (IGSP) and Duke's high-energy physics group
(HEP). Additionally, the SDSN will connect to the Duke Shared Cluster Resource
(DSCR), a 4300-core shared batch job service used by domain scientists all over
the Duke campus. The key goal is to enable domain scientists to request virtual
networks that are 'simple and scalable enclaves' for science networking, and
that link selected resources on campus with selected resources outside, while
excluding unrelated traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will experiment
with OpenFlow controllers on a trial basis within isolated flowspace slices of
the SDSN, including OpenFlow-enabled traffic engineering policies that offload
science traffic onto the SDSN. The project plan is that initial trial demos will
exercise cloudbursting capability to expand computing service into a cloud site,
and (potentially) to support virtual machine migration among the OpenStack cloud
testbeds on campus. The PIs will report on their experience in technical papers.
Travel budget is included for presentation of learnings to other university
CIO/CTOs. Although software-defined networking (SDN) technologies are currently
being widely discussed and are key elements in the GENI architecture, there is
little operational or campus-level architectural experience with using them. The
project will advance the state of the art in integrating SDN technologies into
campus networks, and in enabling safe, controlled interconnection of science
resources and GENI resources within and across campuses. The project seeks to
devise and implement practical solutions that are easily reproducible beyond the
initial prototype, scalable to wider use, and grounded in technologies that are
(or soon will be) solid, manageable, and commercially available for deployment
throughout production campus networks. The project outcomes include reporting of
results and lessons to other campus network operators and to SDN researchers and
industry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The pilot will provide
an opportunity to gain experience with architectural, deployment, administrative
and operational issues of OpenFlow in campus settings to serve research and
education needs beyond the Computer Science domain. The Duke campus OpenFlow
model (GENI-derived technology) offers domain sciences on-demand access to
ultra-high-speed networks without performance limiting firewalls. As such it
will provide direct benefit to the domain sciences. The PIs will report on
issues and operational experience associated with the deployment. These reports
and the PI's willingness to share their experience with other universities will
reduce barriers to use of GENI from campuses, establish GENI technologies and
OpenFlow as building blocks for science networking, enhance support for
computational science on the Duke campus, and facilitate sharing of resources
and data among science researchers and their collaborators on and off campus.