* 1243492
* MPS-BIO:   Replication Conflict and Restart:  Resolving Replisome Dynamics in Single Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Paul Wiggins, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,028,806.00

Intellectual Merit: Cell division requires the replication of the genomic DNA,
accomplished by the replication machinery (the replisome). Breaks in the DNA,
the presence of DNA binding proteins, and transcription can block the replisome,
leading to conflicts that result in genomic instability, mutations, and a
failure to segregate fully replicated genomes. Although it is clear that
replication pauses as the result of these conflicts, the fate of the replisome
during these interruptions is unknown. The overall goal of this research plan is
to understand both active and stalled replisomes through a collaborative,
interdisciplinary study that takes advantage of proteomics as well as high-
resolution single-cell microscopy and mathematical modeling. This research will
quantitatively characterize the dynamics and protein composition of the
replisome during replication conflicts in vivo. The project addresses these
questions in Bacillus subtilis, a genetically tractable bacterial model system
that maintains a key feature of eukaryotic replication: distinct leading and
lagging strand polymerases. The research will use a new generation of
fluorescence microscopy techniques that exploit the small size of the bacterial
cell and can observe, count, and track single proteins in living cells.
Specifically, this project will determine the protein composition of active and
stalled replisomes, both at the population level and at single-protein, single-
fork, and single-cell resolution. Furthermore, the stoichiometry and stability
of the replisome components at stalled and active replication forks will be
determined. Altogether, this work will lead to a deeper understanding of how the
replisome faithfully duplicates the genome, in the face of obstacles, in B.
subtilis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research project will
impact and advance our understanding of DNA replication and repair in not only
Gram-positive bacteria but universally since many key aspects of these processes
are conserved across species. Furthermore, this research will implement an
interdisciplinary approach that is tightly integrated with undergraduate
education. The PIs will recruit talented middle-school, high-school and
undergraduate students, including students from under-represented groups, as
well as transfer students from two year colleges, for research internships
related to this project. Both PIs are especially dedicated to promoting the
success of female and underprivileged students by involving them in research
early in their education. Lastly, the PIs are committed to building quantitative
imaging infrastructure for the Microbiology Department and to continuing the
development of a yearly imaging bootcamp course for training biologists at
multiple levels in quantitative imaging techniques.