* 1243211
* Conference: Dynamics Days 2013
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2012,05/31/2013
* James Meiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Annalisa Calini
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides funding for the travel expenses of graduate students,
postdocs, and individuals without other sources of support to attend the
conference ?Dynamics Days US 2013? on nonlinear dynamics and chaos which will be
held in the Marriott City Center in downtown Denver, Colorado, in January 3-6 of
2013. The conference webpage is http://amath.colorado.edu/conferences/DDays2013.
&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics Days is an annual international conference that has been
running in the US for more than 30 years. During this time, Dynamics Days has
served as one of the main venues where recent developments in and applications
of nonlinear dynamics are disseminated. This year, the conference is aimed at
promoting cross-fertilization across different fields of nonlinear dynamics, and
will address topics such as geophysical and astrophysical fluid dynamics,
neuroscience, synchronization and self-organization, nonlinear dynamics of
biological systems, dynamics on and of complex networks, dynamic fracture,
granular media, and pattern formation. The conference will have 21 invited
speakers, a similar number of contributed talks, and poster
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last decades, Dynamics Days has become
established as an excellent venue for interactions between specialists in
different fields and between young and established researchers. The topics of
the talks cover a variety of areas with overlapping interests in nonlinear
dynamics. This variety attracts participants from various fields in mathematics
and physics, and also a significant number of participants with backgrounds in
other fields such as engineering, biology, and geology. Experienced researchers
will benefit from the exposure to new techniques and potential collaborators in
diverse fields. Financial support will be available to students and young
researchers, who will be able to give contributed talks or present in a poster
session. These young researchers will especially benefit from the format of the
conference, gaining a broad perspective of current research in interdisciplinary
areas. The participation of students and young researchers from underrepresented
groups will be particularly encouraged.