* 1243080
* I-Corps: SOLUTION MICROARRAY MULTIPLEXED BIOMARKER IMMUNOASSAYS
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Shuichi Takayama, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

No one biomarker gives all the information needed to diagnose or treat a patient
reliably. Thus a major goal of clinical diagnostics is to efficiently analyze a
panel of diagnostic biomarkers. Despite this well-known need, cost-effective,
sensitive, and quantitative multi-protein (multiplexed) diagnostic immunoassays
hardly exist. While hundreds of research articles have described multiplexed
immunoassays, they cannot be validated for clinical applications due to
increased background and or cross-talk that occur when multiple detection
antibodies are mixed together into one solution. The team utilizes a proprietary
microfluidic technology to provide an innovative solution to this problem by
creating multiplexed immunoassay microarrays where no mixing of detection
antibodies occurs. The project will advance microfluidic science and technology
as well as provide new tools for use in basic science studies that utilize
proteomics. In addition to science and technology advancement, this project will
advance concepts and methods in translating laboratory research results into
commercial products and services. The project will increase understanding of
customer needs in the area of multiplexed biomarker assays and proteomics. The
project will also propose the most efficient and commercially-viable methods to
bring the technology to users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team envisions the
project to benefit society through development of robust, user-friendly,
multiplexed immunoassays that will enhance clinical diagnostics as well as basic
biology studies through providing robust and user-friendly protein assays. As
the project goal is technology commercialization, success of this project will
directly provide a large benefit to society through economic as well as
technological means. All three personnel involved (entrepreneurial lead, PI, and
mentor) will also learn new ideas and methodology as well as actual hands on
experience that is part of this project. These experiences will surely impact
not only this particular technology commercialization effort but other
commercialization projects in the future. Additionally, the technology transfer
lessons learned will also be incorporated into the classroom through courses
taught by the PI as well as through one-time lectures.