* 1243077
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--A Focused Study of Sustained Upward Vertical Winds in the Auroral Zone
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* John Meriwether, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2016
* USD 51,774.00

The investigators will use data from a multi-instrument observational campaign
centered on Poker Flat Research Range near Fairbanks, AK to study the phenomenon
of sustained upward vertical winds (SUVW) in the thermosphere that are
associated with the soft particle precipitation of auroral activity. These winds
have speeds in excess of 15 meters per second and appear continuously upward
over several hours. They are generally preceded by a period of downward winds
with speeds of 20 to 30 m/s. Far from being an intriguing curiosity, vertical
winds are important to understanding the complex dynamic behavior of the upper
atmosphere. Vertical winds in the thermosphere are responsible for vertical mass
transport, disrupting stratification and changing the local composition, which
can lead to changes in the overall thermal budget. Understanding the underlying
source of these sustained vertical upward winds will enable a prediction of the
global distribution of their occurrence and their impact on thermospheric
dynamics. The study will take advantage of a critical mass of key instruments in
the auroral zone in central Alaska that will produce comprehensive data sets to
characterize the auroral input and large scale thermospheric conditions leading
to the sustained upward vertical wind events. The primary instruments for
observing vertical winds will be a set of three imaging Fabry-Perot
interferometers (FPI), located at Poker Flat, Fort Yukon and Eagle, AK and
dedicated to high-cadence zenith measurements. The contextual instruments
include the Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR), a set of four scanning
Doppler imagers (SDI) at Poker Flat, Gakona, Toolik Field Station, and Kaktovik,
AK, all-sky cameras and meridian spectrographs at Poker Flat and remote
observing sites. The broader impacts of this work will be the training and
educational opportunities for undergraduates in technical research by
participating in the analysis of the data obtained by the zenith FPI
instruments.