* 1243484
* Higher-Taxon Fidelity: Comparative Taphonomy of Marine Benthic Associations in Holocene Depositional Systems of Coastal North Carolina
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Michal Kowalewski, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2015
* USD 161,263.00

Higher-Taxon Fidelity: Comparative Taphonomy of Marine Benthic Associations in
Holocene Depositional Systems of Coastal North Carolina

This project will compare present-day marine communities with past communities
that existed in the same areas prior to the industrial revolution. The past
communities will be reconstructed using shellfish remains found abundantly at or
around the surface in coastal habitats. Also, the project will assess
fossilization potential (probability of preservation) of major types of marine
animals, with primary focus on shellfish. Using coastal habitats of the Outer
Banks (North Carolina, USA), marine communities will be assessed quantitatively
in terms of several major groups of animals important both in commercial and
scientific terms. The targeted field area has been selected because of the
presence of abundant and diverse marine animals (both live and dead), including
benthic mollusks, echinoids, arthropods, annelids, and brachiopods. We will
sample multiple sites to carry out quantitative comparisons of living organisms
and dead shellfish remains. The project should generate a dataset of ~20,000
specimens representing ~200 samples of living and/or dead organisms. Two primary
goals motivate this study. First goal is to quantify differences between live
communities and dead shellfish accumulations in order to provide data that will
allow us to interpret more reliably ecological information preserved in the
fossil record (shellfish is a dominant type of organisms preserved as fossils).
Namely, to develop more rigorous understanding of environmental and ecological
changes recorded in the fossil record, it is necessary to determine whether
death assemblages can provide meaningful estimates of biodiversity, faunal
composition, and other aspects of living communities. Second, a rigorous
understanding of long-term ecosystem changes in areas inhabited by present-day
shellfish communities is critical for assessing human impacts on marine life.
Namely, systematic sampling of extant, ecologically understood, and often
economically important shellfish should contribute direct data for assessing
human impacts on coastal ecosystems. This, in turn, should result in a more
informed evaluation of environmental -- and, ultimately, societal --
consequences of our diverse activities in coastal areas (from industry to
tourism) and improved guidelines for developing sustainable approaches to human
uses of coastal areas. This project will offer a venue for training a post-
doctoral researcher in integrating disparate data and developing transferable
skills in paleontology, marine sciences, and statistical methods. In addition
funding has been allocated for undergraduate student internships to be recruited
from underrepresented minority groups (with assistance from the on-campus
Department of Multicultural Programs and Services). These undergraduates will
receive hands-on field experience and will be involved in science
educational/outreach activities, which will also allow them to develop
competitive portfolios for pursuing graduate education. Numerous undergraduate
educational and research opportunities will also be provided by this project,
including datasets suitable for developing laboratory exercise in introductory
and advanced courses in natural sciences. This proposal will support one female
post-doctoral researcher and initiate collaboration between Virginia Tech and
Duke University Marine Laboratory. Popular online venues will be used to involve
the public in an interactive manner.