* 1243270
* Collaborative Research: EaSM2--Linking Near Term Future Changes in Weather and Hydroclimate in Western North America to Adaptation for Ecosystem and Water Management
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Rajagopalan Balaji, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,086,765.00

This project will examine anticipated changes in the statistics of weather and
hydroclimate over western North America in coming decades from the point of view
of needs in the management of water and ecosystems. Western North America is
already experiencing significant climate and hydroclimate change. Models project
that over the next few decades warming will continue, southwestern North America
and the southern Plains will become more arid and the northern Rockies and
Plains will become modestly more humid. Additionally precipitation is projected
to become more intense, variability on all timescales stronger and significant
shifts to occur in the seasonal cycles of precipitation, soil moisture and
streamflow. While these projected changes will have serious implications for
water resources, agriculture, rangelands, wildlife management and natural
ecosystems including forests, fire, etc. it must be noted that the model
simulations of radiatively-driven hydroclimate change to data are not in close
accord with actual change. This could be because the models are wrong or
radiatively-driven change is being obscured by potent natural variability.

The work will involve three interwoven efforts: 1) analysis of policy and
management decisions to identify needs for ecosystem and water management, and
how to translate science to meet those needs, 2) an assessment of how long term
changes in those climate features identified as management-relevant in the
decision analysis, play out in terms of day-to-day, month-to-month and year-to-
year weather and 3) application of hydroclimate information to problems in water
resources and ecosystem management in the monsoon region and ecosystem
management in the Plains.

Evolution of near term climate due to both natural variability and forced change
will be considered, including changes in frequencies and locations of storms,
lengths of dry spells, extreme wet or dry years, seasonality etc. Observational
records and Reanalyses, including the 20th Century Reanalysis, will be analyzed
as well as the models participating in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5.
Long control runs and last millennium simulations will allow an unprecedented
assessment of the range of natural variability of hydroclimate and archiving of
daily data will allow a pioneering assessment of how climate change impacts
weather in the near term future. The geographic area of focus extends from the
Pacific coast to the Great Plains and from Canada into Mexico; the research
effort will consider large-scale climate features and short term weather and how
these features may shift in time and space, influencing the landscapes and
ecoregions of the future.