* 1243575
* INSPIRE: A Digital HPS Infrastructure for Understanding Biodiversity
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* James Collins, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,999.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Science, Technology, and Society
Program in the Division of Social and Economic Sciences in the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; and by the Advances in Biological
Informatics Program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be the first large scale computational
project in Science and Technology Studies. Although the focus of this project is
on Biodiversity and on History and Philosophy of science, the approach would
extend well beyond these areas. The project will establish a repository and a
research system based on computational tools and digital sources, and it will
develop education and training modules. The goal is to move beyond separate
small collections that reside on individual computers in dispersed places, and
bring together the objects of study as well as scholarly interpretations of
those objects. The materials are to be openly available for efficiency and also
to stimulate new kinds of research and discovery. The repository will link to
existing large and widely-used databases such as the Biodiversity Heritage
Library and the Encyclopedia of Life. Researchers at Arizona State University
and the Marine Biological Laboratory will collaborate in bringing together the
robustly integrative methods that combine history and philosophy of science,
informatics, and biology of biodiversity. It will transform the way that
scholarship and training is done in the areas, and lead to a new kind of
scientific history based in open access publishing. The repository, tools, and
training modules will be widely available for other projects in Science and
Technology Studies for the full range of STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will produce scholarly results, a repository, informatics tools, and
training manuals for others to customize and contribute their own projects.
Scholarly results are to be produces that would be available through different
websites for multiple user groups, from specialized scholars to the wider
public. For educators and students, the project will connect with Arizona State
University's Ask A Biologist project, as well as to Encyclopedia of Life and the
Biodiversity Heritage Library, and to other existing databases. Undergraduate
and Graduate students will be trained to contribute interpretive articles.
Informatics Training courses, manuals, and other educational approaches will
make the system and repository available widely.