* 1243354
* Collaborative Research:  The Effects of Anthropogenic-Biogenic Interactions on Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Douglas Day, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 03/31/2016
* USD 560,000.00

This research is a component of a broad community experiment named SOAS
(Southern Oxidant and Aerosol Study) designed to further investigate the photo-
oxidation of the emissions (biogenic volatile organic compounds; BVOCs) of
plants in the context of the atmospheric environment of the South East United
States. The overall project will investigate the photochemistry of the dominant
biogenic alkenes and their oxidation products, during a collaborative field
experiment planned for summer, 2013 in Alabama. This site was chosen as a region
where substantial BVOCs from vegetation mix and interact with anthropogenic
(pollution) compounds, synergistically resulting in the production of secondary
organic aerosols (SOA). Many questions remain regarding SOA, and how
anthropogenic and biogenic compounds interact in its formation in rural
atmospheres. For example, a major focus is to determine whether anthropogenic
emissions enhance or inhibit biogenic SOA formation, as well as the extent to
which either pathway takes place. A range of advanced mass spectrometric and
flow reactor techniques developed by these researchers are powerful tools with
which to address such questions.

SOA may compromise a major fraction of submicron sized aerosols, and thus may
play important but poorly understood roles in climate forcing, atmospheric
visibility, acid deposition, as well as in human health effects.