* 1243323
* A Phylogenetic Evolutionary Psychological Approach to Human Mating
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Paul Eastwick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 08/31/2015
* USD 276,194.00

The present research proposal employs a new theoretical perspective called
Constrained Mating Theory; this theory is informed by both evolutionary
principles and theoretical and empirical insights from social psychology,
including research on close relationships. Constrained Mating Theory predicts
that the presence of a strong attachment bond between close relationship
partners will diminish or refocus otherwise adaptive psychological processes
that may threaten that bond. In other words, people who are strongly attached to
their partners will experience hormonal and psychological shifts that maintain
and protect the bond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study 1 explores whether the
strength of men's attachment bonds predicts decreases in their testosterone
levels over time and subsequent increases in supportive behaviors toward their
partners. Studies 2a and 2b examine whether the function of women's ovulatory
shifts (hormonal and psychological changes that vary with women's fertility) are
rechanneled toward the adaptive purpose of protecting and strengthening the
pair-bond when the bond is strong. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the theoretical
level, this work will integrate research in anthropology and evolutionary
psychology, research on the role of hormones in human social and sexual
behavior, and research on adult romantic attachment. Scholars in these various
disciplines have typically come from very different theoretical traditions and
have used very different methods; the research in the present proposal borrows
from all of these fields. Specifically, this work is inspired by anthropological
models of hominid evolution, evolutionary perspectives on humans' multiple
mating motives, and attachment theory and its relevance to adult romantic
relationships. Finally, the present work will promote a rich understanding of
human pair bonding by employing a diverse set of methods, including biological
methods that assess hormone concentrations, observational methods that capture
live dyadic interactions, social cognitive methods that examine moment-to-moment
social judgments, and experimental methods that identify causes of interpersonal
attraction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have a variety of
positive broader impacts. The proposed research explores how people rechannel
and/or control impulses that can lead to disastrous choices in the domain of
close relationships (e.g., cheating on a partner). By identifying the conditions
under which people are more or less likely to protect their close romantic
relationships, this work can inform educators and therapists as they provide
their students and clients (respectively) with tools to improve decision making.
The researcher will also maintain an active role in the dissemination of
findings. Research on evolutionary psychology and on romantic relationships
frequently enjoys strong media coverage, and the researcher will continue his
history of collaborating with the media to ensure that the lessons of this
research reach a broader audience (and are communicated accurately). Finally,
the research funded in this proposal will provide meaningful research training
experiences for a graduate research assistant.