* 1243176
* CEDAR:   Thunderstorm Coupling to the Lower Ionosphere through Electromagnetic, Acoustic, and Gravity Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Sigrid Elschot, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 403,788.00

The investigators will quantify the impact on the ionosphere by thunderstorm
activity through coupling from below in the form of lightning, acoustic waves,
and gravity waves. Thunderstorms, lightning, and gravity waves are the primary
known sources of coupling from the troposphere to the ionosphere and
thermosphere, but their impacts are not well quantified. This program aims to
quantify the effects of thunderstorms on the D-, E-, and F-regions of the
ionosphere through electromagnetic, gravity, and acoustic waves. In particular,
this program aims to address the effects of thunderstorm activity on sporadic-E
layers, which are a dominant source of satellite-to-ground communication
disruption. This program will utilize Very Low Frequency (VLF) narrowband and
broadband data, together will optical measurements, to assess the impact of
these sources on the D-region ionosphere and provide estimates of lightning-
driven electric field magnitudes in the D- and E- regions. Simultaneously, GPS,
ionosonde, radar, and optical observations will be used to assess the impacts of
thunderstorm activity on the E- and F-regions. The Arecibo incoherent scatter
radar and St. Croix coherent scatter radar will be used to assess thunderstorm
effects on these ionospheric regions. Existing finite-difference and full-wave
propagation models will be used to compare observations to theory. The Ph.D
thesis of one graduate student will be supported by the program, and the data
collected will be used by several other graduate students in the group. Data
collected in this program will also be made available to the scientific
community. Results of the program will benefit society through enhanced
understanding of the interaction between tropospheric weather and space weather.
The program will also enhance the scientific infrastructure at Arecibo and St.
Croix through an advnaced photometer and VLF/LF receivers.