* 1243473
* CAREER: Hybrid Nanostructures as Catalysts for Advanced Oxidation Processes: An Integrated Research and Education Plan Promoting Water Reuse and Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2016
* David Cwiertny, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,538.00

It is a challenge for arid regions like southern California to develop and
maintain a reliable domestic drinking water supply in light of projected
population increases in the regions and presently overdrawn groundwater basins,
drought, and climate change which is slated to reduce the Sierra snowpack by 40%
by 2050. In California, this will require an increase in the treatment and reuse
of municipal wastewater, much of which contains a plethora of organic pollutants
such as hormones, pharmaceuticals, and endocrine-disrupting compounds. This
research implements a novel approach to trapping and rendering harmless these
compounds by exploring the potential of functionalized carbon nanotubes as
tunable ozonation catalysts to degrade these and other organic pollutants. The
benefit of this approach is that the nanotubes can be functioned into activated
filters and membranes. A main goal of the research is to generate structure-
activity relations to guide future design of hybrid nanomaterials for water
purification. To achieve this, synthesis and detailed characterization of the
functionalized carbon nanotubes and hybrid nanostructures in terms of their bulk
structure and morphology, chemical composition, surface chemistry, and solution
phase stability will be carried out using a wide array of state-of-the-art tools
such as XPS and ATR-FTIR. Characterization will be followed by reactivity and
performance testing in closed batch reactor systems using a range of model
pollutants and chemistries relevant to water and wastewater treatment.
Performance testing includes examination of the influence of matrix chemistry,
how effective the nanomaterials are in removing organic matter in the effluent,
mitigation of oxidation bi-products, and removal of dissolved organic carbon
from secondary effluents. The broader impacts include societal benefits in the
form of providing more reliable, safe, and sustainable water supplies. It will
support an early career faculty member and train doctoral students at the host
institution and one community college student from nearby Hispanic Serving
Institution, Cal Poly Pomona. Students will be engaged in multi-disciplinary
research that fosters an appreciation for the responsible development and use of
nanomaterials. Efforts will be made to recruit students from groups
traditionally under-represented in STEM fields to promote greater diversity in
the science and technology workforce. Project outcomes will be incorporated into
two undergraduate courses associated with the Nanotechnology major at the
University of California, Riverside and will be disseminated to other University
of California campuses. The project will also carry out an outreach program to
raise public awareness and understanding of regional and global water crises.