* 1243501
* Meeting: MEPS 2013:  Plant Signaling Systems-From Cells to Environment, College Station, TX, May 13-14, 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Thomas McKnight, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 13,000.00

Intellectual merit: This project funds the MEPS (Molecular and Environmental
Plant Science) Symposium 2013: Plant Signaling Systems: From Cells to the
Environment, to be held at Texas A&amp;M University in College Station, TX, on
May 13-14, 2013. The symposium will be the 8th of the series of symposia
initiated in 2005. The objectives of these symposia are to promote basic plant
sciences in the region by bringing faculty and students together around invited
national and international speakers conducting cutting-edge research, and to
foster dialog and collaboration among organizers, attendees, and speakers. The
theme of this symposium will address the growing field of plant signaling,
ranging from cellular signal transduction to plant responses to biotic and
abiotic environments. The symposium will consist of oral presentations by
invited speakers, poster sessions by local and regional participants, and
discussion sessions with invited speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The symposium attracts over 170 participants representing over 20 academic
programs from local and regional institutions. The resources derived from this
proposal will be used, in addition to cover a part of meeting expenses, to
promote participation of regional junior scientists, namely undergraduate and
graduate students, postdocs, and early-career faculty by defraying their
traveling costs, and to digitally disseminate the symposium outcomes so that it
will be available to a broader audience. Invitation of early career speakers and
their interaction with participants should provide role models to junior
scientists. Finally, interactions between research groups at this symposium,
like past ones, will facilitate new collaborative and synergistic activities
that should maximize productivities of current and future researchers.