* 1243027
* Interaction Between Landfalling Hurricanes and the Atmospheric Boundary Layer Using Ensemble-based Data Assimilation
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Zhaoxia Pu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 457,667.00

Accurate forecasts of the intensity and structure of a hurricane at landfall can
save lives and mitigate social impacts. However, among recent efforts in
hurricane forecast improvements, few studies have focused on landfalling
hurricanes. This reflects the complexity of predicting hurricane landfalls and
the uncertainties in representing the atmospheric boundary layer conditions in
numerical weather prediction (NWP) models. The aim of this study is to
investigate the interaction between landfalling hurricanes and the atmospheric
boundary layer using ensemble-based data assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study is based on two hypotheses: 1) the interaction between the hurricane and
atmospheric boundary layer is an essential factor that controls the intensity
and structure changes of landfalling hurricanes; and 2) the ensemble
assimilation of surface mesonet and WSR-88D Doppler radar observations will
improve the representation of near surface and boundary layer atmospheric
conditions that interact with the landfalling hurricanes. Therefore, the
research will incorporate the surface mesonet and Doppler radar observations
with other available conventional and satellite data into an ensemble data
assimilation system with the community mesoscale weather research and
forecasting (WRF) model. The following four scientific questions will be
addressed:&lt;br/&gt;1. How does a hurricane's structure evolve during its
landfall?&lt;br/&gt;2. How, and to what extent, do atmospheric boundary layer
environmental conditions influence the intensity and structure of landfalling
hurricanes?&lt;br/&gt;3. How do the hurricane vortex and secondary circulation
interact with the atmospheric boundary layer environmental conditions?
&lt;br/&gt;4. What are the processes that control the intensity and structural
changes of landfalling hurricanes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The research represents the first comprehensive study of the
interaction between landfalling hurricanes and the atmospheric boundary layer as
well as the predictability of landfalling hurricanes using ensemble-based data
assimilation. Results from this study are expected to enhance our understanding
of landfalling hurricanes and also contribute to the overall goals of our
scientific community in improving hurricane intensity
forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Results from this
study will facilitate the accurate prediction of hurricanes at landfall as well
as their associated extreme winds and flooding rainfall events that have
devastating effects on society and the environment in U.S. coastal regions. The
broader impacts will also extend to educational goals, as graduate students will
be trained during this research.