* 1243490
* PIRE: Nuclear Energy Systems and Materials under Extreme Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Heshmat Aglan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 3,916,844.00

The development and refinement of advanced materials for nuclear and cutting
edge applications will allow energy systems to operate with increased
reliability, safety, and economy while increasing sustainability and limiting
negative environmental impacts. This research will significantly reduce the
principal bottleneck for developing future energy technologies, i.e., the lack
of reliable damage-resistant materials for use under extreme environments. The
research will critically advance knowledge about the interaction of particle and
plasma beams with various materials under extreme irradiation conditions. These
scientific outcomes have related policy impacts for systems modeling and energy
planning in both the near and long term for both developed and developing
countries as global appetites for energy continue to increase. Improving
sustainability outcomes while securing our energy future entails a global
outlook that brings together the appropriate people and resources to not only
advance basic research but also to ensure the existence of a diverse, globally-
minded and well-trained cadre of scientists, policy specialists, and industry
workers. The goal for this project is to provide robust computer resources and
experimental validation to minimize irradiation-based design constraints of
materials performance while situating this research within a larger context of
sustainability, resource management, and global energy policy. This project
draws on international research partnerships to develop the human capital
essential for further work in materials under extreme conditions. It brings
together key partners and research facilities in Japan, Russia, Germany, and
Ireland that will enable graduate student research across disciplines with a
focus on Nuclear Energy/Fusion, Lithography, and High Energy and Nuclear Physics
Applications. No one location can provide all these facilities; together with
resources at Purdue, Illinois, and Tuskegee, students gain critical experience
in modeling, simulation, and experimentation. Scientific gains from the
experimental research also have potentially far-reaching implications for
industrial sectors such as semi-conductor manufacturing using EUVL as well as in
energy sectors including solar, wind, and coal. The education model focuses on
engaging students in both course-related and research opportunities and on
providing multiple types of international experiences that develop global
competencies. The project is funded by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) through the PIRE.