* 1243360
* Assembly of the Agrobacterium Virulence Specific Type IV Secretion System in the Context of Bacterial Cell Growth and Peptidoglycan Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Patricia Zambryski, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,650,766.00

Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a bacterium that, in nature, causes crown gall
disease (a tumor) in plants, which it accomplishes by transferring DNA into
plant cells. The bacterial DNA (along with accessory proteins) is transported
into plant cells by the Type 4 Secretion System (T4SS) of the bacterium. The
ability to transfer bacterial DNA into plant cells has led to the modification
of Agrobacterium and its use as the quintessential vector for transforming
plants with DNA of interest. However, exactly how DNA and proteins are
transported out of the bacterial cell and into the plant cell by the T4SS
remains unknown, as does the manner in which the T4SS interacts with the
peptidoglycan layer of the cell wall during growth and division of the bacterial
cell. This project will use techniques of microscopy, genetics, bioinformatics
and biochemistry to investigate peptidoglycan synthesis and define how the T4SS
in Agrobacterium interacts with peptidoglycan as it assembles.

Broader Impacts. This project has the potential to stimulate the development of
new antibacterial agents that target peptidoglycan synthesis. The PI will
present a course to undergraduates on the biology of Agrobacterium and its use
as a tool for basic and applied research, emphasizing how scientific discoveries
are made. Social and policy implications of plant genetic engineering will be
discussed and special attention will be paid to attracting to the course
students representing a wide spectrum of ethnicities and underrepresented
groups. The PI will give scientific presentations to the community at large (at
public venues such as museums) and attended by parents and children in order to
engage the public and especially children with exciting science.