* 1243144
* A Novel Treatment for Connective Tissue in Ehlers-Danlos Patients and Strained and Sprained Ligaments:  Investigating Carbon Nanostructure Enhanced Prolotherapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Joseph Freeman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 205,390.00

PI: Freeman, J., Brolinson, G. and Rylander, N.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1034026&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sprains and strains account for 5.7 million visits
to emergency rooms in the United States each year. A strain is an injury to the
muscle or tendon due to overuse or trauma. An estimated 200,000 Americans
required reconstructive surgery of ligaments alone in 2002 with a price tag
exceeding five billion dollars. There are approximately 61,000 people in the
United States affected by Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS), a connective tissue
disorder. EDS, causes the body to produce faulty and weak collagen. While there
are several types of EDS, a common trait is hypermobile and unstable joints.
People with EDS experience frequent joint dislocations and subluxations which
are painful and debilitating. Effectively, these are continual sprains and
strains, patients would greatly benefit from a permanent form of internal
bracing and stabilization of the joints. &lt;br/&gt;Prolotherapy is an
available, but somewhat controversial, treatment for damaged and painful
ligaments and tendons. It involves the injection of a proliferant solution into
the tendon or bone-ligament junction, stimulating the body's wound healing
cascade. The damaged tissue is repaired, and new collagen is laid down which
gradually shrinks, forming a denser, stronger, and tighter ligament or tendon.
In persons with normal collagen production the repair is long term. Those with
EDS usually need ongoing treatment. &lt;br/&gt;In order to enhance the
effectiveness and prolong the results of prolotherapy (possibly making it a
permanent solution) we propose the use of prolotherapy with carbon
nanostructures, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or carbon nanohorns (CNHs). This
transformative treatment would retain all of the benefits of normal prolotherapy
while providing immediate mechanical reinforcement (due to nanostructuress) and
long term agitation of fibroblasts by nanostructures for the production of
collagen if the joint is loose at a later date (as a result of injury or EDS).
We propose to investigate this therapy through the following objectives: 1)
Testing prolotherapy solutions, nanostructures, and anesthesia commonly used in
prolotherapy with fibroblasts. This will insure that we find a combination of
these agents that causes the least cell damage, produces the most collagen and
does not lead to nanostructure ingestion by the cells. 2) Injecting different
concentrations of nanostructures into excised ligaments to view the optimal
concentration for improved mechanical properties. 3) The use of the best
prolotherapy solution and types and concentration of nanostructures in a rabbit
strained MCL model. This model will test the effectiveness of the new therapy
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This enhanced prolotherapy treatment has the
potential to quickly and effectively treat strains, sprains, and tissues
weakened by genetic disorders. The use of carbon nanostructures to immediately
enhance tissue stiffness and promote the growth of new collagen over the long
term makes this treatment immediately effective in restoring tissue mechanical
properties and drastically reduces the chances of injury recurrence. The later
point is of extreme importance to people with EDS because they may undergo
hundreds to thousands of treatments over a lifetime. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
This proposed research will enhance the treatment of sprained and strained
tissues along with injuries due to connective tissue disorders, such as EDS. It
has the possibility of expanding the use of new therapeutic agents in sports
medicine allowing athletes to return from injury quicker and less prone to
repeat the injury. This research will provide an opportunity for students to
gain experience in experimental design, engineering, and cell biology at the
graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels. Dr. Joseph Freeman as an
African American and Dr. Nichole Rylander as a female represent underrepresented
groups within the biomedical engineering field and are devoted to establishing
outreach programs to recruit underrepresented students (minorities and women)
into the field. They are involved with several advancement organizations
including AdvanceVT (female recruiting program) and Center for the Enhancement
of Engineering Diversity (CEED) at Virginia Tech. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be recruited from these programs to conduct research related to
this project during the academic year and summer. Two scholastically strong
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be recruited to perform
summer research for 10 weeks through the Bioengineering and Bioinformatics
Summer Institute (BBSI) program at Virginia Tech. In addition, a graduate
student with EDS will perform the research described here as part of her
Master's Thesis.