* 1243948
* Femtosecond Stimulated Raman Scattering, Time Resolved Dynamics, and Electron-Nuclear coupling in Biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Paul Champion, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 636,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program (A) of the Division of Chemistry, the Molecular Biophysics Program of
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Physics of Living
Systems Program of the Division of Physics, Prof. Paul M. Champion at
Northeastern University will use modern, ultrafast laser methods to study the
ways in which biomolecular systems use thermal energy to carry out and control
biochemical reactions. In particular, Prof. Champion and his research group will
use vibrational coherence spectroscopy (VCS) and femtosecond stimulated Raman
scattering (FSRS) will be used to probe the ways in which low-frequency
vibrations of complex biomolecules influence or modify the reactivity of large
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the chemical reactivity of
biomolecular systems is critical towards understanding the way that biological
systems operate at the macroscopic scale. Advances in this field will yield
advances in medicine and biotechnology. The undergraduate and graduate students
working with Prof. Champion will receive excellent training in cutting-edge
science at the intersection of Biology and the Physical Sciences. Prof. Champion
is also actively collaborating with scientists from underrepresented groups at
Northeastern as well as in Puerto Rico.