* 1243925
* I-Corps:  Creating Immersive 3D Audio
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Ramani Duraiswami, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The process by which humans (and other animals) perceive space from auditory
input is complex. Over the past decades, researchers worldwide (including those
involved in the current proposal) have elucidated the mechanisms by which humans
perceive sound and are able to develop algorithms for the creation of immersive
audio. These include audio from games, from the mixing of music, and from the
capture of live events. Because the wavelengths of audible sound are comparable
to the sizes of environmental objects and of features on the listeners' bodies,
the sound perceived by the listener is "colored" by scattering off these
objects. Understanding and efficiently approximating the room impulse response
and the Head Related Transfer Function (HRTF), which respectively characterize
these scattering processes, has been a major contribution of the PI's research
over the past decade. As each listener?s physical body features have different
shapes and sizes, the HRTF shows considerable inter-personal variation. The PI
has developed extremely rapid techniques for measuring HRTFs, for characterizing
HRTFs based on the body and ear measurements of listeners, and for rapid
creation of immersive sound using HRTFs and room responses. Further, single
microphone recordings lose the spatial information in the sound signal. To
retain the spatial information during auditory environment capture, the PI has
developed novel spherical microphone array technology. A decomposition of the
captured sound in terms of plane-wave basis functions allows the easy
incorporation of HRTFs in the captured sound. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's
consumers enjoy music, games, and other media on their mobile devices; most
settle for lackluster sound produced over headphones. Current headphone sound is
simply unable to produce the engaging sound experience that high-end music
systems, movie theaters, or live events deliver. With the technologies developed
under previous NSF support, the team has allowed entertainment content creators
to achieve unmatched realism in sound presentation over headphones. Combined
with the team's sound capture hardware, immersive reproduction of live events
can be achieved. In the last year, the number of smartphone sales outpaced that
of PCs for the first time in history; consequentially, the amount of content
consumed over headphones is vastly increasing. Our technology will allow
companies to make headphone listening more immersive and reach that growing
consumer base. Several industries produce and consume audio products. These
include mobile device / gaming / PC hardware manufacturers, entertainment
content producers, and content delivery networks. They will all be positively
impacted by the technology. Because of the large market, and the strength of the
team, they anticipate that a large and successful business can be built around
this technology. If successful, this effort will contribute to ongoing U.S.
leadership in the fields of mobile technologies, gaming, entertainment, and
immersive simulation.