* 1243464
* Early-Career Participants at the 4th International Conference on NeuroProsthetic Devices on November 19-20, 2012 at the University of Freiburg, Germany
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Victor Pikov, Huntington Medical Research Institutes
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

1243464&lt;br/&gt;Victor Pikov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICNPD-2012 conference
will bring together international investigators of all levels
to&lt;br/&gt;Freiburg, Germany to discuss recent research findings and to
establish new collaborations in the new and exciting field of neural prosthetic
devices. The conference will take place on November 19-20, 2012 at the
University of Freiburg, Germany. It will be preceded by a series of online
discussions by the Scientific Advisory Committee, resulting in selection of
several key innovation challenges that will be addressed at the conference. Main
support for the conference will be provided by the University of Freiburg,
commercial sponsors and exhibitors, and the conference registration fees, with
the proposed supplementary support for the United States-based speakers by the
National Science Foundation. This proposal aims to expand the participation of
junior US researchers at the conference by subsidizing their travel
costs.&lt;br/&gt;The overall conference theme will be the technological and
scientific challenges for translating neural prosthetics into clinical use.
There are multiple research groups worldwide involved in development and
evaluation of neuroprosthetic implants for a variety of neurological disorders,
and similar difficulties often arise in selecting biocompatible encapsulation
materials, in applying modern wireless communication technology, in better
understanding of clinical and user needs, etc. Several discussion panels will be
held at the conference to stimulate the interaction of participants in seeking
solutions for the identified challenges, rather than simply reporting on the
progress from their laboratories. Additional emphasis at the conference will be
placed on identifying the areas of possible collaborations between the US and
European scientists and finding the mechanisms for jump-starting these
collaborations. The online resources, including the poster abstract review
system and the blog, will operate at the conference
website&lt;br/&gt;(www.neurotechzone.com) to promote the worldwide dialog among
the participants prior to the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICNPD-2012 conference will be convened for the
fourth time, following the first three meetings in Hsinchu, Taiwan in 2009, in
Beijing, China in 2010, and in Sydney, Australia in 2011. Foundation of the
series of international conferences on neuroprosthetic devices was necessitated
by an explosive growth of this discipline in the international research
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICNPD conferences have already attracted a
significant number of participants and demonstrated the need and will of
scientists throughout the world to combine their voices in discussing the
existing challenges and future direction of the discipline, and particularly,
the development of global standards on fabrication of the neuroprosthetic probes
and their data and power telemetry. One of the accomplishments of the ICNPD
conferences was the formation of the Alliance for Innovations in Neural
Technology, which includes many renowned experts as its founding
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another accomplishment was a publication of a
special issue of the Frontiers in Neuroscience with five full-length articles (h
ttp://www.frontiersin.org/Neuroprosthetics/researchtopics/Neuroprosthetic_device
s/56)&lt;br/&gt;as well as an online publication and DOI registration of all
conference abstracts at a searchable neuroscience-related depository, the
Frontiers Conferences
(http://www.frontiersin.org/Community/EventDetails.aspx?eid Several important
topics for discussion have emerged during the conferences, ranging from the
governmental oversight and support of the clinical trials of the neuroprosthetic
devices to a lack of dedicated international journal. The ICNPD-2012 conference
will continue the exploration of key technological and biological challenges and
breakthrough innovations that can overcome them. There are multiple
opportunities for the researchers to initiate productive collaborative projects
in the development and testing of devices for the hearing and vision loss,
muscle paralysis, Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, and other neurological
disorders. The conference described in this proposal is one that will bring
together established investigators and early-career researchers just entering
this field. To enable a focused exchange at the discussion panels during the
two-day meeting, there will be a series of brainstorming online discussions
preceding the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
Statement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference can inform the NSF and other US
federal agencies about new developments in the rapidly growing neural
prosthetics field. A specific goal of the NSF that will be aided by the
conference is the establishment of new programs which emphasize integration of
neural technology research and medical device industry. The conference will
provide a good opportunity to highlight best practices in this area and to bring
lessons from this experience to the NSF initiatives. The conference participants
will be selected to represent a broad spectrum of interested participants from
academia, national laboratories, government, and industry. Recruitment of
participants representing researchers at all stages in their careers from well
established to new researchers just starting their career will be actively
pursued. A special effort will be made to increase the representation of women
and underrepresented minorities at the conference. The conference program,
poster abstracts, and talk abstracts will be permanently posted on the
conference website (www.neurotechzone.com) as well as on the Frontiers
Conferences, a premier online depository for the conference proceedings in the
neuroscience-related fields (http://www.frontiersin.org/events/all_events) to
serve as a practical educational tool.