* 1243295
* What Can Networks Tell Us About Aging?
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Tijana Milenkovic, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 207,935.00

The US is growing older because of millions of baby boomers who already started
turning 65. Since susceptibility to diseases increases with age, studying
molecular causes of aging gains importance. Human lifespan is long, which, in
addition to ethical constraints, makes studying human aging difficult.
Therefore, aging is studied in simpler ?model? species, e.g., baker?s yeast.
Then, the knowledge about aging is transferred from model species to human. Thus
far, this transfer has been restricted to genomic sequence comparison, by
identifying regions of similarity between sequences of genes in different
species (which are believed to be a consequence of functional relationships
between the sequences), and by transferring the knowledge from a gene in model
species to a sequence-similar gene in human. However, genes (that is, their
protein products) carry out biological function by interacting in complex
networked ways with one another, instead of acting alone. Hence, it has been
argued in the post-genomic era that the wirings among genes in cellular networks
could give biological insights over and above sequences of individual genes.
Thus, this project hypothesizes that, analogous to genomic sequence research,
biological network research will impact our understanding of aging. For example,
since not all genes implicated in aging in model species have sequence-similar
genes in human, restricting comparison to sequence may limit the transfer of
aging-related knowledge to human. Network comparison can help, as it can find
regions of similarities between networks of different species and allow for a
transfer of the knowledge between such regions.

Intellectual merit: Unlike genomic sequence research, biological network
research is in its infancy, for the following reasons. Many network problems
(including network comparison) are computationally intractable, and hence,
efficient approximate (or heuristic) solutions are needed. The function of many
genes remains unknown, and hence, it must be discovered from other, better-
characterized genes. Even though cells evolve over time, current methods for
analyzing systems-level biological networks deal only with their static
representations, because dynamic biological network data can not be obtained
easily with current biotechnologies, and because there is a lack of efficient
methods for dynamic network analysis. Current biological networks are noisy,
with many missing and spurious links, due to limitations of biotechnologies as
well as human biases during data collection; thus, methods for network de-
noising need to be developed. Hence, this project aims to use sensitive measures
of network structure (or topology) to develop new heuristic computational
methods for efficient network analysis, which can cope with the complexity of
functionally uncharacterized, dynamic, and noisy biological networks. Also, it
aims to help in understanding the processes of human aging by enabling
exploitation of biological network data. Specifically, the new methods will be
used to: transfer the knowledge about aging from model species to human to
complement the knowledge obtained from sequence; study dynamic human biological
networks (obtained computationally by combining current static networks with
age-specific gene expression data) to learn about how cells change with age; and
de-noise current networks to produce higher-confidence results.

Broader impacts: Understanding aging is of societal importance. Since network
research spans many domains, the proposed methods will be implemented into open-
source research software, which will also serve as an educational tool.
Integration of research and education will be promoted further by training
interdisciplinary scientists through novel courses on network research. Research
supervision will be offered to K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students,
focusing on minorities and women. Interdisciplinary collaborations will be
encouraged to allow for wide distribution of the proposed ideas and results.