* 1243945
* Examining the Role of the Endomebrane in Transcription Factor Movement
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 11/30/2017
* USD 616,527.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;In order for organisms to develop and function
properly, cells within the organism must be able to communicate with each other.
In plants, communication can occur through specialized intercellular channels
called plasmodesmata. Nearly all cells in the plant are connected through
plasmodesmata, which allow for the direct exchange of proteins between cells.
This means that proteins made by one cell can travel into the neighboring cell
and influence the behavior and/or developmental fate of the neighbor. An
important question in cell signaling is how this type of protein movement is
regulated. Recently the primary investigator identified a protein that she has
called SIEL (for SHORT-ROOT INTERACTING EMBRYONIC LETHAL) that promotes the
movement of a plant-encoded transcription factor called SHORT-ROOT (SHR) between
cells. Movement of SHR is required for the proper formation and growth of the
plant root and therefore overall growth of the plant. In addition to SHR, SIEL
also interacts with several other mobile transcription factors that are
important for plant growth. It is likely that SIEL promotes the movement of
other key proteins in plant growth as mutations that cause SIEL not to be
produced result in death of the plant early in embryo development. Current data
suggest that SIEL acts as an intracellular shuttle that promotes plasmodesmata-
dependent movement of proteins through associations with intercellular membranes
(specifically endosomes) and the microtubule cytoskeleton. The goal of this
project is to determine how SIEL functions in the cell-to-cell transport of
proteins during plant development. This research has obvious relevance to plant
development and cell biology. In addition, as plant viruses are thought to
exploit endogenous plant pathways for intercellular movement, there is relevance
to plant disease resistance and agriculture where viral infections can decimate
crop yields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The primary
investigator runs a laboratory in which research participation by students at
all levels is highly encouraged. She has hosted students from the local middle
schools and high schools and has both high school and undergraduate students
actively working in her laboratory on a daily basis. In addition she has
actively engaged with local teachers and a Penn education major to develop
laboratory exercises that can be performed with materials inexpensively and
readily available online or in local grocery or gardening stores. These
laboratory exercises meet Pennsylvania standards and benchmarks for science
education.