* 1243686
* Partial Support of the Condensed Matter and Materials Research Committee
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 128,100.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project provides partial support for
the National Research Council's (NRC) Condensed Matter and Materials Research
Committee (CMMRC). The CMMRC is a multidisciplinary group with membership drawn
from universities, industry, and government laboratories. The areas of expertise
represented on the committee are intended to cover the breadth of the condensed
matter and materials research fields. Nominees for committee membership have
been and will continue to be selected on the basis of demonstrated intellectual
leadership in these areas and thoughtful consideration of cross-cutting issues.
The operating guidelines of CMMRC include the following objectives: (1) to
respond to requests for technical information and assistance, both from within
the National Academies and from outside federal research agencies; (2) to
initiate and oversee ad hoc studies in these fields and their multidisciplinary
connections to other fields of science and technology; (3) to serve as long-term
stewards for studies initiated under CMMRC's direction; (4) to act as an
educational resource for the condensed matter and materials research communities
and the agencies that support them; and (5) to provide a forum for discussion
among condensed matter and materials scientists and Washington D.C.
policymakers. To carry out those objectives, CMMRC meets on an annual basis and
between those meetings, conducts its business through telephone
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;CMMRC's impact goes beyond the confines of the condensed
matter and materials research communities. First, these activities engage a
group of leading scientists from across the subfields of condensed matter and
materials science in joint deliberations and provide a learning environment for
that body regarding the public-policy process for science and the position of
those fields in the broader context of the physical sciences. Second, CMMRC
activities lead to an improved understanding of condensed matter and materials
science by the broader scientific and policy-making communities. By holding
workshops and town hall meetings, and initiating studies, CMMRC will continue to
educate researchers, policy makers, and the general public about advances in
condensed matter and materials science and their beneficial impact in other
fields of science and technology and for society, in general.