* 1243651
* Workshop: Wikisym 2012 Doctoral Research Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Clifford Lampe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 16,005.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 8
promising graduate students from the United States (with perhaps some
international attendees as well), along with a panel of about 5 distinguished
research faculty mentors. The event will take place immediately preceding and in
conjunction with the 8th International ACM Symposium on Wikis and Open
Collaboration (Wikisym 2012), which will be held August 27-29 in Linz, Austria.
Wikisym is the leading international forum for bringing together researchers,
practitioners, and entrepreneurs working on open collaboration and wiki-style
socio-technical systems. The topic of open collaboration is the study of the
forms of collaboration found in open source software and communities such as
Wikipedia, Yahoo! Answers, Slashdot, and Digg. Such systems have shown the power
to be gained from creating technologies that enable large distributed groups of
people to collaboratively create artifacts of lasting value. Wikisym is attended
each year by approximately 100 people from around the world; research presented
at this conference is archived in the ACM Digital Library, and has been
increasingly cited in recent years when referring to work in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Wikisym Doctoral Consortium are: to
build a cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of
colleagues spread out across the world; to guide the work of the new researchers
through advice from experts in their research field; to provide encouragement
and support for the selection of research topics; to illustrate the
interrelationship and diversity of research in the open collaboration area, and
identify suitable opportunities for deployment and field evaluation; and to make
it possible for promising newcomers to participate in the leading research
conference in their field and to have an enjoyable and rewarding experience,
thereby encouraging them to attend the conference in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The WikiSym Doctoral Consortium
has been successful in past years in attracting an international and
interdisciplinary student constituency, bringing together the best of the next
generation of researchers in open collaboration and allowing them to create a
social network both among themselves and with senior researchers, who provide
mentorship and expert feedback at a critical stage in their professional
development (during the Consortium each student makes a formal presentation
about his or her doctoral research). Student participants typically come from a
wide range of programs and disciplines, including computer science, information,
communication and sociology. They build ties to mentors that are often helpful
beyond the time of the event; their diversity allows them to share broad
research perspectives and learn about heterogeneous approaches to research under
a shared topic of interest. The organizers will try explicitly to identify and
include the broadest possible group of highly qualified participants, so that
the student and faculty participants will constitute a diverse group across a
variety of dimensions, which will help broaden the students' horizons to the
future benefit of the field. In accordance with CISE policy relating to funding
of events held abroad, the PI has provided assurance that NSF funds will be used
solely to support participation by students enrolled in graduate programs in the
United States.