* 1243207
* EAGER:   identifying the beta-carotene ketolase as a key to understanding mate choice
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Cushing
* 06/30/2013
* USD 81,129.00

Carotenoids are pigment molecules that animals use to produce bright red and
yellow skin and feather coloration and that industry uses as important
supplements in aquiculture and in human health products. To derive red pigments,
most animals, including birds, ingest yellow carotenoids like lutein and
biochemically alter them by adding a chemical group known as a ketone. This
reaction is stimulated by an enzyme, known as a ketolase, that has yet to be
identified in any animal. The best place to isolate this unidentified ketolase
enzyme is in the retina of chicken embryos because it is known that red pigments
are first produced in chicken in the retina, 18 days after laying, while still
in the egg. By comparing the genes expressed in the retina of chicken embryos on
day 15 versus day 18, the researchers will be able to isolate the possible
enzyme. Once it has been identified the researchers will place the gene in
bacteria to make sure that it functions to convert yellow carotenoid pigments to
red carotenoid pigments. The vertebrate ketolase will be a major discovery in
zoology because it is the enzyme responsible for most red coloration in fish,
lizards, and birds. A vertebrate ketolase also has substantial value to
agriculture and the food additive industry as a more efficient means to
synthesize astaxanthin, which is used as a red food additive and aquaculture
supplement. If new products and synthetic processes are developed from the
ketolase research, there is the potential for job creation and economic
stimulation. Undergraduate students will learn cutting edge molecular techniques
while participating in this project.