* 1243754
* New Tools for Genetic Analysis in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,07/31/2016
* R. Poethig, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2016
* USD 399,983.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Research on Arabidopsis thaliana has produced major
advances in plant biology because of the many advantages of this system for
genetic analysis. But, while it is straightforward to study mutations of
Arabidopsis that have obvious, viable, fully penetrant phenotypes, it is still
difficult and time-consuming to study mutations that cannot be maintained in
homozygous condition, and mutations that have invisible, weak or highly variable
phenotypes. This project will produce three resources that facilitate analyses
of this large class of mutations: 1) marked chromosome segments, 2)
introgression lines and 3) induced polymorphic lines. A marked chromosome
segment (MCS) is a chromosome region marked at one end by pNAPIN::dsRED and at
the other end by pNAPIN::eGFP. These seed-specific, dosage- sensitive,
fluorescent transgenes make it possible to visually identify seeds carrying the
marked chromosome segment, as well as seeds homozygous or heterozygous for genes
in trans to the MCS. Using an MCS of an appropriate size and location, seeds
homozygous or heterozygous for genes/mutations of interest can be accurately
identified prior to planting, greatly simplifying genetic and phenotypic
studies. MCS lines can also be used to identify recombination events in the
vicinity of a gene of interest, facilitating the introgression of mutations and
natural polymorphisms into a common genetic background. MCS lines will be
generated in both the Columbia (Col) and Landsberg erecta (Ler) ecotypes.
Approximately 20 Ler MCS lines covering the entire genome will be introgressed
into Col by multiple backcrosses. These MCS introgression lines will be
genetically identical to Col, except in the region encompassed by the MCS, and
will facilitate the map-based cloning of mutations whose phenotype is only
obvious in a Col genetic background. Induced polymorphic (IP) lines offer a
similar advantage, but differ from MCS introgression lines in that they involve
induced, rather than natural, polymorphisms. IP lines of the Col ecotype will be
generated by 3 rounds of sequential mutagenesis, accompanied by selection for
lines with a wild-type Col phenotype. IP lines will be made homozygous and the
identity of the induced polymorphisms will be determined by next generation
sequencing. These new genetic tools will enable a wide variety of experiments
that are currently difficult or impossible to perform, adding to the value of
Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system for research in plant biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;In principle, Arabidopsis
thaliana is an ideal organism for teaching plant genetics: it is small, easy to
grow, has short life cycle, and its seeds mature in only two weeks. However, its
utility as a teaching tool is limited by the difficulty of making controlled
intercrosses. Male parents must be emasculated to prevent self-fertilization,
and this is difficult to do without practice. This limitation can be overcome by
using male sterile mutants, but these mutants must be maintained as
heterozygotes, and this introduces significant complications. An MCS stock that
makes it possible to unambiguously identify seeds homozygous for the dyt1 male-
sterile mutation will be generated, and a laboratory exercise that takes
advantage of this stock and transgene insertions created in this project will be
developed. Specifically, students will cross plants heterozygous for linked
pNAPIN::dsRED and pNAPIN::eGFP transgenes to male sterile plants, harvest the
resulting seeds, calculate the recombination distance between these transgene
insertions, and generate new MCS lines in the process. A stock containing three
linked dominant mutations on the same chromosome as dyt1 will also be produced,
enabling teachers to readily generate the plants necessary for a laboratory
exercise on three point recombination mapping. These resources will make it
possible for students to perform plant genetics in 'real time' in high school or
undergraduate courses, and will enable the development of new laboratory
exercises that take advantage of the numerous genetic resources available in
Arabidopsis.