* 1243988
* Enabling Phenotype Predictions of Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Ryan Senger, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 12/31/2017
* USD 621,182.00

Intellectual Merit: The cyanobacteria are unique organisms that can grow using
CO2 as a carbon source in the presence of sunlight. These organisms have the
potential to combat global warming by utilizing CO2 while providing the economy
with useful fuels and commodity chemicals. In order to achieve this goal, more
must be learned about the basic metabolic activity of the cyanobacteria. These
organisms can grow both in the presence of light (day-time "autotrophic" growth)
where they synthesize excess sugars for continued growth in the dark (night-time
"heterotrophic" growth). Understanding both metabolic programs is essential for
ultimately engineering the cyanobacteria to convert CO2 into fuels and chemicals
such as: ethanol, butanol, biodiesel, alkane biofuels, and eventually any of the
commodity chemicals currently obtained from a barrel of oil. The cyanobacterium
considered in this research is Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, a common strain for
research that is also industrially relevant. This organism will be fed
radiolabeled glucose in this research so the molecule can be tracked easily
through the metabolic network using a methodology called 13C-labeled metabolic
flux analysis (13CMFA). This method is very accurate but also very difficult,
expensive, and time-consuming to perform. Metabolism will also be studied
separately by considering a purely mathematical model of metabolism using an
established technique called flux balance analysis (FBA). FBA is very fast and
inexpensive, but results do not usually agree with the 13C-MFA method. This
research will develop a method to reconcile 13CMFA and FBA. The hypothesis to be
explored is that an accurate portrayal of cell composition (e.g., correct
amounts of protein, DNA, RNA, cell wall, lipids, etc.) is needed to obtain FBA
predictions that are consistent with 13C-MFA measurements. To achieve this, a
"phenotype predictor" algorithm will be developed and verified with laboratory
measurements of cyanobacteria cell composition. The phenotype predictor will
require very simple to obtain measurements of the organism and will predict the
resulting cell composition along with an accurate portrayal of how metabolites
are distributed throughout the metabolic network of the organism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The "phenotype predictor" will allow
scientists to rapidly and inexpensively determine very complex characteristics
of a growing culture. This method will be used to determine how metabolic
engineering the cyanobacteria for fuels and chemicals production ultimately
impacts the health of the culture so it can be optimized. The methodology will
be extremely useful to researchers working with other organisms used for
industrial scale metabolite production. The project will offer excellent cross-
disciplinary research training and educational opportunities for students and
postdoctoral fellows.