* 1243757
* Polycomb Response Elements (PREs) and Polycomb Recruitment in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2017
* USD 750,212.00

Intellectual Merit: In eukaryotes, genomic DNA is highly compacted in the
nucleus. This compaction renders portions of the genomic DNA inaccessible to
transcription factors or the general transcriptional machinery. A large fraction
of the inaccessible DNA consists of gene-poor heterochromatin. Portions of the
gene-rich euchromatin are also inaccessible or silenced. A hallmark of this
silencing is that it occurs only in certain conditions, for example in some cell
types or in the absence of an environmental cue. In multicellular eukaryotes,
euchromatic silencing is largely mediated by Polycomb repression. Polycomb
repressors do not have inherent sequence specificity; instead, they need to be
targeted to the correct genomic loci. This project will identify DNA sequence
motifs that direct Polycomb repressors to euchromatic genomic regions in
Arabidopsis thaliana for proper plant development and proper plant stress
responses. The ultimate goal of the project is to be able to predict--based on
the presence of the DNA sequence motifs--which genomic regions Polycomb
repressors can be recruited to in this, and in other, plant species and to
identify the sequence-specific binding factors involved in the recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will train the next
generation of scientists in state-of the art research. Undergraduate
researchers, including underrepresented minorities, will conduct individual
independent laboratory research and conduct research in new one-semester-long
lab modules. The research will be related to the main objectives of the project.
In the past, the undergraduate contributions have been excellent and have
warranted authorships on scientific publications. The project will teach topics
related to chromatin-mediated regulation of genome accessibility to high-school
students in a summer course and to Biology teachers of inner city high schools
during professional development sessions. Finally, the project will train
researchers from other labs and institutions in critical techniques used in this
field. In plants, Polycomb repression regulates the transition to reproductive
development, flower formation and seed development as well as response to
abiotic stress. Understanding and consequently being able to manipulate the
recruitment of these activities to certain regions in the plant DNA should thus
allow improvement of agricultural traits such as biomass and seed production as
well as water stress tolerance.