* 1243837
* Theoretical and Experimental Study of Functional Association of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Gerhard Wagner, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2015
* USD 800,060.00

The overarching theme of this project is to develop a fundamental understanding
of functional oligomerization of proteins and its relation to protein
aggregation. When proteins acquire a destabilizing mutation that
thermodynamically or kinetically impairs their folding they often aggregate in
cytoplasm which leads to deleterious consequences for an organism. Functional
oligomerization is a newly discovered mechanism by which destabilized proteins
avoid aggregation by forming specific highly active and soluble dimers or in
rare cases higher order oligomers. This mechanism plays a key role in providing
high fitness escape route in response to potentially deleterious destabilizing
mutations or dangerous variations of the environment. This project will provide
a fully atomistically resolved insight into plasticity of protein structure and
function in response to mutations and changing environments. This study focuses
on an essential enzyme, Dihydrofolate Reductase, (DHFR) whose destabilized
mutants were found to form soluble functional dimers in E. Coli at elevated
temperature. The PI will develop advanced computational tools to predict
possible structures and thermodynamic stabilities of oligomers formed by mutant
forms of DHFR and formulate hypotheses of domain swap mechanisms, which will be
tested by mutagenesis experiments. The mutations, which switch between
functional oligomerization and non-functional aggregation will be identified and
their effect on protein stability and cellular fitness will be experimentally
tested. Finally, the structures of soluble oligomers will be determined using
NMR technique to provide a feedback for evaluation and improvement of simulation
techniques and force-fields.

The computational and experimental tools developed in this work will allow
researchers to study adaptation through oligomerization in other systems of
Biological interest. Since this project encompasses a broad range of approaches
and techniques, from computational studies to experimental research in vitro and
in vivo, postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students will receive broad
training. The evolutionary implications of this research are significant and
will be communicated to general public through a series of public lectures on
molecular foundations of evolution, raising the scientific literacy and
appreciation of the excitement of scientific research at the frontiers of human
knowledge. More generally this research will have direct impact on environmental
and agricultural studies by advancing our mechanistic molecular level
understanding of how proteomes of microorganisms adjust to changing
environments. This project is being jointly supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Physics Division.