* 1243868
* I-Corps:  Zero-UI: Translation of Purdue Gesture-based Creative Interaction Technologies into the Real World
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

During the last 30 years, use of computers to initially make 2D drawings and
sketches, and then to design 3D shapes, have lead to deep research and plethora
of geometric and graphic design tools. An analysis of past work reveals that
applications are limited by (1) use of 2D input devices such as mouse, keyboard,
touch screen, etc. (2) and the limitations of corresponding procedural programs
and user interfaces that map user input to computational procedures, and (3)
inability to sense, feel and interact with these virtual data and shapes. The
current state of unnatural user interactions severely limits the creative
expression and manipulation of shapes. It urges us to develop new forms of human
machine interaction to unleash the creativity of the mind's eye. The team's
vision is to enable a new class of natural user interaction driven shape
creation and manipulation paradigms. The team's approach will completely
eliminate traditional user interfaces since users will be able to directly
interact with 3D content using hand and body. This vision is based on a recent
set of our discoveries, enabled by prior NSF support on natural sketch-based
interfaces and shape analysis that resulted in the foundation for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science of natural user interfaces
and interactions are at a very early stage of development. Highly-digitized user
interfaces using windows, icons, mouse and pointer have resulted in overlooking
the role of the user in creative interaction with virtual shapes. The team's
work contributes and creates new ways in which users will interact with
geometric data spaces. Areas of scientific inquiry we will contribute to include
human-computer interaction, machine learning, gesture-based interaction, and
ubiquitous computing. Gesture based natural user interfaces (NUI) enabled by 3D
sensing cameras are the next frontier in computing, media and entertainment and
other verticals. This work can result in new capabilities in edutainment and
game design, training technologies, haptic interfaces for disabled, interactive
advertising, personal manufacturing and many other applications not yet
imagined.