* 1243541
* PIRE: Assembly of Marine Biodiversity Along Geographic and Anthropogenic Stress Gradients
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Forest Rohwer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 4,872,672.00

Indonesia is in the center of the Coral Triangle, a region that contains the
world's most biologically diverse coral reefs. These reefs are an extremely
important biological and economic resource locally and globally, but are
severely threatened by human impacts and climate change; as such, these reefs
are important conservation targets. We will be deploying a novel monitoring tool
called Autonomous Reef Monitoring Structures (ARMS) to measure marine
biodiversity gradients across the Indonesian Archipelago and determine what
organisms are present on these reefs and how this biodiversity is impacted by
human caused environmental stress. ARMS are particularly good at capturing the
hidden biodiversity that comprises the vast majority of marine biodiversity
(e.g., viruses, microbes, smaller animals, algae etc). With this information, we
will be able to better understand the processes shaping the marine biodiversity
in the Coral Triangle, thereby improving the ability of resource managers to
develop strategies to promote sustainability of these valuable marine
ecosystems. A key innovation of this project is that it will be conducted in an
international collaborative framework that increases local scientific capacity
in Indonesia, one of the world's most populous developing countries, while
simultaneously preparing U.S. post-doctoral scholars, graduate and undergraduate
students to be global leaders in the science of marine biodiversity, capable of
international research in the world's most diverse marine environments. The
project is funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE) through the PIRE.