* 1243416
* Conference: Undergraduate Opportunities at the UC System Wide Bioengineering Symposium, June 21 - June 23, 2012, Berkeley, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Teresa Head-Gordon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2013
* USD 14,810.00

1243416/ Head-Gordon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UC System-wide Bioengineering
Symposium is a flagship conference of the University of California and is the
only bioengineering symposium that spans all ten UC campuses. The symposium
typically reaches ~300 attendants, the large majority of whom are undergraduate
students. It provides an ideal opportunity for UC students to hone their
presentation skills and be exposed to the broader landscape of this rapidly
growing field. The symposium highlights all of the UC's strengths in
Bioengineering including tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, stem cell
engineering, biomaterials, biomechanics, micro/nanobiotechnology, imaging, drug
delivery, systems biology, and bioinformatics. The three-day conference will
take place Thursday afternoon, June 21 through Saturday, June 23, on the UC
Berkeley campus. All sessions will be held in the two primary Bioengineering
buildings on campus, Stanley Hall and the Hearst Memorial Mining Building. This
will situate the conference activities adjacent to Bioengineering Department
laboratories, classrooms and faculty offices to encourage spontaneous
demonstration and collaborations forged out of conference networking.
Participants will be housed nearby at dormitories and a local Berkeley hotel to
further facilitate mingling and casual acquaintances. Networking opportunities
are provided throughout the symposium, and all meals will be offered at the
symposium location to further facilitate this goal. The program is posted at:
http://bioeng.berkeley.edu/2012systemwide/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The symposium will feature several parallel sessions and extensive poster
sessions, with oral presentations chosen from abstracts submitted by students
from all ten UC campuses. Judges will select the best student presentations for
the best paper and best poster awards in each session of the symposium. In
addition to twelve distinguished speakers from the UC campuses (including some
new young faculty who get to highlight their new career work), the symposium
will feature keynote lectures by three world-renowned bioengineers (Prof. Nancy
Allbritton, Prof. Anthony Atala, Prof. Jay Keasling), which will provide an
excellent learning opportunity for the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The organizers are seeking travel support for many young as well as
established women faculty to present their high quality research, as well as the
registration and travel support for 15 URM graduate students to come to
Berkeley. The PIs have organized a Career Development luncheon to foster an
active dialogue between students and academic and industry researchers to
discuss career goals in the field of Bioengineering, as well as an undergraduate
tour through UC Berkeley Bioengineering labs after lunch. The College of
Engineering has raised the issue of student and faculty diversity to a high
priority, and the UC System-Wide Bioengineering Conference provides a high
profile opportunity to support URM students and exposing them to Bioengineering
activities at Berkeley.