* 1243160
* Theoretical and Laboratory Investigation of Buyer-Determined Procurement Auctions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Elena Katok, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 31,134.00

Buyer-determined procurement auctions are now widely used by businesses as a way
to purchases needed supplies and parts from other businesses. These 'B-to-B'
auctions are conducted on-line by a number of commercial auction providers. They
typically use auction rules that economists would classify as non-binding
reverse auctions. Bidders compete against each other (hence it is a reverse
auction) but the winner is not necessarily the supplier with the lowest bid.
Rather, buyers decide who wins the contract, based on the final quotes and
further information on the suppliers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While these auctions
are widely used, they have not been studied by economists. This award funds the
development of a formal game-theoretic model of behavior in these auctions as
well as a series of lab experiments that test the theory's predictions about the
effects of specific features of the auction design on auction
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances our understanding of a
procurement methods that is in wide use. The results of this research benefit
businesses as well as government entitities that use procurement auctions to
find appropriate suppliers. The research demonstrates that specific changes in
auction methods can improve the efficiency of the auction method, so that buyers
can quickly locate the supplier who best meets their needs.