* 1243063
* Collaborative Research:   CEDAR--Correlative Study of Metal Atoms and Ion Concentrations Using Simultaneous and Common Volume Multi-lidar and Radar Measurements at Arecibo
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Craig Tepley, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 04/30/2017
* USD 192,134.00

The investigators will conduct a comprehensive study of the chemistry and
dynamics in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) using existing and new
data. The tasks include the development of a new radar capability to measure
nighttime Fe+ concentrations, and enhanced lidar capabilities for temperature
and wind measurements. The objectives are to characterize relationships among
atomic metals and electron concentration, compare chemistries of meteoric
species in MLT through simultaneous observations, and investigate the response
of metal layers to gravity waves and tides. In the last two decades, there have
been a number of simultaneous and common volume observations of meteoric
species, including, Ca, Fe, K, Na, and Ca+, as well as electron concentration
(Ne) and temperature in the mesopause region at Arecibo. The simultaneous
observation of multiple species offers the advantage that the atmospheric
conditions are identical. With the anticipated radar measurement of Fe+, the
observations will allow for comparative studies on ion-molecular and neural-
molecular chemistries. Also, the influence of dynamical versus chemical
transport and its variation with the altitude will be investigated. The study
will help in the development of atmospheric models and improve knowledge of
mesospheric chemistry and dynamics. It will involve graduate and undergraduate
students from Miami University, as well as students from universities in Puerto
Rico, and will strengthen international collaborations with scientists from at
least two other countries. The results are expected to help to improve
atmospheric models used by the broader atmospheric community.