* 1243565
* Structure and Function of Carotenoids
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Harry Frank, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2017
* USD 567,935.00

Carotenoids are naturally-occurring pigments that are essential for the survival
of photosynthetic organisms. They act as protective devices against irreversible
photodestruction of the photosynthetic apparatus, and they function as light-
harvesting pigments. Despite this general knowledge of carotenoid behavior
obtained from years of investigations, the excited state spectra and dynamics of
these molecules are still not well understood. Many of the assignments of their
energy states from spectroscopic data are controversial, and the precise nature
of the excited states and the roles they play in controlling the biological
functions of carotenoids remain unclear. The overall objective of the project is
to elucidate the excited state spectra and dynamics of carotenoids in order to
reveal how they carry out their important roles in nature. The planned
experiments will analyze systematic series of polyenes and carotenoids obtained
either synthetically or from several different photosynthetic organisms. In
addition, recombinant proteins refolded with modified chlorophylls, or having
undergone site-directed mutagenesis in the vicinity of protein-bound pigments,
will be studied. Ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopic methods will be used to
measure the spectra and dynamics of the excited states. The experiments will be
augmented by theoretical quantum mechanical computations to reveal the excited
state configurations which will be correlated with the spectroscopic
observables. Kinetic and quantum mechanical models describing the photochemical
behavior of carotenoids will be evaluated. Various hypotheses pertaining to the
excited state structure and spectral properties of carotenoids will be tested,
and a number of issues regarding how carotenoids function will be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;The subject of the
research has broad relevance to several socially important topics including
global climate change, biofuels, and the development of alternative solar energy
conversion schemes. A critical aspect of this project will be its impact on the
training of undergraduate and graduate students which include those from
underrepresented groups recruited though several outreach activities in which
the PI will continue to participate. In the laboratory of the PI, the students
will gain experience in a broad spectrum of experimental approaches including
the techniques for the isolation and characterization of complex biological
materials, sophisticated molecular spectroscopic methodologies, and kinetic and
quantum computational modeling. The students will develop organizational and
problemsolving skills by writing reports and publications and making
presentations at scientific meetings to obtain valuable critical feedback from
experts in the field. In addition, the PI will advance general understanding of
the project by incorporating the subject matter directly into the freshman-level
General Chemistry and graduate Biological and Physical Chemistry courses and
through outreach activities involving the general public. The PI will be giving
presentations at various schools where he will speak not only about the
scientific content, but also about the broad social impacts of the project. The
PI will continue his active role as a mentor in the NSF-sponsored REU program in
the Department of Chemistry where a participating student will work directly on
the project. Finally, the PI has established collaborative arrangements with
internationally-known experts who will interact freely with the students in the
group specifically on work related to this project, offer a global perspective
on the work, and help bring the studies to fruition as rapidly as
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism and Chemistry of
Life Processes programs in the Chemistry Division