* 1243898
* EAGER: The Role of Water Vapor and Incorporated Protons in Enhancing Diffusion and Sintering in Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2014
* Martha Mecartney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 142,713.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ceramics are the durable, high temperature material
of choice for many technical applications, such as coatings for turbine blades
in jet engines, but water vapor can unexpectedly change the properties of a
ceramic. For example, at high temperatures when a ceramic can soften, it can be
even easier to deform when high pressure water vapor is present. Different
elements in a ceramic may segregate more rapidly when water vapor is introduced
at high temperatures, creating a non-uniform structure and weak spots where
failure can occur. The mechanism for these changes is not currently understood.
This research identifies which ceramic materials are most susceptible to
changing properties when exposed to high temperature water vapor, and studies
the conditions for which water vapor can improve or degrade the ceramic.
Underrepresented community college students and returning U.S. veterans are also
participating on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
project studies whether grain boundary diffusion in oxides is significantly
affected by exposure to water vapor at high temperatures by studying the
magnitude of this phenomenon. This exploratory research is important for
understanding the consequences of exposure of solid oxides to water vapor at
high temperatures, as ceramics are pushed to be used in harsher and higher
temperature environments and designed with smaller and smaller dimensions.
Studies measuring changes in sintering, creep and segregation in the presence of
water vapor are used to determine if grain boundary diffusion is enhanced. The
role of incorporated protons on grain boundary diffusion is also evaluated as a
possible mechanism. This research determines if the development of mitigation
measures is necessary for the use of oxide ceramics in water vapor at high
temperatures and if water vapor enhanced sintering as a low energy route is
feasible. Students are trained to learn advanced analytical techniques, included
cutting-edge electron microscopy and spectroscopy techniques.