* 1243485
* Emerging Research Questions in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Chris Elfring, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Renee Crain
* 07/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

This proposal from the National Academy of Sciences is to support a planning and
assessment activity by the Polar Research Board (PRB). Selected via standard NRC
procedures, an ad hoc committee of 16 members will engage a broader segment of
the Arctic research community in an information-gathering workshop. The workshop
will assess the current state of research and supporting infrastructure and plan
for emerging research questions in the Arctic over the next 10-20 years. The
assessment will identify the key scientific questions in different realms of
Arctic science, exploring both disciplinary realms (e.g., marine, terrestrial,
atmosphere, cryosphere, and social sciences) and cross cutting realms (e.g.,
integrated systems science and sustainability science). Based on the emerging
research questions, the study will also help identify research infrastructure
needs (e.g., observation networks, computing and data management, ship
requirements, shore facilities, etc.) and collaboration opportunities. The goal
is to provide crisp, concise guidance for U.S. Arctic research so that research
is targeted on critical scientific and societal questions and conducted as
effectively as possible. An opportunity for additional, web-based community
input will be offered. Existing community planning documents will be used, but
synthesis and findings are the responsibility of the committee.