* 1243622
* EAGER:  Assessing the Impact of Technology-Aided Participation and Mentoring on Transformative Interdisciplinary Research
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Cathy Davidson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 294,793.00

"Assessing the Impact of Technology-Aided Participation and Mentoring on
Transformative Interdisciplinary Research: A Data-Based Study of the Incentives
and Success of an Exemplar Academic Network" uses computational analysis, data
extraction, and social networking analysis to embark on the first large-scale
study of the interplay of cyberinfrastructure and scholarly communication in an
academic peer-produced network. The exemplar virtual institution studied is the
Humanities, Arts, Sciences and Technology Advanced Collaboratory (HASTAC or
"haystack"), a network of over 9000 educators dedicated to innovative,
technology-aided forms of collaborative research and teaching. Formed in 2002,
HASTAC, now headquartered at Duke University in the Ph.D. Lab in Digital
Knowledge, is currently adding 200-300 new members a month. The study mobilizes
six years of the extensive HASTAC data pool, including the 176MB MySQL database
of individual and institutional member profiles, for social networking analysis,
data extraction, text and content analysis, and procedural and organizational
analysis. It provides critically needed evidence for the current and future
capacities of institutions to support the interdisciplinary collaborations
essential to meet the Grand Challenges (such as energy, water sustainability, or
human sciences and policy design) confronting the world, especially those
requiring collaboration among scientists working with humanists and social
scientists trained to confront the societal and cultural factors that deter the
implementation of scientific and technological
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the unique interdisciplinary nature of
HASTAC as a virtual organization and the fact that this is a first, exploratory
study of its extensive, accessible, anonymized "clean" individual and
institutional data (in a Drupal database), this is a transformative, high-impact
early-stage study for which EAGER was designed. Because one focus of the study
is the 522 current students and recent alumni (80% graduate, 20% undergraduate)
in 63 disciplines and departments on small scholarships from over 120 supporting
institutions, the study will also test the hypothesis that networked
interdisciplinary young scholars outcompete more traditional peers, another
first commensurate with the EAGER mission of transformative knowledge with the
potential for maximum impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
the project include modeling a method by which cyberfrastructure can enable
successful collaborative research adaptable to other problem-based research
centers and scalable to other projects, such as NSF-funded Science of Learning
Centers (SLC); determining the best incentives for risk-taking early career
interdisciplinary research; and calculating how voluntary, scholarly networking
and virtual mentoring support and promote early-stage researchers in both
scholarly innovation and high-prestige academic
achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the study is in
addressing one of the most urgent structural problems in higher education and
one on which there is little quantitative, data-based research: how to
incentivize and support the range of cross-disciplinary researchers who must
work together successfully in order to solve society?s biggest problems. At its
broadest, it is anticipated that the study will intervene in current theories of
organizational behavior, social media protocols, disciplinary and
interdisciplinary formation, and self-governing systems, and lay the groundwork
for increased collaborations dedicated to tackling the major problems and Grand
Challenges of the 21st century.