* 1243641
* Deciphering the Code for RNA Recognition by PPR Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Alice Barkan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2018
* USD 736,035.00

Intellectual Merit: The interpretation of genetic information by the molecular
machinery inside cells requires highly specific interactions between protein,
DNA, and RNA molecules. The ability to predict the nucleotide sequences bound by
RNA and DNA binding proteins would accelerate understanding of the molecular
networks that underlie organismal development and physiology, and would have
broad application in basic research and biotechnology. However, it remains
difficult to predict the RNA binding properties of most RNA binding proteins, or
to design them to bind specified RNA sequences. This project focuses on a family
of RNA binding proteins, the pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins, that holds
special promise for the rational design of specified RNA binding properties and
for the engineering of regulatory switches to control gene expression. PPR
proteins consist of tandem repeating units that form a surface for binding RNA.
PPR-RNA recognition is modular in nature: each repeat specifies binding to a
particular RNA nucleotide via the combinatorial action of amino acids at two
positions in the repeat. PPR proteins are found in all eucaryotic organisms, but
the family is extraordinary for its size in the plant lineage, with &gt;450
members in flowering plants. PPR proteins localize primarily to mitochondria and
chloroplasts, where they influence the expression of RNAs encoded by the
organellar genomes. As such, the PPR family has a profound impact on many
organelle-dependent processes, including photosynthesis, respiration, and
fertility. The goal of this project is to develop understanding of the basis for
PPR-RNA recognition to the point that (i) the binding sites and functions of PPR
proteins in crop plant genomes can be reliably predicted, and (ii) PPR proteins
can be designed to achieve desired RNA sequence specificities. The ability to
predict PPR binding sites and the functional consequences of that binding will
be tested by engineering PPR proteins to regulate endogenous organellar genes
that are distinct from their natural targets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Anticipated outcomes would impact applied and basic biology by: (i)
accelerating the assignment of functions to one of the largest gene families in
plants; (ii) providing a set of switches with which to control mitochondrial and
chloroplast gene expression, and thereby modulate photosynthesis, respiration,
and plant fertility; and (iii) providing tools for targeting passenger proteins
to specified RNA sequences in vivo. This funding will foster an international
collaboration between laboratories in the US and Australia. The
interdisciplinary and international nature of this research will provide a rich
educational experience for one graduate and two undergraduate students. The
undergraduates will take ownership of core components of the project, and will
employ informatic, biochemical and genetic approaches. They will be mentored by
the PI and graduate student in a program that will include weekly subgroup
meetings tailored to their needs. Project content will also be incorporated into
University-wide initiatives aiming to increase diversity in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by Genetic Mechanisms in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, by Plant Genome Research Program
in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.