* 1243461
* Structural studies of proteins by paramagnetic solid-state NMR spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Christopher Jaroniec, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2017
* USD 630,064.00

In this project the PI is developing new multidimensional NMR spectroscopy
techniques for the determination of three-dimensional protein structures in the
solid phase. These NMR methods rely on the use of covalently-attached
paramagnetic tags and exploit the large electron-nucleus hyperfine interactions
to simultaneously obtain long, up to ~20 Ã…, electron-nucleus distance restraints
at multiple protein sites. The principal research objectives of the project are:
to develop methodology for the collection of paramagnetic-based NMR structural
restraints with enhanced sensitivity, to develop methodology for probing the
higher order intermolecular architecture of large protein assemblies, and to
design compact paramagnetic tags to improve the quality of protein structures
derived using this methodology. The paramagnetic solid-state NMR techniques
emerging from this project are expected to be directly applicable to the
structural analysis of a variety of large macromolecular assemblies that are
central to fundamental biological processes yet do not readily lend themselves
to characterization using traditional high-resolution structural tools.

The research aims of the project are integrated with education and outreach
activities. The primary educational activity will consist of intensive, full-
time summer research internship programs for undergraduate and local high-school
students organized annually in the PI's laboratory. Student recruitment for
these programs will focus particularly on students from groups traditionally
under-represented in the STEM disciplines. The main objective of these
activities is to directly impact students in the earliest stages of their
educational experience by introducing them to cutting edge interdisciplinary
research at the interface of chemistry, biology, and physics, building their
confidence in themselves and their scientific abilities, and encouraging them to
think of science in a broad, discovery-based manner. The ultimate goal is to
increase student participation and retention in the STEM fields. This project is
jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division.