* 1243510
* PIRE: Context Sensitive Implementation of Synergistic Water-Energy Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Eric Wells, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 3,920,644.00

This PIRE (Partnerships in International Research and Education) project
addresses integrated water and energy systems fundamental to social, economic,
and environmental well-being and prosperity. The project seeks to merge water
and energy concerns with appropriate cultural models of local knowledge,
institutions, and resource limits. It also seeks to initiate a cultural shift in
individual and university research and education programs by developing
international research competence and building capacity through global
partnerships. Engineering systems will be adapted to environmental and cultural
changes associated with growth in human populations, urbanization, and resource
consumption by focusing on the interstices of geographical context, cultural
analysis, and how the scale of implementation of a solution impacts results. The
overarching research question is: can effective, geographically-appropriate, and
culturally relevant engineered systems be established that utilize wastewater as
a resource for recovery of energy, water, and nutrients.&lt;br/&gt; The project
will be carried out by a team of researchers from engineering, anthropology,
marine science, and science education to enable a new integrated,
interdisciplinary model in context sensitive implementation of synergistic
water-energy systems. Their combined expertise and perspective will be applied
to explore the viability of two technologies to manage wastewater: anaerobic
digestion and algal-based resource recovery. Two specific research tasks address
advancing the methods and materials involved in the technologies themselves, and
steps needed to be taken to protect human health; two other tasks explore these
technologies in the context of geographical location and environmental impacts;
and the remaining two tasks focus on comprehensive systems research across
social, economic, and environmental domains through life cycle assessment and
systems dynamics modeling. &lt;br/&gt; The project will involve academic
partners from Europe (U.K., The Netherlands, Czech Republic) and the Caribbean
Basin (U.S. Virgin Islands, Belize, Mexico), providing a range of expertise in
technological innovation, cultural histories, and geographic locations, in order
to address integrated resource management challenges due to differences of
scale, political will, environmental worldview, level of interest, and financial
constraint. Caribbean Basin partners will provide opportunities to investigate
deployment and sustainability of technology and management strategies that take
place at different stages of economic development and population density. The
three European partners are located in areas with examples of integrated
resource recovery, allowing the team to develop solutions where water and energy
infrastructure are highly developed and serve higher population
densities.&lt;br/&gt; These education and research partnerships will create an
international team of at least 40 undergraduate and 60 graduate students, 4
postdoctoral research associates, and 31 faculty members, who will immerse
themselves in issues of national and global importance. The application of
research to international locations will provide social, economic, and
environmental contrast for students and early career researchers. The
educational activities will help develop global competency and knowledge of
sustainable systems, and provide participants with opportunities to participate
in international partnerships. Education and research opportunities are also
provided to students from the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI), a
historically black university with BS programs in math and basic and
environmental science, but limited research opportunities. A collaborative
undergraduate program with UVI will broaden access of under-represented minority
students to career opportunities in engineering, and provide a dual degree
option and opportunities for student research. In addition, existing and planned
Peace Corps graduate school partnerships will utilize the Peace Corps? unique
training in language, culture, participatory approaches to community assessment,
and sustainable development to build global competency.&lt;br/&gt; This project
is jointly funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering, and
the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division in
the Engineering Directorate. The project is funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) through the PIRE.