* 1243183
* CEDAR:  Understanding the Loss of Energetic Electrons from the Radiation Belts Using Remote Sensing with Multi-point Riometer Measurements and Satellite In Situ Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Yuri Shprits, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 164,214.00

The investigators will use multi-point riometer measurements in conjunction with
in-situ satellite data, to improve understanding of the precipitation of
energetic electrons into the ionosphere from their magnetospheric origins.
Energetic electrons in the 10's of kilo-electron volt (KeV) range precipitate to
the upper D- and lower E region ionosphere, and are responsible for enhanced
ionization. This same particle population is important in the inner
magnetosphere, as it provides a source of waves, and acts as a seed population
for relativistic electrons in the radiation belts. In situ observations of
plasma populations and waves are usually limited to a single point, which
complicates temporal and spatial analysis. Also, the lifespan of satellite
missions is often limited to several years, which does not allow the inference
of long-term climatology of magnetospheric conditions and solar cycle
dependencies. Multi-point remote sensing of the ionospheric plasma conditions
can provide a global view of the ionospheric and magnetospheric conditions, and
the coupling between magnetospheric and ionospheric phenomena can be examined on
time-scales that allow comprehensive statistical analysis. The investigators
will inter-calibrate riometers with satellite measurements of precipitating
fluxes and also compare to variations in the trapped electron population in the
equatorial plane. Comparison with in-situ observations of precipitating fluxes
will show which energy electrons can be measured by riometers and allow
development of maps of latitudinal and magnetic local time (MLT) distributions
of precipitation. The team will also study how precipitation depends on the
solar wind conditions and geomagnetic indexes. Comparison with trapped
population measurements from satellites will quantify the fraction of the loss
to the atmosphere vs loss to the outer boundary of trapping and the outward
transport. Long-term riometer measurements, which are correlated with fluxes of
precipitating energetic electrons, can be used in the future as a proxy for
magnetospheric wave activity. Electron precipitation can also modify ionospheric
conductivity, which will influence magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. This study
supports the Van Allen Probe mission by demonstrating how remote sensing of
ionospheric precipitation can help scientists understand processes in the
magnetosphere and radiation belts. The results of the study will advance
knowledge of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, which is important to provide
better quality conductance estimates in the E-region ionosphere. Additionally,
the energetic electrons in the 10's of keV range act as a seed population for
relativistic electrons, which may damage satellite systems and hardware. In
addition, the precipitation of energetic electrons directly influences the upper
atmospheric chemistry, and represents a link between solar and magnetospheric
activity, and climate.