* 1243595
* United States Universities Council on Geotechnical Education and Research (USUCGER)Early Career Geotechnical Engineering Conference; Boston, Massachusetts; 8 July 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2012
* Jeffrey Evans, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2012
* USD 44,981.00

The United States Universities Council on Geotechnical Education and Research
(USUCGER) will hold an Early Career Geotechnical Engineering Conference on 8
July 2012 in Boston, Massachusetts, in conjunction with NSF's Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Engineering Research and Innovation
Conference. This award is for the planning and facilitating this Early Career
Geotechnical Engineering Conference which will be the first of its kind for the
Geotechnical Engineering research community in several respects. First, the
Conference is aimed at addressing issues of importance to early career faculty.
Next, the Conference includes an explicit focus on facilitating research
connections between participants. This Early Career Conference will provide an
opportunity for early career geotechnical engineering faculty to learn of on-
going research under the direction of other early career faculty, meet
geotechnical engineering faculty at other institutions to facilitate
collaborations, and learn of federal funding opportunities for their research.

This Early Career Conference seeks to enhance the diversity of participation by
supporting early career faculty through stipends to attend the conference and to
stay for the NSF CMMI conference. The Conference will also provide keynote
speakers representative of the diversity in geotechnical engineering. By
focusing on Early Career Faculty where the demographics are more diverse than
later career faculty, the participants will be provided tools and guidance that
will no doubt enhance their probability of success in Geotechnical Engineering.