* 1243037
* Molecular Mechanisms of Lysosome Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Hanna Fares, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2016
* USD 643,050.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to decipher mechanisms
of lysosome biogenesis. Lysosomes are the main membrane-bound, degradative
organelles of eukaryotic cells. In addition to degrading endocytosed molecules
from the extracellular medium, lysosomes regulate multiple essential cellular
processes, including degrading material for turnover of cellular organelles,
degrading material to respond to starvation, degrading signaling receptors to
regulate developmental pathways, fusing with the plasma membrane to initiate
wound healing, and mediating some cell death pathways. Given this central
importance of lysosomes, it is striking that little is known about basic
principles of how lysosomes are formed, the process of lysosome biogenesis.
Fundamental to the understanding of how lysosome biogenesis is regulated
requires identifying the proteins that function in this process. The aim of this
project is to characterize six novel proteins that were identified as regulators
of lysosome biogenesis. Using sophisticated genetic and cell biological tests in
the C. elegans model system, this project will determine how these proteins
interact to modulate the dynamic membrane events required to form a new
lysosome. These approaches are likely to provide mechanistic molecular insight
into lysosome biogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;First,
this project will transform current views of membrane transport by establishing
a molecular model of lysosome biogenesis. Second, this research program will
continue to support a strong training mission in undergraduate student research.
The P.I. has a strong record of undergraduate training, particularly with
students from under-represented groups. The majority of these students
eventually enter into graduate programs and pursue a career in science. Most of
students that will be trained on the present project will be encouraged to
present their work at research conferences and will be authors on peer-reviewed
publications emerging from the work. This research program will serve as a
platform for the scientific development of the next generations of scientists
and health professionals.