* 1243643
* NSF Wireless Spectrum Research and Development Senior Steering Group Workshop
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Timothy Brown, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2013
* USD 25,715.00

The Wireless Spectrum R&amp;D (WSRD) Senior Steering Group (SSG) of the National
Information Technology R&amp;D (NITRD) program was stood up as a result of
President Obama's June 2010 memorandum on "Unleashing the Wireless Broadband
Revolution." WSRD's purpose is to implement section 3 of the presidential
memorandum, which directs the Secretary of Commerce, "in consultation with the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, National Science Foundation
(NSF), the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, NASA, and other
agencies as appropriate, [to] create and implement a plan to facilitate
research, development, experimentation, and testing by researchers to explore
innovative spectrum-sharing technologies, including those that are secure and
resilient." WSRD facilitates coordination and information exchange regarding
federal government research in the spectrum
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although WSRD is a committee of the federal
government, it closely coordinates its activities with private industry, public
safety, academic researchers, and state and local governments, as these sectors
are major drivers of spectrum requirements, research, and development. It does
so through a series of workshops which include the participations of
representatives of all of these groups. Two workshops have been held so far: The
first in Boulder, CO, in July 2011, which concentrated on coordinating the
current and future federal spectrum R&amp;D portfolio within the broader
context; and the second in Berkeley, CA, in January 2012, which undertook a
discussion of the need for a national-level wireless testbed
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenge with the previous two workshops was
getting adequate and diverse representation from some sectors, because of the
lack of travel funds. In this third workshop, to be held in Boulder, CO, in July
2012, limited travel funds will be available to invited participants who might
otherwise have difficulty attending. Priority will be given to improving the
gender and racial diversity of the workshop participants. The travel grant
program will be led by Dr. Timothy Brown of the University of Colorado at
Boulder, who is a key member of the workshop organizing committee.