* 1243997
* Studies of Translation Initiation in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ralf Bundschuh, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 580,000.00

The final step of gene expression is translation, the synthesis of protein based
on the sequence of messenger RNA (mRNA). Translation is performed by ribosomes,
sub-cellular machines composed of both ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and protein. In
recent years, x-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy have revealed
the structure of the ribosome and its interactions with a variety of substrates
and translation factors. Despite this wealth of structural information,
questions of how the ribosome facilitates specific events during translation
remain unclear. The goal of this project is to better understand the initiation
phase of translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initiation is a complex process that
requires selection of the initiator tRNA from other species of tRNA and
selection of the start codon from other similar or identical triplet sequences
in the mRNA. In bacteria, the process is kinetically controlled by initiation
factors IF1, IF2 and IF3. In other organisms, initiation is fundamentally
similar but more elaborate, involving 10 or more factors in addition to
universally conserved IF2 (eIF5B) and IF1 (eIF1A). The Fredrick Lab has
characterized a number of mutations in the rRNA of the small (30S) subunit that
cause defects in initiation. This project will investigate the role of the large
(50S) subunit and factors IF1, IF3, and S1, providing further insight into the
molecular mechanisms that govern the initiation process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: The broader impact of this project lies in
its strong educational emphasis. This project will provide (1) research training
for undergraduate and graduate students, (2) summer research opportunities for
local high school students (Columbus Public Schools), and (3) laboratory
internships for students of the Ohio STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics) Talent Expansion Program, which aims to boost the success rate of
STEM majors. In addition, genetic experiments (relevant to the project) will be
incorporated into the curriculum of the advanced laboratory course in
Microbiology. By conducting actual experiments rather than lab exercises, these
students will be given the opportunity for discovery as they gain technical
skills.