* 1243444
* OISE-PIRE Sustainability, Ecosystem Services, and Bioenergy Development across the Americas
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* David Shonnard, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,841,735.00

This Partnership in International Research and Education (PIRE) project
addresses the question: How will biofuel development impact socio-ecological
systems and associated ecosystem services, and how can those impacts best be
measured, modeled, and mitigated? Society faces difficult challenges in
preventing climate change and reducing dependence on foreign energy supplies
that can come from political unstable regions. In response, the US, Brazil,
Mexico, and Argentina have moved toward encouraging the development of new
energy forms that can be domestically produced in a less environmentally
negative fashion than traditional energy from petroleum, coal, or natural gas.
The team, led by Michigan Technological University scientists, includes 33
scientists at nine US, three Brazilian, four Mexican, and two Argentine
universities and public and private research labs. Bioenergy is energy formed
from plants. Many are familiar with bioenergy in the form of firewood used for a
campfire or woodstove. Bioenergy can be used to heat buildings, create
electricity, or create automotive fuels, including diesel and ethanol. One of
the major policy goals of the US, Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina is to promote
the development of bioenergy in the forms of both biodiesel and ethanol,
generally called biofuel. These fuels will be created from many types of plants,
including trees, corn, sugarcane, soybeans, and palm tree nuts. As these
countries work toward achieving this goal, it is important to understand whether
and what types of these fuels are most likely to allow us to create new energy
forms that maximize benefits while minimizing costs, including negative societal
and environmental impacts. This research team of scientists from the US, Brazil,
Mexico, and Argentina has the goal of increasing understanding of the societal
and environmental impacts of different types of biofuels in these four
countries. The team focuses on the production of these biofuels in forested
regions, areas where the biofuel is being produced from forests or impacting
forests through their conversion to agricultural crops, like soybeans. This
international team of social, natural, and engineering scientists will work
together to collect data about these impacts. But it will also translate
findings into new ways to measure and reduce those impacts, while increasing
understanding of how public policies can help maximize biofuel benefits while
minimizing biofuel costs. Project work will advance understanding of
sustainability science while training new generations of students and scientists
to work more effectively in teams that include many different types of
scientific professionals. The project is funded by NSF's Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) through the PIRE.