* 1243060
* Collaborative Research: EaSM2--Linking Human and Earth System Models to Assess Regional Impacts and Adaption in Urban Systems and Their Hinterlands
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Johannes Feddema, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2019
* USD 712,617.00

Within the next three decades, climate variability, climate change and global
development trends could have varied and profound effects on human well-being,
especially in the developing world. Understanding how human and earth system
trajectories will interact is essential to making better decisions that can
reduce negative consequences for society and ecosystems. Research related to
climate impacts has traditionally been separated into a number of poorly
coordinated tasks, with independent models and research groups developing a)
socio-economic development pathways, b) emissions and land use scenarios, c)
land cover projections, d) climate simulations, and e) impact assessments. This
disjointed approach has led to inconsistencies in assumptions across different
components of the problem, lack of incorporation of feedbacks, unmanaged
uncertainty propagation, and introduction of errors when upscaling or
downscaling information across components.

To address these issues, better approaches to impact assessment are required
that provide richer, higher resolution, and more internally consistent
information about future societal and earth system conditions, and that link
models of human and earth systems more effectively. The central objective of
this proposal is to improve understanding of the joint consequences of socio-
economic development and regional climate change by developing and applying
tools to better integrate human and earth system models. This objective will be
pursued by focusing on impacts in three key systems - urban areas, agriculture,
and forests - in three regional case studies in rapidly developing countries -
China, India, and Brazil. The project will develop an integrated suite of
community tools for linking the most relevant type of global human system model,
integrated assessment models (IAMs), with the Community Earth System Model
(CESM), developed and validated through broad-based scientific collaboration and
community support over the past 15 years. It will employ these tools to link the
CESM with one IAM, the integrated Population-Economy-Technology-Science (iPETS)
model, and carry out end-to-end impact assessments for our case study regions,
from socio-economic scenario development through earth system analysis to impact
and adaptation assessment. These assessments will serve as a proof-of-concept
for this new modeling framework as well as produce valuable assessment
information. Importantly, the research framework will be applicable in other
human systems, in other regions, and with other IAMs than those employed here,
to contribute to an even broader understanding of the human consequences of
climate change.