* 1243313
* PIRE: Materials for Renewable Energy NaturE's Way (RENEW)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Ica Manas-Zloczower, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2019
* USD 3,800,000.00

This PIRE project will address the global challenge that many of the materials
used in today's clean energy technologies come from unsustainable sources. While
often thought of as only substitutes for liquid fossil fuels, biomass substances
can serve as replacements for non-sustainable building blocks in many
applications. PIRE: RENEW will use biological-based materials to create
sustainable replacements and improve material performance in high value-added,
high performance applications, beginning with solar and wind energy devices.
Research will explore applications where intermolecular and interfacial
interactions play a key role in self-assembly and aggregation, in building
structural materials with exceptional properties, and in nanoscale
optoelectronics. A wind track will investigate building blades from biobased
nanocomposites, while a solar track will explore structure-property
relationships of cellulose nanowhiskers, bacterial cellulose fibrils, and
sophorolipid surfactants. The program will produce replacements that improve
function, provide renewable sources, and mitigate environmental impact in
production and disposal. Case Western Reserve University and the Polytechnic
Institute of New York will lead the international research nexus necessary to
provide these ongoing material solutions and to educate future materials
scientists and engineers. Partnerships include the University of Pennsylvania,
Rochester Institute of Technology, and universities in the U.K., Brazil,
Belgium, and Italy. Together, they provide expertise in synthesis, processing,
characterization, theory, and lifecycle analysis needed for this global problem.
Under them, twelve U.S. graduate students and postdocs, alongside international
peers, will be trained in sustainability problem solving. Broader impacts will
include materials innovations applicable outside energy (e.g., consumer
products) and a sustainable materials website. The project is funded by NSF's
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) through the PIRE.