* 1243785
* Building an inter-disciplinary research community to protype computationally-intensive analysis of large scale educational datasets
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Robert Haralick, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2016
* USD 435,281.00

This proposal develops a community of researchers that crosses domains of
education, social science, statistics and computer science to expand the
research agenda that utilizes large scale, longitudinal educational databases.
This research collaborative is engaging in the design and implementation of
computationally-intense data analytic methodologies to address limitations
experienced by researchers who use these techniques to analyze multiple types of
large scale data in education including data from a national transcript study,
local education agency longitudinal student data and an administrative dataset
collected about students across a large university system. The researchers are
bringing together scholars to identify a research agenda for the effective
engagement of such methodologies and their use in addressing educational
practice and policy questions. The researchers are developing and implementing a
seminar on data-intense research methodologies that includes practical analysis
of three different educational databases, conducting iterative bi-weekly
workshops for researchers, and developing, implementing and documenting a
graduate level course for new researchers. Researchers from the City University
of New York Graduate Center are collaborating with the Inter-University Doctoral
Consortium that includes eight additional institutions in the region. Scholars
from across the country are recruited from across the country to participate in
a virtual community.

The project is operating through three distinct mechanisms. The first is the
faculty seminar that brings together researchers from different domains to study
the challenges and strategies involved in applying computationally-intensive
techniques to the analysis of large longitudinal educational datasets, repeated
across the two years of the project. The second is a biweekly workshop in which
a working group of researchers from computer science, applied statistics and
education design and pilot approaches to data analysis from specific datasets.
The third mechanism is a semester-long course for doctoral students that
connects them with the researchers who are developing and testing new
methodologies for data analysis.

The growing number of large scale longitudinal datasets in education present
multiple analytic challenges. The first is that many techniques that have been
developed for such analyses encounter problems when having to address the
complexity of many educational datasets. The second is that the understanding of
the fit between different computationally-intensive statistical methodology and
the types of questions that need to be answered through these methodologies is
not always straightforward. The third challenge is the growing need for
researchers who have the background and training to use these multiple
analytical techniques.