* 1243671
* EAGER: A Model System for Soil Microbial Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jo Handelsman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Microbial communities govern the nutrient cycles,
integrity of solid surfaces, and health of other organisms in essentially every
habitat on Earth. To affect these processes towards improving the health of
animals, plants, or the planet itself, it is necessary to understand what makes
communities resistant and also susceptible to change. For example, soil
communities influence crop health and global climate, and yet little is known
about the principles governing stability and change in this habitat. This
project will enable an investigation of the nature of community robustness - the
resistance to, and recovery from disturbance. One especially interesting aspect
of robustness is invasion. Towards understanding the traits that make bacteria
successful community invaders, and conversely, the traits of communities that
enable them to exclude invaders, a simple model system is required, in which
variables can be controlled and genetic analysis can be applied. This project
focuses on the microbial community associated with sand grains in soil for
several reasons, including the relative uniformity of sand particles, the
disaggregated nature of sand (compared with other soil components), the aerobic
nature of sand-associated communities, exposure of sand communities to invaders,
and the ease of manipulation of sand grains as experimental units. Thus, laying
the groundwork for identifying genes and metabolites that influence invasion and
exclusion, a model community, together with appropriate bacterial invaders, will
be designed and developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide research opportunities for undergraduates. A valued
resource that will be relied upon to increase participation of ethnically
diverse students in the project is the POSSE Program. This is a national program
that recruits outstanding high school students to attend college as a cohort.
POSSE students have a remarkably high graduation rate and they are truly
exceptional scholars. This project will provide summer research experiences at
Yale for POSSE students from other institutions, to be mentored by individuals
trained in principles and practices of successful mentoring.