* 1243738
* Collaborative: RUI: Characterization of Marine and Freshwater Photosynthetic Consortia that Accomplish Cellulose Degradation and Nitrogen Fixation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Jean Huang, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2017
* USD 242,493.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient cycling in the environment is carried out
by complex microbial communities. Unraveling the network of organismal
interactions that drive carbon and nitrogen cycling in nature is a challenging
task given the taxonomic, functional, and biochemical diversity of most natural
systems. This project will study a series of environmentally derived freshwater
and marine photosynthetic microbial communities that grow using cellulose and
dinitrogen as sole sources of carbon and nitrogen, respectively. These
communities contain distinct populations that can degrade nitrogen-poor
cellulose, fix atmospheric N2, and harvest light energy through photosynthesis
at different light wavelengths under anaerobic conditions. The goal of this
research is to generate new insights into the links between community structure,
productivity, and organismal interactions that produce stable nutrient-cycling
microbial systems by using biochemical, molecular, and model-based analyses.
These environmentally derived consortia can provide insight into how renewable
resources such as cellulose, N2, and light can be efficiently converted into
cell biomass and other usable products under marine and freshwater conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted
at the primarily undergraduate institution, Olin College and the non-profit
research institution, Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL). The interaction
between these institutions will provide rich opportunities for undergraduate
training. Undergraduates will be strongly involved in all cultivation,
biochemical, and physiological characterization of consortia at Olin College.
They will be exposed to cutting edge techniques in high-throughput sequencing
and bioinformatics at the MBL. This will provide valuable experience,
encouragement and preparation for graduate programs and for a range of careers
in science. The data generated by this research will be brought into the
classroom and integrated into curricula to enhance student learning of
bioinformatics using authentic data. Undergraduates will be involved in all
aspects of this research, will present results at scientific meetings, and will
co-author manuscripts.