* 1243167
* CEDAR:  Lidar and Radar Investigations of Turbulence in the Arctic Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Richard Collins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 12/31/2017
* USD 348,462.00

The investigators will study wave-breaking, instability, and turbulence in the
Arctic middle atmosphere. Specifically, an integrated study that combines lidar,
radar, and satellite measurements will be conducted to characterize turbulence
in the presence of persistent mesospheric inversion layers. The study will draw
on established instruments at Chatanika, Alaska (65°N, 147°W); namely an
established Rayleigh lidar and the Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar. The
lidar will yield high-resolution temperature and density measurements that allow
characterization of the mesospheric inversion layers and wave activity in the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT). The radar will provide spectral
measurements of turbulence. These observations will provide a framework for
characterizing turbulence in the presence of persistent instabilities in the
upper mesosphere and lower thermosphere. The wintertime Arctic middle atmosphere
provides a unique natural laboratory for observing large-scale wave breaking and
persistent instabilities in the middle atmosphere. In the winter planetary
waves, generated in the troposphere, routinely break in the stratosphere and
mesosphere and disrupt the circulation. Studies to date indicate that the
western Arctic may be a center of action for planetary wave breaking and
formation of persistent mesospheric inversion layers due to the presence of the
Aleutian anticyclone and the interactions between the anticyclone and the Arctic
vortex during periods of enhanced planetary wave activity. The study's focus is
on observations of waves and turbulence at the lower border of the Space
Atmosphere Interaction Region (SAIR). This SAIR-based study addresses the
coupling that is critical to a systems-based understanding of the atmosphere,
represents a transition in geospace, and determines the current structure and
composition of geospace and how it evolves. The research will fuse knowledge
from remote sensing and geophysical fluid analysis, and directly support
understanding in natural sciences. It will support education and training of
students in science and engineering, employ and extend research infrastructure
in the Arctic, enhance international collaborations, and promote collaboration
amongst universities and laboratories in the US and Japan. The research results
will be integrated into the University of Alaska programs and disseminated
through a variety of professional, educational, and outreach programs.