* 1243645
* Dissecting the Mechanisms of Cell Division
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Jorge Torres, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2017
* USD 740,000.00

Intellectual merit: Mitotic spindle assembly is a highly complex and
specifically orchestrated event that is necessary for cell division. It relies
on a multitude of protein complexes, protein-protein interactions, and
regulatory mechanisms driven by enzymatic activities. Current progress to
generating a comprehensive map of the pathways that are critical for spindle
assembly has been hampered by two major roadblocks. First, the complement of
cell division enzymes and how they coordinate with each other to form the
mitotic spindle is largely unknown. Second, there are only a limited number of
chemical probes that can inhibit the function of these enzymes and can be used
to define their function in an acute and temporal manner. To advance our
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms required for spindle assembly and
cell division, we are taking two complementary multidisciplinary approaches.
First, we are characterizing 20 novel cell division enzymes identified in our
proteomic and genetic screens with respect to their depletion phenotype,
subcellular localization, and interacting partners. These data will be used to
construct a cell division enzyme interaction network that will enable the study
of mitotic enzymes as a biological system in time and space. Second, we are
testing the utility of novel small molecules as chemical probes for dissecting
the mechanisms of these critical cell division enzymes. This research entails
the development of new research schemes, the establishment of interdisciplinary
collaborations, the use of advanced technological tools and instrumentation, and
the integration of data from diverse sources. This research will advance our
understanding of the cellular pathways, enzyme components, and the mechanism of
action of these enzymes for promoting proper cell
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This multidisciplinary research
will create mentoring, educational, and training opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students from multiple fields including cell biology,
chemistry, biochemistry and bioengineering. In particular women and
underrepresented minorities in the sciences will be encouraged to participate.
Students will receive instruction and training in advanced biochemical research
methods and instrumentation through seminars and hands on training modules. This
will enable students to conduct independent research, contribute to the
advancement of our understanding of the mechanisms regulating cell division and
to gain a lifelong appreciation of the scientific process. This research will
generate large data sets and tools, which will benefit the scientific community
and can be used to further understand how cells divide. All research results
will be disseminated broadly in journals, as supplementary material, on our labs
website, at research meetings/conferences, and at invited talks at colleges and
universities. This research will benefit society by inspiring young students and
enabling them to appreciate science and its importance for the advancement of
our society. It will also mentor and train the next generation of highly skilled
and diverse scientists.