* 1243574
* RUI: Bosons in Optical Lattices: dynamics and criticality in inhomogeneous systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Courtney Lannert, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 105,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and undergraduate training in the modeling of interacting
quantum many-body systems. The focus will be to explore the novel properties of
ultracold atoms in optical lattice potentials, an ideal system for the study of
quantum phases, dynamics, and critical phenomena. Using a combination of
analytical and numerical techniques, the PI will study the time evolution of
these systems after a change in the system's parameters, a quench. This research
exploits recent advances in laboratory control over ultracold atoms in optical
traps, including the strength of the interatomic interactions, strength of the
optical lattice potential, and shape of the confining trap, and the ability to
vary these experimental parameters more or less at will. This research and
education activity features the training of undergraduates at Wellesley College
in these topics through mentored independent projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
control over microscopic parameters as well as the macroscopic geometry present
in trapped ultracold gases allows the creation of nearly perfect systems of
interacting bosons or fermions. The ability to alter the interactions, mobility,
and geometry of these systems essentially instantaneously will produce new
understanding of quantum many-body physics and allow new tests of fundamental
quantum behavior. The research funded by this award will focus on the dynamics
of these systems after and during changes in an experimental parameter and will
yield new insight into quantum dynamics and quantum critical phenomena in
superfluid and Mott-insulating quantum phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic
systems hold great promise to probe models of many-body condensed matter and to
test the foundations of quantum mechanics. Theories of superfluid and Mott-
insulating phases of bosons, as well as the quantum phase transition between
them, have direct bearing on superconducting systems. Increased understanding of
interacting bosonic atoms can lead to insights into the quantum dynamics of
strongly-interacting superconducting systems, and may consequently aid the
development of new electronic devices. Further progress in quantum computing
based on ultracold atoms in optical lattices depends on a better understanding
of the dynamics of these finite quantum systems with spatially-dependent
parameters. Quenches in which a system parameter is quickly changed lead to non-
local phenomena that could be harnessed for future algorithms. The work
supported with this award will develop and model promising directions for future
experiments in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported through
this award will be carried out at Wellesley College, a non-Ph.D.-granting
women's college and will train undergraduates through independent research
projects -- including senior theses and summer research -- throughout its
duration. This will engage undergraduates in cutting-edge physics research and
training them in advanced theoretical methods. Undergraduate projects will
include analytical and numerical work on the hydrodynamic modes of superfluid
regions, the expansion of superfluid systems after release from their traps, and
the formation of vortices in trapped BECs. These undergraduate research projects
will give underrepresented physics students at a small liberal arts college the
opportunity to gain theoretical modeling skills and working knowledge of the
emerging field of ultracold atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and undergraduate training to explore the novel properties of atoms
close to the absolute zero in temperature trapped in beams of laser light. This
turns out to be an ideal system for to study quantum mechanics and new states of
matter in a controlled way that is difficult to achieve in the study of
electrons in materials or trapped in artificial material structures. The PI will
use a combination of analytical theory and computational techniques to carry out
this project. The research will contribute to our understanding of how a change
in the environment of a quantum system affects the way it evolves in time. This
research exploits recent advances in laboratory control over systems of
ultracold atoms trapped in laser light. The research features the training of
undergraduates at Wellesley College in these topics through mentored independent
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With ultracold atoms, it is possible to create
nearly perfect systems of interacting particles that behave according to the
rules of quantum mechanics. The study of this system will enable new
understanding of quantum many-body physics and allow new tests of the theory of
quantum mechanics. The research supported by this award will focus on how a
system of ultracold atoms, responds to an abrupt change in its environment, for
example a rapid squeeze. The response will yield new insight into the way
quantum systems transform from one phase to another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of trapped cold atoms, a kind of crystal of light, holds promise to
advance understanding of solid state materials and to test the foundations of
quantum mechanics. Theories of the phases of quantum particles, as well as the
transition between these phases, have direct bearing on understanding strongly
interacting electrons in solids as well as superconductors. Superconductors are
materials that can conduct electrical current without dissipation. This
contribution to the fundamental understanding of states of matter contributes to
the intellectual foundations of future technologies. Ultracold atoms may enable
the realization of a new kind of computer that functions through the
manipulation of quantum mechanical states. A better understanding of the
dynamics of ultracold atom systems is needed for further advance. "Quenches" in
which a system parameter is quickly changed lead to non-local phenomena that
could be harnessed for future quantum-computing algorithms. The research
supported under this award will contribute promising directions for future
experiments in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported through
this award will be carried out at Wellesley College, a non-Ph.D.-granting
women's college and will train undergraduates through independent research
projects -- including senior theses and summer research -- throughout its
duration. This will engage undergraduates in cutting-edge physics research and
training them in advanced theoretical methods. Undergraduate projects will
include analytical and numerical work on the hydrodynamic modes of superfluid
regions, the expansion of superfluid systems after release from their traps, and
the formation of vortices in trapped BECs. These undergraduate research projects
will give underrepresented physics students at a small liberal arts college the
opportunity to gain theoretical modeling skills and working knowledge of the
emerging field of ultracold atoms.