* 1243000
* Collaborative Research: Computational Geometric Uncertainty Propagation for Hamiltonian Systems on a Lie Group
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/07/2012,08/31/2014
* Taeyoung Lee, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 131,583.00

This collaborative research project is concerned with the development of
accurate and efficient computational uncertainty propagation techniques for
nonlinear stochastic Hamiltonian systems that evolve on Lie group configuration
spaces. Uncertainties in a dynamic system arise from multiple sources such as
unmodeled dynamics, parametric uncertainty, and uncertainty in initial
conditions. As they cannot be completely eliminated from any computational
experiment or physical measurement, a careful characterization of the evolution
of uncertainties is essential in scientific and engineering problems. This
project involves the application of computational geometric mechanics, geometric
numerical integration, noncommutative harmonic analysis, and generalized
polynomial chaos techniques, and will yield mesh-free, coordinate-free methods
for the numerically stable long-time propagation of uncertainty in a Hamiltonian
system, while explicitly addressing the underlying stochastic and geometric
properties of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most mathematical models have
sources of uncertainty that may arise from physical processes that are poorly
understood, a lack of precise knowledge of the parameters, or incomplete
information about the current state of the system, and it is important to
understand how these model uncertainties affect the predictions that arise from
the mathematical model. In particular, a computer prediction without some
indication of the reliability and confidence in the prediction can be
disastrously misleading. This project aims to address the essential task of
developing accurate mathematical and numerical methods for characterizing the
effects of uncertainty in complex systems, which is a particularly timely and
pressing need, since mathematical models of complex systems are increasingly
relied upon to inform public policy decisions with long lasting and far reaching
consequences. A graduate textbook will be prepared that discusses in parallel
the continuous and discrete time approach to geometric mechanics on Lie groups
that aims to be accessible to professional programs in computational science,
and which will be field tested in the CSME graduate program at UCSD. This
textbook includes accompanying code that will facilitate the reuse of the
computational infrastructure funded by this project in other applications
involving uncertainty propagation on nonlinear spaces.