* 1243179
* Career and Technical Education as a Foundation to Support Postsecondary Transitions in STEM for Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,10/31/2014
* Michael Gottfried, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 10/31/2014
* USD 403,865.00

The "Career and Technical Education as a Foundation to Support Postsecondary
Transitions in STEM for Students with Disabilities" award is a Broadening
Participation Research project designed to investigate non-traditional and less
formal educational pathways, specifically career and technical education (CTE)
experiences, for high school students with disabilities pursuing postsecondary
STEM degrees and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will examine
three forms of CTE in high school, specifically those identified by the 2006
Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act, considered critical in
supporting the school-to-postsecondary transition of students moving toward STEM
college majors and, ultimately, STEM careers: (1) STEM course-taking, (2)
school-based employment programs, and (3) labor force participation. STEM
course-taking includes both traditional and applied STEM courses that impart
quantitative concepts, logic, and problem solving skills to students in a
structured classroom setting. School-based employment experiences include
activities organized and sponsored by schools that promote career development,
such as cooperative education, internships, and career mentoring. Labor force
participation includes paid work done for an
employer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are five specific research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;1. What CTE experiences are provided to students with
disabilities during high school?&lt;br/&gt;2. Do CTE experiences in high school
improve the odds of students with disabilities transitioning into a STEM field
of study in college? If so, which experiences are most beneficial?&lt;br/&gt;3.
Conditional on having attended college, do CTE experiences in high school
improve the odds of students with disabilities transitioning into a STEM
profession after college? If so, which experiences are most
beneficial?&lt;br/&gt;4. Do answers to the preceding four questions differ by
specific disability classification of the individual student?&lt;br/&gt;5. Are
these results generalizable to multiple nationally-representative
datasets?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these research questions, the research
will conduct secondary data analyses of two existing national datasets: the NCES
Education Longitudinal Study of 2002 (ELS) and the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1997 (NLSY97).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be evaluated by
an independent evaluator, Dr. Vi-Nhuan Le, and will include formative and
summative assessments. Results are expected to advance the field's knowledge
about the future CTE experiences of students with disabilities pursuing STEM at
the postsecondary level.