* 1243608
* Mechanism and Function of Argonaute 4 Subcellular Localization
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Rebecca Mosher, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2017
* USD 705,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Regulation of gene expression is critical to all cellular
processes, from development to environmental response. One way to silence gene
expression is by chromatin modifications that prevent transcription. Such
transcriptional gene silencing can be induced by small RNAs in association with
Argonaute proteins. This presents a conundrum, because by definition, chromatin
modification must occur in the nucleus, but many Argonaute proteins are found in
the cytoplasm. The role of cytoplasmic accumulation of nuclear-acting Argonaute
proteins is unclear, but might reflect regulation of Argonaute action, or relate
to transport of small RNAs between cells. This project will exploit the model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana to understand the molecular mechanisms that regulate
the subcellular localization of small RNA-mediated transcriptional gene
silencing, in particular how ARGONAUTE 4 and RNA Polymerase IV-dependent small
RNAs are spatially distributed within a cell and how this relates to their
functions within and between cells. Because the molecular function of small RNAs
and Argonautes are conserved in many species, investigating the localization of
ARGONAUTE 4 at the protein, cellular, and organismal levels, this research will
create mechanistic paradigms that could be applicable to gene silencing in many
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research offers outstanding
training for a graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow, who will utilize
advanced genomic and bioinformatics tools as well as traditional molecular and
genetic analyses. An undergraduate student will also be included in the research
environment, simultaneously advancing his or her own education and creating
mentoring opportunities for the graduate student and postdoctoral fellow. This
research will also make fundamental contributions to our understanding of
transcriptional gene silencing, an important aspect of gene regulation and a
powerful avenue for crop improvement.