* 1243409
* ICML 2012 Workshop on Machine Learning for Clinical Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Milos Hauskrecht, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 18,000.00

The wealth and variety of data generated in modern medical and health-care
settings present tremendous research challenges as well as opportunities in
artificial intelligence and machine learning. Extensive electronic medical
records - with thousands of fields recording patient conditions, diagnostic
tests, treatments, outcomes, as well as narrative about the patients and care
delivery - provide an unprecedented source of information. Tapping into this
data source can bring clues leading to improvements in a wide range of health-
care applications, such as disease modeling and early detection, chronic disease
management, and efficient design of clinical
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Workshop on Machine
Learning for Clinical Data Analysis
(http://sites.google.com/site/mlclinicaldata) will be held during the
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2012, Edinburgh, Scotland
on June 30-July 1, 2012. The workshop aims to bring together machine learning
and informatics researchers interested in problems and applications in the
clinical domain, with the goal of bridging the gap between the theory of machine
learning and the needs of the health informatics applications. The award
provides funds to cover the travel costs of invited speakers and graduate
students. The Ph.D. student participants will be able to present their work,
interact with their peers from other universities as well as hundreds of leading
researchers in machine learning from around the world. In addition to attending
the workshop, they will attend the technical sessions, plenary talks, and
tutorials of their choice at the conference. The invited speakers will present
talks covering state-of-the-art research as well as open machine learning
research challenges in building predictive models from clinical data. The
workshop aims to educate the machine learning research community regarding
machine learning research opportunities and challenges in health care
applications, especially in connection with recent electronic health record
initiatives; identify new machine learning problems not previously addressed by
the community; and help build a community of researchers who can advance machine
learning informed by the challenges and opportunities presented by clinical data
analytics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Machine learning is playing an
increasingly important role in many emerging data-rich sciences and application
domains, such as bioinformatics, computational biology, health informatics, and
security informatics. Participation in the workskshop and the ICML and COLT
conferences will enrich the education and training of student researchers at
early stages in their careers. The travel awards will help broaden the
participation of women and members of underrepresented minority groups within
the Machine Learning and Health Informatics research communities.