* 1243339
* Collaborative Research:  A Comparative Analysis of the Impact of Children on Parents' Well-Being
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2012
* Jennifer Glass, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 34,197.00

SES-1024539&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jennifer L. Glass&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1024431&lt;br/&gt;PI: Robin W.
Simon&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Wake Forest University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this research are twofold: (1) to document cross-national variation in
the effect of parenthood on well-being in post-industrial developed economies,
and (2) to determine whether cross-national variation in the effect of
parenthood on wellbeing can be explained by variation in the quality and
quantity of welfare state support for parenthood. This research will use the
2005 World Values Surveys from a sample of 21 OCED countries to determine the
impact of parenthood on several key indicators of adult well-being, including
life satisfaction, general happiness, mastery, fatalism, and self-rated health.
The investigators hypothesize that those countries with greater public support
for parenting will show less negative effects of parenthood on adult well-being
than other countries with less support. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;By investigating the role of public policies and
institutional supports for parenting on parents? psychological well-being, this
research can help identify those practices that minimize the child penalty on
adult well-being, and most strongly affect the lived experience of parents.