* 1243792
* Discovery of the Mechanisms Enabling the Dynamic Architecture of the Plant ER
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Federica Brandizzi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 03/31/2019
* USD 715,780.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT A central question in eukaryotic cell biology is how the
identity of organelles is established and maintained. The endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) is an essential organelle of the secretory pathway for the production of a
wide variety of the cell's building blocks, as well as for the control of
essential stress and hormonal signaling pathways. To achieve maximum efficiency,
the ER assumes a unique architecture characterized by a network of
interconnected membrane tubules and sheets to form closed polygons. Discoveries
in ER integrity are emerging from studies in various model organisms/systems
such as fruit flies, yeast and cultured human cells. Compared with these
systems, however, the ER has acquired unique morphological and functional
features in the plant lineage that are likely linked to its important role in
lipid synthesis together with chloroplast, intercellular communication, protein
storage and plant-specific hormone signaling. The goal of this project is to
investigate the unique regulatory mechanisms that maintain plant ER integrity by
using genetic mutants, live cell imaging and biochemical approaches. These
approaches have identified several genes that encode critical players involved
in ER integrity and architecture including an Arabidopsis ER-associated dynamin-
like protein, named RHD3. The project research aims to elucidate the mechanistic
role of RHD3, as well as other gene products identified by mutant screens, in
maintaining the architecture and functions of the plant ER. Since integrity and
function are two inextricably linked features of the ER, the research will
advance the general understanding of ER roles in the plant secretory pathway in
the context of a multicellular organism and contribute to answering fundamental
questions regarding differences in ER organization and function across
eukaryotic systems.

BROADER IMPACTS Plants are the direct or indirect primary carbon and nitrogen
source of all animals and humans, in addition to their role in providing
materials and fuels. The secretory pathway of plants plays a fundamental role in
the conversion of fixed carbon into energy-rich materials, such as proteins,
lipids and complex sugars. These plant-derived products are not only important
for nutrition, but have the potential to be used as renewable fuels, lubricants,
textiles and building materials. Because unique variations exist among
eukaryotes as a result of evolutionary adaptation, it is important to study the
unique properties of the plant ER which is the key organelle for the
biosynthesis of important building blocks of cells and for essential signaling
path-ways in growth, development and stress responses. The project will also
broaden the impact of on the plant cell science research community by providing
unique plant lines and constructs which will be made available to other plant
cell biologists. The research will promote teaching, research training and
outreach activities through multiple avenues both at Michigan State University
as well as the local community. In particular, project personnel will continue
to communicate to students and teachers discoveries in plant science and their
impact on the society by engaging students and teachers in research activities
in the lab and by performing science presentations at schools.