* 1243070
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Large-Scale Characterization of the Sub-Auroral Polarization Stream and Its Impacts on the Ionosphere-Thermosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Joseph Baker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 298,086.00

During geomagnetic storms the region of the ionosphere that lies just
equatorward of the auroral zone is often perturbed by a longitudinally-extended
channel of high-speed (&gt;1 km/s) plasma flow known as the sub-auroral
polarization stream (SAPS). The investigators will analyze observations of
ionospheric disturbances through the current period of solar cycle maximum with
the aim of deriving a comprehensive, observationally based model of SAPS. The
study will examine the onset, spread, and decay of SAPS flows and chart the
accompanying changes observed in total electron content (TEC). Coordinated
experiments will be conducted with the recently refurbished Incoherent Scatter
Radar (ISR) at Millstone Hill in order to relate the SAPS electric field
dynamics to changes in ionospheric density and chemistry and to gauge their
effects on the neutral atmosphere. The SAPS phenomenon is associated with strong
poleward-directed electric fields (&gt;50 mV/m) and a deep depression, or
trough, in ionospheric densities. SAPS is believed to be a consequence of a
feedback process whereby magnetic field-aligned current of magnetospheric origin
closes across the ionospheric trough, eliciting chemical changes that further
reduce the ionospheric density while increasing the electric field in a manner
that maintains current continuity. The SAPS phenomenon has important
consequences for structuring ionospheric plasma, ionospheric composition,
formation of plasma irregularities, and coupling to the neutral atmosphere. The
attainment of a comprehensive, observationally-based understanding of SAPS and
its impacts on the thermosphere would be a major advance. SAPS has traditionally
been studied with single radars and satellites, leading to characterizations
that are limited in their utility for understanding the evolution and impacts of
SAPS as a multi-dimensional, global-scale phenomenon. Recent advances in
observational techniques have fundamentally altered the research landscape. The
construction of a mid-latitude chain of SuperDARN radars in North America has
made possible simultaneous (~1 min) views of SAPS plasma flows and electric
fields across many hours of MLT while the expansion of the network of Global
Positioning System (GPS) receivers has made possible continental-scale mapping
of TEC on similar time scales. Initial comparisons indicate that the SAPS
observed by the radars are seated in an enhanced trough-like density feature
that is mapped by TEC. This work will lead to the development of a
phenomenological model of SAPS that is suitable for testing theoretical ideas
and the development of storm-time ionospheric models, the dissemination of
global-scale information on recent SAPS events to the wider community, the
increased application of the GPS TEC database to scientific research, and the
instruction of scientists on the use of these data. In addition, a graduate
student at Virginia Tech will be trained in the new experimental techniques and
in the merging of data from the SuperDARN radars, GPS, and incoherent scatter
radar.