* 1243524
* PIRE: Mapping Evolutionary Process in the Face of Climate Change: An Integrated Approach to Education and Conservation Prioritization in Central Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Thomas Smith, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2019
* USD 4,950,000.00

The overarching research goal of this project is to develop an integrated
framework for conserving Central African biodiversity under climate change that
is both evolutionarily-informed and grounded in the socioeconomic constraints of
the region. Central African rainforests represent one of the most important
centers of biological diversity in the world. While efforts have been made to
prioritize regions for protection, habitat loss continues at an alarming rate
severely limiting the ability of species to respond to climate change. This
project unites researchers and students from the U.S., Cameroon, Gabon, United
Kingdom, Germany, France and the Netherlands around an innovative research
program that seeks to identify meaningful conservation measures to mitigate the
effects of habitat loss and climate change. The international team will use
multi-disciplinary approaches to: 1) map environmentally-associated genomic and
phenotypic variation in a broad range of species and assess how this overlaps
with patterns of species richness and protected areas; 2) evaluate how
evolutionary adaptation, phenotypic plasticity and landscape connectivity might
mediate future threats; and 3) develop an integrated prioritization scheme that
ranks candidate areas for protection on their evolutionary potential,
connectivity, estimated socioeconomic costs, degree of threat and cultural
value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a broad range of partnerships
between U.S., European and African universities, non-governmental organization
and governmental agencies. Planned educational activities will promote
scientific collaboration and exchange between partners through: 1) undergraduate
and graduate educational programs that will partner U.S. and African students
and provide cutting-edge training in the biological, environmental and social
sciences; 2) annual professional development workshops for early career U.S. and
African scientists and advanced graduate students; 3) region-wide research
symposia and scientific exchange; 4) bilingual distance-learning programs; and
5) outreach to decision makers through policy workshops. This integrative
program aligns well with NSF's Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) program objectives in developing a workforce of globally
engaged young investigators whose coordinated efforts will focus on
sustainability science and education. These joint international research and
educational efforts will enhance existing collaborations and establish new
partnerships that will build a foundation for lasting conservation and
sustainability in Central Africa. The project is funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE).