* 1243019
* CEDAR:   Wave Coupling and its Role in the Momentum and Energy Budget of the Middle Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jian Du, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 198,378.00

The goal of this project is to better understand wave coupling mechanisms and
their role in the dynamics of the Earth's middle atmosphere. The investigators
will examine the tidal/planetary wave, tidal/gravity wave and planetary/gravity
wave couplings in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere (MLT) region of the
atmosphere by employing data from a complementary general circulation model, the
extended Canadian Middle Atmospheric Model (CMAM). They will use modeled data
(including temperature, winds, gravity wave forcing) over an annual cycle from
the extended CMAM, a full, three-dimensional, self-consistent, and spectral
general circulation model from the Earth's surface to about 210 km, to study the
physical mechanisms of the interaction processes in tidal/planetary wave and
tidal/gravity wave and their role in the momentum budget of the atmospheric
tides. They will also employ the one-year modeled data from the extended CMAM
(such as winds, geopotential height, and gravity wave forcing) to study the
possible consequence of the planetary/gravity wave coupling - generation of
large-scale planetary waves in the upper mesosphere and lower thermosphere
region of the Earth's atmosphere. Further understanding of the upward
propagation and latitudinal-propagation of the planetary waves in the upper
mesosphere and lower thermosphere will be also achieved. The study will lead to
a better understanding of the processes that govern the coupling, energetics and
dynamics of the middle and upper atmosphere. The project also addresses the
complexity of nonlinearity, a crucial element that needs to be understood within
the space atmosphere interaction region (SAIR) in order to better predict 'space
weather'. Furthermore, the work is highly relevant to the efforts of the
international Climate and Weather of the Sun-Earth System (CAWSES) research
community. The project supports efforts to expand atmospheric dynamics research
in Kentucky through support of a graduate research assistant.