* 1243311
* EAGER: Iron-sulfide based Molecular-wires for Enhancing Charge Transport of Enzymatic Electrode Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Sandun Fernando, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 62,000.00

1243311&lt;br/&gt;Fernando&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall effectiveness of enzyme-based electrochemical
devices such as biosensors and fuel cells are heavily dependent on the ability
of the molecules that attach enzymes to the electrode to successfully harvest
and transport charges from the outer oxidizing point (enzyme active-site) to the
inner electrode surface. Current technology uses a series of ancillary molecules
(with the correct prosthetic groups) to tether the essential electron mediator
and the enzyme complex on to the surface of an electrode. Unfortunately, the
inherently low conductivity of presently known organic tethering molecules makes
the electron transport process highly constrained; therefore, contributing to
fuel cells with low power density and sensors with low sensitivity. The lack of
an effective molecular wiring system that can allow unimpeded charge transport
is a significant problem and hinders harnessing the tremendous potential
bioelectronics devices have to offer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this proposal is to evaluate whether it is possible to replace the current
complex wiring&lt;br/&gt;system with a single molecule that has the ability to
mediate electron shuttling between the coenzyme and a metal surface, and that
has the correct prosthetic groups to latch simultaneously onto the metal surface
and the enzyme complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by the natural electron
transport mechanism that occurs in the mitochondrial surface, we hypothesize
that the glucose dehydrogenase-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (GDH-NAD)
apoenzymecoenzyme system could be directly attached onto a gold electrode using
synthetic iron-sulfur [Fe-S] complexes. Iron-sulfur complexes are well known to
transport electrons generated by glucose oxidation in eukaryotic cells. The
rationale is that the thiol groups of the [Fe-S] complex would attach onto the
gold surface via covalent linkages while iron will coordinate with heterocyclic
nitrogen atoms in imidazolediazine moieties of NAD attaching the apoenzyme-
coenzyme complex on to the electrode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis will
be tested via the following Specific Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Evaluate the effectiveness of tethering GDH-NAD+ complex onto a gold electrode
via [Fe-S]&lt;br/&gt;surrogates. This will be done by synthesizing simple forms
of [Fe-S] complexes, evaluating the&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness of binding the S end
onto the Au electrode and the Fe end to the NAD via&lt;br/&gt;quartz crystal
microbalance (QCM) studies, and elucidating the current-voltage (CV)
behavior&lt;br/&gt;of a developed electrode via potentiometric and current
sensing atomic force microscopy&lt;br/&gt;(CS-AFM)
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Elucidate electrochemical phenomena occurring
at the electrode surface in the presence of the&lt;br/&gt;fuel oxidant. The
electrochemical response of the novel simplified electrode will be compared with
the&lt;br/&gt;conventionally wired electrode in the presence of glucose. The
parameters studied will&lt;br/&gt;include CV response and fuel-
consumption/electrode kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts and the
Appropriateness of the Project for EAGER Funding:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is high-risk since direct attachment of NAD to a metal surface
via a surrogate&lt;br/&gt;known to act as a redox mediator, to the best of our
knowledge, has never been attempted before. If&lt;br/&gt;successful, the
research will provide a transformative impact on the bioelectronics area by
alleviating one&lt;br/&gt;of the most intricate bottlenecks impeding development
of effective bio-electronic devices, i.e.,&lt;br/&gt;constrained charge
transport. Moreover, if successful, this research will lay the foundation for
mimicking&lt;br/&gt;the first step of the electron transport chain which in turn
may take us a step closer to developing a&lt;br/&gt;synthetic version of the
most effective power plant known ?mitochondria!&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A high-risk
proposition of this nature will not fit into a regular proposal due to lack of
preliminary data.&lt;br/&gt;However, a potentially high-payoff project of this
caliber is a ?good fit? for an EAGER