* 1243225
* Collaborative Proposal:  Polar Experiment Network for Geospace Upper-atmosphere Investigations -- PENGUIn: Interhemispheric Investigations along the 40 degree Magnetic Meridian
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Geoffrey Crowley, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2016
* USD 114,932.00

The overarching goal of this award is to study, together with the other
coordinated PENGUIn projects, the multi-scale, complex global solar wind-
magnetosphere-ionosphere electrodynamic natural system that can impact a variety
of human technological systems in space and on the ground. To forecast and thus
mitigate that impact, it is necessary to develop accurate physical models of the
Sun-Earth system, which is a major goal of the National Space Weather Program.
This goal is hampered, however, by the lack of sufficient data to validate
global models, particularly in the Southern hemisphere. Therefore, deploying
closely-spaced chain of geophysical instruments in the Antarctic makes possible
geomagnetically conjugate multi-instrument studies utilizing data with high
temporal and spatial resolution from both the Southern and Northern hemispheres.
Important aspects of this investigation include (1) the utilization of a
collaborative federation of space research instrument operators in both polar
regions to improve spatial coverage and access to global data sets, (2) the
deployment of autonomous low-power instrument systems along the 40 degree
geomagnetic meridian in the Antarctic to improve the spatial distribution of the
federated instrument arrays, and (3) near real-time access to the remote
Antarctic station measurements through satellite telemetry. The developed
technology could be used to support measurement programs in other geophysical
disciplines. The project's data are important to several major research
initiatives of national importance, including the NSF's GEM and CEDAR programs,
the NASA's "Living With a Star" and THEMIS satellite programs, as well as the
National Space Weather Program. The data sets will be made available to
scientists worldwide via the World Wide Web access while stored in the PENGUIn
program and THEMIS satellite databases. The project will train graduate students
and post-docs with the development and operation of the deployed instruments, as
well as with space weather science investigations. Use of these data to validate
space weather models can provide benefit to society as a whole as it aides to
protect various navigation, communications, and defense technologies from severe
space weather events.