* 1243377
* Support for International Ocean Science Activities Through the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edward Urban, Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,562,194.00

Continuing support is provided for the international oceanographic activities of
the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) that are relevant to U.S.
interests in marine sciences and the Division of Ocean Sciences. Support of
these international activities through SCOR began in 1987. The SCOR provides an
international, interdisciplinary, non-governmental focus for ocean research and
makes it possible for national ocean science communities to (1) participate in
international research projects, (2) identify important ocean science issues and
create working groups to address the issues, and (3) participate in capacity-
building activities (40% of SCOR national committees are based in developing
countries). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is requested for partial support of
the Scientific Steering Committees (SSCs) of the Surface Ocean ? Lower
Atmosphere Study (SOLAS), the Global Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal
Blooms (GEOHAB) program, the Integrated Marine Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem
Research (IMBER) project, the International Ocean Carbon Coordination Project
(IOCCP), Joint group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine
Environmental Protection (GESAMP), and the GEOTRACES project. These activities
also are supported by other international and national
sponsors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These major
programs have origins in US and have turned to SCOR to provide a forum for
international planning and coordination. SCOR's impact has and will continue to
be evident in the standardization of measurement protocols, sharing of data,
coordination of ship time, and the enlargement of field studies which would be
impossible without international coordination.