* 1243082
* INSPIRE:   Mimicking the Functional Complexity of Biology with Man-Made Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 999,904.00

This CREATIV award is partially funded by the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure
and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences; the Physics of Living Systems Program
in the Division of Physics and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences;
and the Bioengineering and Engineering Healthcare Cluster in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems in the Directorate
of Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CREATIV project is
to organize functional components into devices or interfaces that interrogate
and control biological systems. Biology performs very complex processes using
linear heteropolymers that are made by hooking together a relatively small set
of monomers in a particular order. This rather digital approach to creating
chemical function can, in principle, be applied to the development of molecular
scale devices of our own creation. However, thus far, libraries of molecules
that cannot be individually assayed or computationally designed have been used.
In addition, the ability to organize functional components into such devices or
to create structured molecular interfaces has been quite primitive. Recently,
however, a number of interdisciplinary technologies have come together which
promise to provide truly new approaches to creating chemical complexity and
molecular function that rivals that of biology. Methods have been developed to
specifically design, fabricate, and interrogate millions of different molecules
in ordered libraries. In addition, functional elements can be incorporated into
molecular-scale devices with nanometer accuracy or interfaced directly with
micro-electronics, allowing both interrogation and control of complex chemical
and biological systems. Here, the first step towards capitalizing on the
combined power of these capabilities is proposed. Initially an ordered library
of multivalent synthetic ligands on a surface that has a molecular recognition
capacity approaching that of the mammalian immune system will be created. This
library will then be used to enhance three research efforts; organizing and
optimizing multienzyme reaction pathways using DNA nanostructures; interfacing
redox proteins with electrodes using the bacterial photosynthetic reaction
center as a model; and finally identifying eukaryotic cell types and controlling
their gene expression patterns and growth/differentiation characteristics via
specific molecular interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of
technologies and concepts in computational design, high throughput molecular
synthesis, high throughput detailed chemical analysis, and electronic
integration has the potential to create completely artificial systems with the
complexity and diverse functionality of biological systems, but with the
accessible control mechanisms that interface seamlessly with the electronic
world. The project depends on collaboration among computational, synthetic,
electronic and biological regulation capabilities. This project will expose
junior scientists to the challenges of interdisciplinary research, and will
allow them to be involved at the creation of conceptual frameworks and initial
tools that could lead to highly efficient multi-enzyme pathways, rapid systems
for personalized drug development, comprehensive diagnostics, energy harvesting,
and a new type of biohybrid circuitry that interconverts chemical and electronic
information.