* 1243129
* CEDAR:   The Climatology and Causal Mechanisms of the Early Morning Upward Plasma Drift at Equatorial Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Tzu-Wei Fang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 04/30/2019
* USD 256,176.00

The objective of this study is to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms
of equatorial electrodynamics in the pre-sunrise ionosphere. Strong upward
plasma drifts have been observed by satellites and radars in the early morning
hours at equatorial latitudes during the recent solar minimum. The investigators
will analyze measurements from the C/NOFS satellite and the Jicamarca radar to
infer the morphology (local time, longitudinal, and seasonal variations) of the
early morning vertical drift. Comprehensive physical models, the Whole
Atmosphere Model (WAM), the Global Ionosphere and Plasmasphere model (GIP) and
the Thermosphere-Ionosphere-Mesosphere Electrodynamic General Circulation Model
(TIME-GCM) will be used to interpret the observations and to investigate the
causal mechanisms of the early morning upward drift. The influence of the early
morning upward drift on the thermosphere and ionosphere near dawn and in the
daytime will also be estimated. The study combines observations, theory and
modeling to achieve a better understanding of the dynamics of the upper
atmosphere and the physical processes leading to the early morning upward
drifts. The results will help improve the prediction of ionospheric
irregularities, which cause GPS scintillation and radio communication outages in
the equatorial ionosphere.