* 1243539
* Advancing Earth Dam and Levee Sustainability through Monitoring Science and Condition Assessment
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Michael Mooney, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 3,857,960.00

In this project, researchers from Colorado School of Mines, Mississippi State
University and the University of Mississippi are collaborating with Dutch and
French researchers to advance education and research in the sustainability of
earth dams and levees (EDLs). This international partnership will pursue
research and education on multi-scale monitoring science to enable a sustainable
future for the vast worldwide array of earth dams and levees. EDLs are critical
infrastructure that provides flood protection, fresh water storage and renewable
energy to developed and developing nations. The science and engineering
community knows relatively little about: (1) the internal condition of EDLs, (2)
their interaction with the natural environment, and (3) how they will perform
with climate change. This partnership aims to improve understanding in these 3
areas through an integrated social-environmental-economic-technical approach to
EDL sustainability research and education. The research is broadly
interdisciplinary (8 disciplines) and will advance understanding in the
following areas: (1) passive geophysical imaging to noninvasively assess
conditions within EDLs, including internal erosion; (2) airborne and space borne
remote sensing for assessing important surface features of EDLs and surrounding
landscape; (3) characterization of levee interaction with surrounding natural
environment, including the benefit of natural landscapes; (4) EDL health
assessment, early warning of damage and prediction of performance due to climate
change; (5) social, economic and policy approaches to EDLs and risk tolerance
across countries and cultures; (6) cost-benefit of incorporating monitoring
systems into EDLs and how it influences policy on risk tolerance. The research
and education plan immerses participating graduate students in EDL
sustainability education through rich interactions with European researchers,
study abroad and research-intensive visits to these countries, sustainability
coursework and interdisciplinary seminar. Graduate students will pursue a minor
in EDL sustainability and will devote a chapter of their thesis/dissertation
towards economic and societal aspects of EDL sustainability. The benefits of the
proposed research are potentially very broad. EDL sustainability is a global
issue that affects practically everyone through flood protection, clean water
supply and hydropower. The project is funded by NSF's Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) through the PIRE.