* 1243801
* A Workshop to address the Grand Challenge:  How Organisms Walk the Tightrope Between Stability and Change?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Dianna Padilla, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 07/31/2016
* USD 134,008.00

Understanding the complexity of living systems and how they work is a major
challenge for biology. At present, we do not understand what properties of
complex living systems allow them to be flexible, and change in response to the
environment, versus those that cannot change without disrupting the whole
system. This is particularly important for organisms that must deal with current
and future climate change. For example, many of the processes that are essential
for animals to function are temperature dependent. Even small changes in
temperature could disrupt development or functioning of individuals, thereby
affecting species and systems on which humans depend. Some organisms
successfully adapt to environmental change, while others cannot and go extinct.
This project will support an important workshop that will be held in November
2012 in Arlington, Virginia. The goals of this workshop are to address this
grand challenge question, to identify key research and information needs, and
facilitate the collaborations that will be needed to make progress addressing
this question. This workshop will bring together scientists from very wide
ranging fields who do not normally interact so that they can bring the expertise
of their fields to others, build bridges and develop a common language. This
effort will allow knowledge and solutions to be transferred, and identify key
areas where we need new information that will form the basis of new research
that is needed to address these critical questions. To make sure that the best
scientists from a broad range of fields are included, there will be a steering
committee that will meet in August 2012 in Cold Spring Harbor, NY to select
workshop participants, set the specific agenda of the workshop, and communicate
with participants beforehand so that they come to the workshop fully prepared
for the work at hand. The broader impacts of this workshop include the central
focus on this research question that has been identified as a Grand Challenge in
Organismal Biology. The workshop and the steering committee will include a
diversity of scientists including those from small and large institutions,
members of groups underrepresented in the sciences, and a diversity of research
areas. This workshop will be used to develop a research agenda to address this
important question facing organismal biologists in the 21st century.