* 1244373
* S(0) Globule Metabolism in Chlorobaculum tepidum: Interdisciplinary Studies of a Novel Microbe Mineral Interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Thomas Hanson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 02/28/2017
* USD 913,397.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Elemental sulfur, S(0), is a common chemical
species involved in a wide range of environmental and industrial reactions. S(0)
is a non-toxic, relatively inert, immobile solid under most conditions. It is
the "Yellow" in Yellowstone National Park, it is applied as a slow release
fertilizer in agriculture, and it is the desired end product for industrial
processes that remove toxic hydrogen sulfide from waste. The cycling of S(0) is
driven by microbial activity. Broadly this project seeks to provide new insights
into microbe-mineral interactions by addressing the following question:How does
a single microbe both synthesize and degrade an insoluble inorganic compound?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model system for this project is the phototrophic
green sulfur bacterium Chlorobaculum tepidum. While some microbes either form or
consume extracellular minerals, Cba. tepidum is unusual as it both forms S(0)
from hydrogen sulfide and consumes S(0) when hydrogen sulfide is not present.
Tools of nanoscale imaging, analytical chemistry and molecular biology will be
applied to identify how Cba. tepidum interacts with S(0) during its formation
and consumption. The project seeks to identify specific gene products required
for both S(0) formation and consumption. It will then address how these gene
products tailor both Cba. tepidum and S(0) surfaces for productive interaction.
The availability of energy and nutrients are critical parameters that define
microbial niches and the success of microbial communities in a given
environment. The vast majority of cultured microbes obtain energy and nutrients
from compounds soluble in aqueous media. However, many resources are bound as
insoluble minerals, like S(0). The understanding of mechanisms for cellular
interactions with insoluble minerals developed in this project will provide an
instructive comparison to other microbe-mineral systems (i.e. Fe/Mn oxidizing
and reducing bacteria) and allow us to discriminate between unique and universal
features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The study of microbe-
mineral interactions provides an excellent opportunity to train students and
junior scientists at the interface of chemistry, biology, and environmental
science. The project will provide interdisciplinary training for at least two
Ph.D. students, one postdoctoral scholar and three undergraduates over the
duration of the project. This includes technical training in bacterial molecular
genetics, "omics" techniques, anaerobic culturing, and nanoscale imaging and
elemental analysis techniques. The participation of under-represented groups
will be facilitated by the PI's role as a Co-PI on an IGERT (DGE-1144726) that
is establishing undergraduate-to-graduate bridge programs with local minority
serving institutions. Results and information generated by this project will be
disseminated to the public through the University of Delaware's Coast Day, which
attracts &gt;10,000 visitors each year, lifelong learning seminars, science
caf√©s, and public group visits to the Delaware Biotechnology Institute. The goal
of these public interactions is to impart the critical role of environmental
microbes as beneficial biogeochemical engines and not solely agents of disease.
K-12 educators will specifically be targeted by PI and Co-PI participation in
"in service day" training seminars.