* 1244593
* BioMaPS: Experimental and Computational Studies of Microtubule Dynamics and Regulation by Binding Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Mark Alber, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2019
* USD 897,000.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use coordinated
experiment and computational modeling to answer fundamental questions about the
system-level behavior of the microtubule cytoskeleton. Microtubules (MTs) are
the primary components of crucial subcellular structures including the mitotic
spindle, which segregates the chromosomes, and the intracellular transport
network, which organizes the cytoplasm. Understanding how MT-based structures
assemble, are maintained, and drive cell organization is a central problem in
cell biology. MTs exhibit a surprising behavior known as dynamic instability --
individual MT fibers transition randomly between extended phases of growth and
depolymerization. The long-term goal of this project is to establish an
understanding of DI and its regulation by MT binding proteins by coupling
experiment with iterative multi-scale modeling. The specific goals of this
research are: 1) Obtain an understanding of, and seek to establish, a set of
general principles for how MT binding proteins cooperate to modulate MT dynamics
and polymer mass using MT plus-end tracking proteins as a model; 2) Define the
relationship between the behavior of the bulk MT polymer and that of individual
MTs. A key goal is to use modeling approaches to investigate and refine
classical theories of equilibrium polymers that define MT dynamics. While the
focus is on MTs, the improved understanding should be relevant to other
cytoskeletal polymers; 3) Develop freely disseminated software packages with
associated tools and instructional electronic tutorials to help students and
researchers gain an intuitive understanding of dynamic MT systems using
computational models of MT assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;This projects combined modeling and experimental effort will
help students and researchers at all levels gain an intuitive understanding of
dynamic MT systems. This understanding is important for applications ranging
from nanotechnology (the mitotic spindle is a striking example of a self-
organized nanotechnological system) to controlling agricultural pests (some
prominent antiparasitic and antifungal compounds are directed at MTs). The PIs
will integrate the software tools developed as part of this project into their
classes. The project will also educate graduate and undergraduate students who
will benefit from interdisciplinary training in biology and computational
modeling. Projects related to this research will be incorporated in The Research
Experience for Teachers at Notre Dame program as well as into programs promoting
graduate and doctoral studies for minority students.