* 1244100
* Investigating the Role of Insulators in linking Gene Regulation and Nuclear Organization
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Craig Hart, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2018
* USD 925,809.00

Intellectual merit: Chromosome organization and chromatin dynamics play
important roles in nuclear processes such as gene regulation. However,
understanding of most mechanisms that link nuclear organization to function
remains rudimentary. Chromatin domain insulators (also called boundary elements)
might link gene regulation to nuclear organization. Insulators are thought to
partition chromosomes into functionally independent domains, preventing cross-
talk so that genes in adjacent domains can be differentially regulated. But
little is known about molecular mechanisms by which insulators function. The
goal of this research project is to gain insight into molecular mechanisms by
focusing on a particular insulator-binding protein in Drosophila melanogaster
(fruit flies), the Boundary Element-Associated Factor, BEAF. Various approaches
will be used to identify important domains in BEAF, and to identify proteins
that interact with BEAF. The relationship of these proteins to BEAF will then be
characterized. Previous results from the laboratory of the PI found that BEAF
usually binds adjacent to promoters and plays a role in keeping the associated
promoters active. Experiments will be performed to determine if promoter
activity correlates with BEAF-dependent insulator activity, and to determine if
interacting proteins affect BEAF-associated promoter activity. Some models of
insulator function hypothesize that insulators are involved in nuclear
organization by mediating the formation of chromatin loops. There is evidence
that BEAF mediates chromatin loop formation. To explore this in more depth,
networks of looping interactions will be determined for six BEAF binding regions
using circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) assays with high throughput
DNA sequencing. The proportion of loop partners that are insulators, promoters,
enhancers, or other sequences will be determined, as will the distances over
which looping occurs. Results will be validated by two-color fluorescence in
situ hybridization and chromosome conformation capture (3C) assays.
Identification of interaction partners of BEAF and the role of BEAF and these
proteins in promoter activity will provide insight into molecular mechanisms of
insulator function. The looping experiments address the role of insulators in
nuclear organization. Together, these experiments will provide insight into the
relationship between nuclear organization and gene regulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: An integral goal of research in the lab
of the PI is to train the next generation of scientists. Participants in this
research project will include both graduate and undergraduate students,
including members of traditionally underrepresented groups. At least two
undergraduates usually work in the lab each semester and in the summer. They
participate in cloning, PCR (mutagenesis, sequencing, inverse PCR to localize
transgene insertion sites), fly genetics, microscopy, and protein biochemistry.
Most have been females, minorities or both. Several have gone on to careers in
medicine or life sciences research. The PI has also served as a local Science
Fair judge, mentored two high school science fair projects, and is recruiting
another high school student. One project won second place in its category in
statewide competition. PhD students and associated undergraduates will be
trained during this project. The research will enhance teaching by the PI of
junior and senior level molecular cell biology courses, and of a graduate
seminar course entitled Chromatin, Nuclear Organization and Gene Expression
developed by the PI based on his research expertise. Research results will be
disseminated at conferences and by publication. The PI will continue to make
reagents developed in his laboratory, such as fly stocks, available to the
research community. Thus this research will have significant scientific and
educational impacts.