* 1244303
* Molecular Genetic Dissection of Calcium Signaling in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Caren Chang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2018
* USD 886,989.00

Intellectual Merit: Cellular calcium mediates diverse processes in both animal
and plant cells, including gene expression, cell proliferation, cell division,
metabolism, and cell movement. Stomata are microscopic pores each formed by a
pair of guard cells that shrink and swell to regulate respiration. Calcium
channels in the plasma membrane of these specialized cells play a crucial role
in allowing an increase of cytosolic Ca2+, which causes these pores to close
thus limiting water loss by the plant. Patterns of cytosolic Ca2+ dynamics
encode information that impacts stomatal behavior and controls the specificity
and efficiency of gene expression; however, the molecular identity of these Ca2+
channels in plants remains elusive. In addition, molecular mechanisms by which
these Ca2+ patterns regulate cellular responses, including gene expression, have
yet to be identified. Using Arabidopsis guard cells as a model system, the aim
of this project is to investigate how a cellular Ca2+ signal is transduced by
molecular components at the single-cell level. In this project, a
multidisciplinary approach that includes computational modeling and molecular
genetic analysis, will be used to characterize a family of putative
Ca2+-permeable channel proteins in the plasma membrane and to analyze how
cytosolic Ca2+ dynamics modulates gene expression in guard cells and contributes
to the regulation of stomatal behavior. The results of this research will reveal
novel molecular components of cellular Ca2+ signaling and provide new insights
into Ca2+ dynamics-controlled cellular responses in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Fresh water scarcity is one of the
major global problems this century, and 65% of global fresh water is used for
agriculture. Plants lose over 95% of their water via transpiration through
stomatal pores in the leaf surface. Since cellular calcium plays a key role in
the regulation of stomatal behavior, results and knowledge arising from the
proposed research will contribute to protecting the environment and to improving
agricultural productivity. Two postdoctoral fellows, two graduate students and
one or more undergraduate students will participate in this project. The PI and
co-PI will provide extensive mentoring to prepare postdoctoral associates for
their future careers. The PI and co-PI will continue making a commitment to
broadening the participation of students from underrepresented groups. The PI
and co-PI will give presentations and lectures to the public to stimulate
general interest in science and science education. In collaboration with
colleagues, the PI plans to offer an open house to local and state governmental
officials to provide a non-technical explanation of our research and give these
policymakers an opportunity to see first hand tax dollars at work.