* 1244207
* Modeling protein-membrane interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Themis Lazaridis, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2018
* USD 988,395.00

The interaction of peptides and proteins with lipid membranes is key to many
biological processes. Over the past years the PI and his group have developed an
implicit membrane model (IMM1) that describes protein-membrane interactions
through a solvation free energy term. The model accounts for the effects of
surface, transmembrane, and dipole potential and can also model pores of
different shapes, making it the most comprehensive model of its kind. The model
has been used to address a number of interesting biological problems, including
the determination and analysis of membrane-bound protein structures,
transmembrane helix association, and membrane insertion of toxins. In this
project, this model will be extended in a number of directions. An improved
treatment of the lipid headgroup region will yield more accurate results for
interfacial binding. Incorporating lateral pressure effects will allow
accounting for the effects of lipid composition. Extending the model to curved
membranes will allow the study of the mechanism of membrane curvature sensing
and generation, which are key in processes like endocytosis or protein sorting.
In addition, implicit solvation models for detergents will be developed, aiming
to obtain structural information on detergent-peptide complexes, characterize
the SDS-denatured state, and study the effect of lipid environment on peptide
conformation. At the same time, these methods will be applied to important
biological problems, including the structure of the hemagglutinin fusion peptide
in bilayers, in micelles, and in implicitly modeled fusion stalks, the
conformation of รก-synuclein in membranes of different curvature, and the open
channel state of colicins. Collaborations with experimental groups will provide
synergy between theory and experiment.

This research will be carried out at an institution where the majority of the
students belong to underrepresented groups and several programs support the
participation of undergraduates in research. Several minority students at the
high school, undergraduate, or graduate level have participated so far in the
research carried out in this lab. This project will train Ph.D. students in the
Molecular Biophysics subdiscipline of the Chemistry and Biochemistry doctoral
programs at the City University of New York. The methods developed in this lab
are available to the research community through the CHARMM program and can be
used by theoreticians and experimentalists in academia and industry to address
important biological problems, such as membrane protein structure prediction or
understanding the mechanism of action of membrane proteins. This project is
jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in
the Physics Division.