* 1244885
* CIF: Travel Grant for the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, July 1 to 6, 2012
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Lizhong Zheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

The IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) is the biggest
annual conference of the information theory society. It has been held
continuously since 1954. It covers almost all the topics related to the studies
on information theory, including coding, compression, statistics, complexity,
inference, cryptography, as well as many innovative directions such as
networking, quantum computing, and other emerging applications of information
theory. It is considered the highest standard of IEEE conferences. It has been
supported by US Funding Agencies, especially NSF, to facilitate the
participation by students and young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year,
ISIT will be held at Cambridge, Massachusetts, on the campus of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The location is chosen not only
because it is one of the birth places of information theory, but also an on-
campus conference is aimed at reducing the travel costs of attendees. We expect
the size of the conference to be larger than in recent years, and thus travel
support is more crucial for this conference. ISIT has a well established method
of allocating the requested travel funds by selecting&lt;br/&gt;the most
meritorious and needy students to present their papers at the symposium. This
year, the travel support is combined with other forms of local arrangement
including the use of MIT dorm rooms, organized child care, etc., to encourage
more student attendance.