* 1244665
* Collaborative Research: Real World Relevant Security Labware for Mobile Threat Analysis and Protection Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Yi Pan, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 60,000.00

While the computing landscape is currently moving towards mobile computing, the
security threats to mobile devices are also growing explosively. The prevalence
of mobile devices and the significant increase of threats to their security has
not been accompanied by sufficient related educational activities. Though the
demand for incorporating mobile security into computing security education is on
the increase nationwide, very few courses have been initiated for teaching
mobile security, and there is a dearth of well-prepared available learning
material providing hands-on experience. To address these national needs, this
project is producing innovative mobile security labware to promote the exposure
of students to these concerns and to provide them with hands-on real world
relevant mobile threat analysis and protection solutions. The labware helps
students to know how a mobile threat and its corresponding protections go into
effect. The students experience mobile security knowledge with mobile devices
and implement protection apps that are workable in practice. The broader impacts
of this project are on the improvements of student learning, educational
resources, faculty collaboration and development at three academic institutions
in the three states Ohio, Georgia and Tennessee, and the influence on faculties
in other institutions. The labware can be integrated into many computer and
information security courses and will be made public and disseminated in
academic community nationwide to benefit a wide range of universities and
colleges that have the need for mobile security education.