* 1244328
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging Matched Administrative Datasets to Improve Educational Practice and Long Run Life Outcomes: Toward Building a National Interdisciplinary Network
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Dodge, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 697,070.00

This proposal intends to develop a national community of researchers that
utilizes large scale, longitudinal educational databases that are linked across
the spectrum of early childhood to college, workplace and other social sets of
data. The research collaborative includes an initial group of scholars in
education research, education policy, anthropology, economics, psychology and
social sciences from Northwestern and Duke University. These researchers are
actively recruiting researchers and educational stakeholders from across the
country, who are working with different educational and other data sets to
improve capacity to link data together in the expanded data repositories that
have been funded by the federal government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
are identifying best practices in the use of data and develop prototypes of
their use. Starting from the Florida and North Carolina longitudinal data sets,
the researchers are developing prototypes of how these data can be combined to
answer pressing educational and social science questions that have heretofore
been unable to be addressed. These prototypes are being developed
collaboratively across the multiple institutions who are participating in the
national community, with Northwestern and Duke serving as the conceptual hubs of
the project. The prototypes inform the two national level meetings at which
scholars and practitioners to share findings and stimulate the development of
such research in other states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expansion of large scale
longitudinal data in education and social sciences has resulted in a demand for
new ways to link together data that has typically remained in silos across
various state agencies. By developing prototypes of how these data sets should
be linked, this research and development is expanding the nature of the
questions that the data can inform. These questions include important policy and
practice concerns that have been problematic in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics education.