* 1244626
* Elucidating the Genetic Basis and Evolutionary Potential of Cross-stress Behavior in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Ilias Tagkopoulos, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2015
* USD 212,000.00

Bacteria that are exposed to a stressful environment are often better protected
when they are then exposed to a second stressor. Understanding of this behavior,
which is also known as cross-stress protection, is limited especially when it
comes to its genetic basis. This project will characterize the genetic basis and
evolutionary potential of cross-stress behavior in the bacterium Escherichia
coli. To elucidate the evolutionary potential of bacteria and the emergence of
cross-stress protection, E. coli will be exposed to three stressors, and
organisms will be identified in which evolution under a first stress has
conferred a fitness advantage (or disadvantage) upon exposure to a second
stress. DNA sequencing will be used to identify genetic changes whose phenotypic
effects will be validated by reversing the mutations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will generate new knowledge
relevant to our understanding of microbial behavior in the agricultural and
biotechnology sectors. The PI will host and train high school students in
microbial evolution and bioinformatics through the UC Davis Biotechnology
program. The PI will advise the UC Davis IGEM team in projects that include
topics in microbial evolution and microbial stress response.