* 1244742
* Collaborative Research: BCC-SBE: Building Communities for Transforming Social Media Research with SOCRATES: SOcial and CRowdsourced AcTivities Extraction System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Yasuaki Sakamoto, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 65,339.00

This project will result in a novel system called SOCRATES that will help
transform social media research for scholars working in diverse fields by
building a community of researchers and practitioners around various issues of
data-intensive research. Social media services such as Twitter and Facebook,
used by millions of people worldwide, expose vast amounts of data about people's
beliefs, ideas, opinions, behaviors, and activities. At the same time, the sheer
scale and volume of the data make them extremely difficult for scholars to study
effectively. SOCRATES will address this issue by incorporating a set of socio-
computational tools that will allow researchers from multiple fields to collect
large-scale social media data; explore and visualize the resulting content
items, and analyze the collected content. A community- and human-centered
approach to developing the new system will ensure that SOCRATES matches
researchers' work practices and mental models, is easy to use, and produces
outcomes that significantly contribute to the researchers' goals, especially in
solving multi-disciplinary problems. Importantly, the SOCRATES system will
employ a social-computational approach--crowdsourcing--to handle some of the
challenges of social media research. Thus, the project will take advantage of
the intelligence of both computers and people to study online social activities.
SOCRATES proposes to use the labor of humans to assist in the collection of data
(e.g., by refining and filtering information collected by an automatic crawler);
to help explore the data and generate insights (e.g., by allowing the public to
view and comment on visualizations of the collected data); and to analyze and
annotate the data (e.g., by creating a controlled environment where coders can
annotate content items with high reliability). As a result, SOCRATES will
provide a first-of-its-kind, end-to-end environment where social media can be
studied effectively, with high validity, and at immense scale.