* 1244300
* Regulation of Sulfur Sensing by Metabolic Flux Partitioning
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Hideki Takahashi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2016
* USD 695,854.00

Intellectual Merit: Sulfur is an essential element for all living organisms. Its
biological significance is highlighted by the presence of sulfur in essential
metabolites and cellular constituents including cysteine, methionine,
glutathione, redox centers, sulfolipids, sulfated polysaccharides, and
phytoalexins. Sulfur nutrition is thus critical for growth of the organisms and
mitigation of diverse stresses. This project aims to elucidate the sulfur
sensing mechanisms controlling the regulatory networks for sulfate acquisition
and utilization pathways which are essential components for plant biomass
production. This project presents a new paradigm of sulfur sensing, which is
associated with metabolic flux partitioning of biosynthesis of APS (adenosine
5'-phosphosulfate) and PAPS (3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate) in two sub-
cellular compartments, plastid and cytosol of plants. The primary objective is
to identify metabolic flux partitioning of APS/PAPS biosynthesis which is
hypothesized as a key switching mechanism for driving transcriptome-wide sulfur
responses and plant biomass production. Research will be focused on finding
causal relationships between plastid-cytosol partitioning of sulfur assimilation
and regulation of sulfur signaling pathways. This project further aims to
identify protein-protein interaction networks of APS/PAPS biosynthetic enzymes
and their accessory proteins associated with control of sulfur sensing. The
long-term goal is to create a quantitative model of sulfur sensing modules in
plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project provides excellent
opportunities for students and early career scientists to learn advanced
techniques in interdisciplinary areas of biochemistry, molecular biology and
omic biology. The education and training activities are based on the frameworks
of partnering programs arranged with collaborators sharing common objectives.
Participants of the NSF-funded "Plant Genomics@MSU" summer program, which is
aimed for training students from under-represented groups, will be accepted in
this project as trainees to have research experience in the laboratory.
Furthermore, this project will strengthen international collaboration with the
EU-funded research training program (Marie Curie Initial Training Network (ITN)
"Biochemical and Genetic Dissection of Control of Plant Nutrition (BIONUT)") to
obtain expertise in metabolic flux analysis and modeling. This project addresses
fundamental questions of nutrient sensing mechanisms and regulation. Discovery
of novel components of APS/PAPS biosynthetic enzymes and regulatory coordination
of downstream networks will provide novel insights into nutrient sensing
mechanisms. The potential link between the sulfur sensing mechanism and biomass
production will provide new avenues towards the engineering of plant biomass.