* 1244889
* Increasing Undergraduate Cell Biology Literacy through Writing-to-Learn Activities Administered through On-line Educational Platforms
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Meena Balgopal, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* julio soto
* 04/30/2016
* USD 199,163.00

In order to increase the scientific literacy skills of undergraduate students
enrolled in introductory cell or general biology courses, Colorado State
University (a research-intensive university), Minnesota State University
Moorhead (a 4-year teaching university), and White Earth Tribal &amp; Community
College (a 2-year college) are integrating writing-to-learn (WTL) activities
into these courses at their respective institutions. In the writing-to-learn
model students are assigned the task of writing three related essays in response
to reading assignments on socially relevant topics. Two different electronic
platforms (Writing@CSU and Electronic Blackboard) are being used to support the
writing activities. The WTL model was originally developed through CCLI project
0930978, tested in small (10-30 students) college courses and found to be
successful, as measured by analysis of student writing, in increasing students'
scientific literacy and tendency to draw on scientific data when faced with STEM
related challenges. The goals of the current project are to determine if and
how: 1) WTL activities in cell biology courses help students achieve greater
science literacy, as well as, increased science content knowledge and 2) the
greater flexibility and leveraging potential offered by the use of two
accessible Online learning platforms makes it easier for faculty to introduce
STEM-related writing activities such as WTL into their courses by helping
overcome the management and assessment challenges that arise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: By documenting the effect of WTL
activities in large (150+ students) cell and general biology courses this study
will add to the knowledge base concerning the development of higher order
thinking skills, such as problem-solving and decision-making, as well as on
student learning outcomes and decision-making skills in large foundational
biology courses. The study is also exploring how faculty members can efficiently
implement WTL activities and assess their efficacy using existing online
educational platforms. Concept inventories, developed and tested at Colorado
State University are being used to determine the impact of the instructional
intervention on overall knowledge gains in such subjects as molecular chemistry,
cellular metabolism, and protein synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project involves a total of over 700 undergraduates, about thirty
of them Native American students at the tribal college involved, from three very
diverse institutions. Both of the universities involved have initiatives to
increase the number of courses with writing components. Colorado State
University houses Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC), which is visited over a
million times a year by users from around the U.S. The Editor of this website
heads the Advisory Board and helps disseminate project findings and products
(writing prompts, rubrics, and modified concept inventory assessment tools)
through this Online resource. Findings are being disseminated through university
Professional Development institutes, journal articles, conference presentations,
and an instructional wiki linked to the WAC Clearinghouse Website.