* 1244695
* Collaborative Research:  Automatically Annotated Repository of Digital Video and Audio Resources Community  (AARDVARC)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Douglas Whalen, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 86,253.00

Audio and video data from understudied languages is useful to linguists,
anthropologists, educators, and computer scientists interested in visual action
extraction, speech technology or software localization. Terabytes of such data
exist, having been collected in large amounts by documentary linguists since the
advent of easy digital recording via handheld devices. As records of vanishing
languages and cultures, video and audio records are far richer and more
captivating than paper records, but they need to be indexed and transcribed so
that they reach their full potential as research tools. The current project,
AARDVARC (Automatically Annotated Repository of Digital Audio and Video
Resources Community) will address the problem of untranscribed, and therefore
unavailable, documentation of understudied languages by building an
interdisciplinary community of linguists, anthropologists, and computer
scientists to share knowledge and collaborate on the specification of a
repository and suite of tools to facilitate transcription. It will provide for
two workshops and a symposium to design a "take one leave one" repository and to
explore recent advances in speech and video processing that will allow
anthropologists and linguists to break the 'transcription bottleneck' for
language data. Even partial automation will greatly facilitate the work of the
analyst and dramatically increase the amount of transcribed audio and video
available to researchers in multiple disciplines.