* 1244008
* Identifying and Understanding Connections between Photosynthesis and Amino Acid Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Robert Last, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,653,308.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthesis provides food, fuel, and fiber to
humans and other animals. The growing human population and the increasing
worldwide demand for high protein diets and biofuels generate needs for higher
plant productivity and improved nutritional quality in crop plants. To improve
crop yield and nutritional value, it is important to have a better understanding
of how plants utilize carbon from the air and nitrogen from the soil to produce
biomass. In green tissues of plants, photosynthesis and the biosynthesis of many
amino acids both occur in chloroplasts. These processes are linked to each
other, as photosynthesis provides both the carbon and energy for amino acid
biosynthesis, while amino acids are the building blocks for the protein
components of photosynthesis. Despite an awareness of this relationship, large
gaps exist in our understanding of how these important biological processes
interact. The long-term goal of this project is to understand the connections
between photosynthesis and amino acid metabolism. Computational integration of
Arabidopsis thaliana phenotype data (photosynthetic parameters, amino acid and
fatty acid profiles, seed carbon and nitrogen content) of mutants with defects
in chloroplast-targeted nuclear-encoded gene products will be used to generate a
list of candidate genes that can guide us to those connections. The candidate
genes will be experimentally tested for changes in photosynthesis and amino acid
metabolism, and those mutants with robust and interesting phenotypes will then
undergo more focused studies. By increasing our understanding of the complex
interactions between photosynthesis and amino acid metabolism, we will be in a
position to effectuate advantageous changes in both.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will increase our
understanding of the interactions between photosynthesis, carbon metabolism, and
nitrogen metabolism, and these results should inform plant breeding and
biotechnological approaches to crop improvement. The data and outcomes of the
project will be made publicly available via publications and a project website.
In addition to providing year-round training opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students, the project will integrate research and education as
part of established summer Research Experiences for Undergraduate Programs at
Western Michigan University (WMU) and Michigan State University (MSU). The
collaboration between WMU and MSU with respect to the research, education, and
outreach activities will also provide cross-disciplinary, cross-institutional
training and experience to trainees in both laboratories.