* 1244737
* Collaborative Research: SCC-SBE: Research Coordination Network on Leveraging  Computational Social Science for Understanding Virtual Organizations
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Davood Tofighi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2016
* USD 336,824.00

Rapid advances in digitally-enabled communications have given rise to a new
organizational form - the virtual organization. Because of their immense
capacity for flexibility and their ability to draw on diverse expertise across
time and space, the large-scale, cross-boundary collaborations enabled by
virtual organizations have the potential to solve some of the grand challenges
of today's world - those in environmental sustainability, climate change,
disaster response, education, and health care. However, research on
understanding and enabling virtual organizations requires the deep expertise of
many disciplines including computer science, information and decision sciences,
communication, management, and psychology, to name a few. Therefore an integral
next step is to invest in community and infrastructure development that better
fuses the "social" and the "technical" cores of this research enterprise. This
need for greater socio-technical integration is at the heart of a new paradigm
which we call computational social science enabled virtual organizational
research (CSSeVOR).

This research coordination network will increase the interconnections between
scholars across disciplines and catalyze a new community examining virtual
organizations using computational and data-enabled approaches. Big data presents
an enormous opportunity for organizational science, particularly the areas aimed
at understanding human behavior and organizing processes. However, utilizing
such data requires a fundamental transformation within the areas of science
engaged in this problem domain. This project engages a core set of
interdisciplinary scientists representing both the "social" and the "technical"
thinking about virtual organizing, to work collaboratively to build the
scientific network needed to tackle the challenges of utilizing big data in the
organizational sciences, and to set up the necessary conditions for big-data
enabled organizational science research to thrive. The project team will conduct
workshops, research incubators, doctoral consortia, and a conference to build
community and capacity for computational virtual organization research.