* 1244602
* RUI:   Characterization of Porcupine membrane topology and palmitoyl acyltransferase activity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Laura Burrus, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 581,556.00

Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;Proteins often undergo post-translational
modifications that are critical for their function. The covalent attachment of
lipid moieties, such as palmitoyl groups, is one such modification. Proteins can
be acylated on N-terminal residues (N-linked), cysteine residues (S-linked)
and/or serine residues (O-linked). The S-palmitoylation of cytosolic proteins
and the intracellular domains of transmembrane proteins is a reversible process
that regulates protein stability, membrane tethering, membrane trafficking, and
neuronal transmission. The relatively recent discovery that Wnt morphogens are
palmitoylated has raised as many questions as it has answered. For instance, how
does palmitoylation regulate morphogen distribution and activity? And how does
the structure of the enzymes that catalyze this important modification influence
their function? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Porcupine (Porcn), a member of the
membrane bound O-acyl transferase (MBOAT) family, is required for the addition
of O-linked palmitate to a conserved serine in Wnt proteins. Despite the central
role of Porcn in regulating Wnt activity, virtually nothing is known about the
structure or enzymatic function of this enzyme. This lack of biochemical insight
extends to virtually all palmitoyl acyltransferases, in large part, due to the
lack of fast sensitive quantitative assays to measure palmitoylation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to define the
membrane topology of Porcn and to develop and apply a quantitative in vitro
approach to assess the roles of residues known to be critical for Porcn
function. In addition to gaining specific insight about Porcn structure and
function, the project will deliver an assay for acyl transferase activity that
would result in significant advancement in this technology for all protein
palmitoyl acyltransferases. The project will lay the groundwork for future
comparative studies designed to understand the mechanistic differences between
S- and O-acyl transferases as well as the similarities and differences between
DHHC enzymes that control palmitoylation and
MBOATs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;This work also has
important broad impact because the experiments in this project will contribute
to a comprehensive and intellectually challenging scientific training experience
for undergraduates and master's degree students, many of whom enter the lab with
little or no prior research experience. Students (2 undergrads and 2 master's
level students per year) will be trained to develop their critical thinking
skills, presentation skills, and hands-on technical knowledge, benefiting from a
close mentorship relationship with the PI. Involvement in the cutting-edge
primary research of this laboratory will contribute significantly to the career
development of female and underrepresented minority students at different stages
of their careers at San Francisco State University (SFSU), a historically
underrepresented minority (URM)-serving institution. SFSU serves one of the most
culturally diverse student populations in the region with 35% URM and 58% women.