* 1244769
* Workshops on Big Data and Urban Informatics: e-Infrastructure for Social Science Research on Sustainable Urban Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Moira Zellner, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 137,280.00

The project will establish a multi-disciplinary research community to generate
decadal-scale data-intensive research questions on how Big Data can be leveraged
for Urban Informatics. Pervasive sensing, social media, location-aware
technologies and vast numbers of sensors in the urban infrastructure will lead
to massive amounts of Big Data on cities. Urban Informatics is the design and
analysis of Big Data to create the next generation of tools and services for
improved social science research on urban decision-making and citizen
engagement. These tools will enable urban systems of the future to be designed,
planned, managed and used more sustainably, efficiently and
equitably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research community will be organized around
creating an Urban Informatics e-Infrastructure (UIE) for social science
research. The UIE will consist of three components--a Big Data resource, Urban
Informatics Analysis Tools to enable social science research on urban systems
and Emerging Technologies to facilitate the use of the e-infrastructure by
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By interweaving these components from a
multi-disciplinary perspective, data-intensive research on urban modeling, data
mining and knowledge discovery to explore urban dynamics will be stimulated.
Agent-Based Modeling, large-scale simulations and research on unique data
management and multi-sensor sensor fusion that arises with urban Big Data will
be encouraged. Innovations in urban sensing and new directions in community-
based information generation will inspire questions on participatory urban
planning and models of community engagement as well as on sustainable choices
regarding transportation, urban ecology, green infrastructure, land development
and water use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support two workshops on
the topic. The overall goal of the workshops will be to present advances in such
activities and to stimulate discussion on research and applications to be built
using the e-infrastructure.