* 1244355
* Genome Repatterning Underlying the Co-evolution of Diploid Number and Gender Determination in Turtles
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Nicole Valenzuela, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 03/31/2017
* USD 883,878.00

Gender is determined by genetic constitution in most animals (as by sex XX/XY
chromosomes in humans, or ZZ/ZW in birds), and by environmental temperature
(TSD) in others, including turtles. Notably, turtle lineages that underwent a
transition in the gender-determining mechanism show a 20-fold increase in the
rate of evolution of chromosome number, but it is unclear why or how these
traits are associated. This project represents the first step to elucidate the
functional link between these two traits by testing the hypothesis that
chromosomal rearrangements disrupt the location and consequently the regulation
of genes controlling sexual development, which in turn cause the transition
between gender-determining mechanisms among turtles. By combining molecular
cytogenetics, transcriptomics, bioinformatics and phylogenetic analyses, this
project will reconstruct the organization of the ancestral turtle genome;
characterize the chromosomal rearrangements that have taken place among turtles
over 210 million years of turtle evolution; and build mechanistic hypotheses
about the critical elements in the regulatory network of sexual development that
underlie transitions in gender-determining mechanisms in turtles for further
study. This project proposes a novel hypothesis about the relationship of genome
evolution over large spans of time and gender determination, which if true,
could transform our understanding of the mechanism by which gender determination
evolves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The educational
activities of this project will help integrate undergraduate discovery-based
learning and broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in biology by
training students and their mentors; by engaging women and minorities through
outreach activities; and by strengthening the PI's qualifications as role model
for underrepresented groups.