* 1244799
* Investigating the Landscape of Undergraduate Science Literacy
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Sanlyn Buxner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 190,369.00

Intellectual Merit: This project addresses foundational issues in science
literacy of the general public, developing further a survey instrument and
initially using a longitudinal study of undergraduates at the University of
Arizona. The overarching question is: What science content knowledge and
understanding of process should educated adults have and how can science classes
for non-science majors best achieve those goals? The project is refining a
coding scheme for answers to the open-ended question "What does it mean to study
something scientifically?" and combining it with interviews and scientist
responses to the same question, to get a more nuanced measure of student
understanding of the scientific process. As part of this effort, the project is
revising a currently developed instrument to gain insight into where students
get their information about science, conducting interviews to diagnose the
interplay between belief systems and scientific knowledge, and developing an
instrument to assess the relationship between students' science literacy
knowledge, beliefs, and decision-making in their daily lives. All instruments
are research-validated, and the results are being disseminated at national
meetings to both educators and scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Science literacy is a matter of broad concern among scientists,
educators, and many policy-makers in the United States. Preliminary analysis of
over 11,000 undergraduates shows only small gains in performance in the science
knowledge score between incoming freshmen and seniors who graduate having taken
three or more General Education science classes, and surprisingly high levels of
belief in pseudoscience and supernatural phenomena. Current practice is not very
effective in educating graduates who have basic science knowledge and who can
discriminate between science and non-science. By diagnosing what students know
about the process of science, where they get their science information from, and
what role scientific thinking plays in their everyday lives, this project is
tackling important aspects of the science literacy problem. It can also suggest
pedagogical approaches that can be applied beyond the astronomy courses that are
test bed for the proposed research. Success in this arena promises to have the
broader impact of helping prepare graduates for participation in a civic society
that is increasingly dominated by science and technology