* 1244382
* Support for US Participants for Symposium on Methods to Predict the Structural and Mechanical Properties of Dense Granular Media, Graz, Austria, July 9-13, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 13,350.00

1244382&lt;br/&gt;PI: Behringer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will cover
travel-related expenses for US scientists who will present their research, and
interact with other experts, at the mini-symposium entitled, Methods to Predict
the Structural and Mechanical Properties of Dense Granular Media, at the 8th
EUROMECH Solid Mechanics Conference (ESMC 2012) in Graz, Austria (July 9-13,
2012). This mini symposium at ESMC 2012 will strengthen collaborative ties
between researchers from Europe, the U.S. and other regions, who work in the
disciplines above, and who study dense granular materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials can exist in highly fluidized, liquid-
like, or solid-like phases depending on the driving mechanism and intensity.
There has been considerable progress in describing granular gases and dilute
fluids. However, developing reliable descriptions of dense granular materials
(DGM) and the fluid-to-solid or jamming transition remains one of the grand
research challenges in this field. If the community is to understand and
eventually predict the behavior of DGM, we must develop innovative ways to
characterize multi-scale structures, and develop statistical and mathematical
techniques that can relate structural, mechanical, and statistical properties to
imposed macroscopic constraints. The overarching goal of current studies of DGM
is to develop statistical and mathematical models that can be used for
quantitative and predictive description of their structural and mechanical
properties given a spectrum of preparation histories and particle properties.
The mini symposium will facilitate progress towards this goal by enabling
interactions between researchers who might not otherwise have this opportunity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials occur broadly in nature, industrial
applications, and the day-to-day environment. Important applications, involving
trillions of dollars per year in the US alone, range from the handling and
transport of rocks and soils in the oil and mining industries to the processing
of powders and pills in the pharmaceutical industry. Despite their wide-ranging
appearance in industry and nature, our ability to predict their behavior lags
far behind that for more conventional materials such as Newtonian fluids.
Advances in this field would have a major economic impact. In addition, this
proposal will help support travel costs of junior participants, which will help
prepare them for future careers in STEM disciplines. It will also provide
opportunities for women researchers and researchers from under-represented
groups.