* 1244236
* Biochemical and structural studies of gamma-secretase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Iban Ubarretxena-Belandia, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 01/31/2017
* USD 847,300.00

Intellectual Merit. Biological membranes surround all living cells, confine
their internal organelles, and participate in an astounding variety of essential
cellular functions, including extracellular signaling, electrolyte balance and
energy conversion. These membranes are structurally and chemically heterogeneous
environments composed of numerous types of lipids arranged as a continuous
bilayer, in which membrane proteins are either embedded or surface-associated.
The goal of this project is to understand the effect of the lipid bilayer on the
structure and function of the membrane protein gamma-secretase. This protease is
of great importance as it is responsible for activating numerous signaling
molecules involved in the regulation of neuronal function, and its substrate
specificity is thought to vary with the bilayer composition. Using novel assays
the research will study the effect of physical and chemical parameters of the
bilayer on secretase activity. To visualize the structure of the enzyme in a
membrane it will be crystallized in lipid bilayers and analyzed using electron
microscopy. This project constitutes a paradigm shift in membrane protein
research as it moves away from commonly used artificial detergent systems to the
study of membrane proteins in their natural lipid bilayer environment.

Broader impacts. By training scientists in membrane protein research and in the
principles and applications of modern structural biology, this project will
provide a platform for educating the next generation of scientists at the
interface of biophysics, biochemistry and biology. The PI will continue to teach
electron microscopy in a course available to students from all New York City
institutions. Additionally, facilitating and encouraging minority participation
in the sciences through teaching, mentoring and career counseling is a key goal
of this project. This project will recruit students from various backgrounds at
different career stages, through existing programs such as Post Baccalaureate
Research Education Program (PREP), the Summer Undergraduate Research Program
(SURP), and the precollege and collegiate programs of the Center for Excellence
in Youth Education (CEYE). Emphasis will be placed on raising the scientific
literacy of the public by ongoing outreach activities and by hosting one local
high school student every year. This student will be chosen through an ongoing
collaboration with the science faculty at Great Neck South HS.