* 1244108
* Regulation of Diurnal Physiology through Integration of Circadian and Environmental Signals
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Susan Golden, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2016
* USD 687,224.00

Oxygen-producing photosynthetic bacteria, known as cyanobacteria, have many
properties that make them excellent candidates for the production of green fuels
and chemicals. They require few nutrient inputs, can grow in water that is of
poor quality for drinking or farming, and can easily be manipulated through
genetic engineering. The cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 has
already been successfully engineered to produce a number of useful chemicals
such as alcohols and oils. However, first generation strategies to genetically
engineer cyanobacteria resulted in only modest chemical production rates, and
did not consider how these rates would be affected by growing bacteria outdoors
in a day/night cycle. More effective engineering of cyanobacteria for industrial
purposes requires basic research that addresses how these bacteria integrate
information related to conditions in the external environment and timing
programs inside their cells to make decisions on when to run various aspects of
their metabolism. This project will utilize Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 as a
model to address three questions: (1) When Synechococcus transitions from being
in light to darkness, is there a specific signaling pathway that detects this
change and alters the organism's gene expression and metabolism? (2) Does the
internal circadian clock of Synechococcus influence the decision of whether to
use carbon immediately for growth or to store it for later use? and (3) How does
the cell integrate external environmental signals and internal circadian clock
information to subsequently exert control over metabolism? Better understanding
of these signaling networks will both expand basic understanding of how
cyanobacteria control their metabolism and facilitate more effective genetic
engineering efforts that take into account how the bacteria will respond to
modifications and external environmental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
answer basic scientific questions about when and how carbon is utilized and
stored in a model cyanobacterial system; such information has been essential in
the successful engineering of non-photosynthetic bacteria such as Escherichia
coli. In doing so this project will enable the engineering of photosynthetic
microorganisms to produce fuel and industrial chemicals, decreasing dependence
on petroleum for these products. Success in the biofuels arena will improve
environmental sustainability through the development of carbon neutral fuels,
and produce a new domestic fuel source that will strengthen economic and
homeland security. This project will generate genetic tools, strains, and
network map data that will be made available to the biofuels research community.
Further, many of these tools and strains will be of interest to biotechnology
companies for direct commercialization. The project will directly train two
doctoral graduate students and a number of undergraduate students in systems
biology, a growing field with a need for trained personnel. In turn the doctoral
students will utilize knowledge and actual data gleaned from this project as a
teaching tool in a local bioenergy certificate program known as EDGE (Educating
and Developing workers for the Green Economy). Graduates of this program have
actively and successfully contributed to the growing green biotechnology
industry of San Diego.