* 1244297
* Investigating  DNA Mismatch Repair Through Single-Molecule Approaches
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Piotr Marszalek, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 03/31/2017
* USD 660,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;During DNA synthesis in living cells, potential
for erroneous incorporation of nucleobases (e.g. introduction of a mismatch such
as a thymine instead of a cytosine across from a guanine) is as high as 10% per
nucleotide. These pro-mutagenic DNA alterations need to be removed through post-
replication mismatch repair (MMR) systems. Malfunction of MMR has disastrous
consequences. Even though tremendous progress has been made in elucidating DNA
mismatch repair, mainly through biochemical studies, many critically important
details of DNA repair mechanisms remain obscure and controversial, even for
bacterial (E. coli) MMR system, which is the simplest and best characterized.
This is because MMR involves an orchestrated activity of many proteins, which
form transient complexes that are difficult to monitor in real time. In the
previous project, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to directly visualize
and examine the behavior of MutS, the key E.coli MMR protein that detects
mismatched bases. Those AFM results, which reconciled the main features of
previous, mutually exclusive models, provided new insights into the mechanism by
which E.coli MMR is initiated. The main goal of the current research is to
further unravel the mechanism of E. coli mismatch repair through the application
of a suite of single-molecule techniques such as AFM,Optical Tweezers (OT) and
single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer (SMFRET). Specifically,
AFM imaging and volumetric measurements will be used to examine the structure of
MutS tetramers and MutS complexes with MutL to determine the oligomeric status
of both proteins in ternary complexes with heteroduplex DNA in the absence and
presence of adenine nucleotides. AFM force spectroscopy will be used to measure
the interactions within MutS dimers as well as the effect of adenine nucleotides
on these interactions, while optical tweezers will be used to measure similar
interactions within MutS tetramers as well as between MutS tetramers and DNA.
MutS-controlled DNA looping mechanisms and pathways will be thoroughly examined
using Optical Tweezers. SM-FRET will be used to follow, in real time, the
position of the MMR proteins relative to key DNA sites (the mismatch site and
strand signal site) and the distance and contact between these key DNA sites
will be probed during the MMR reaction by all three techniques through
mechanical and optical (fluorescence) detection. These single-molecule
approaches will test a new MMR signaling model, in which the mismatch site and
the site of DNA incision are brought into contact by the concerted work of two
MutS dimers through a DNA looping-sliding mechanism. These approaches promise to
unravel the details of the MMR mechanism that so far have proved very difficult
to elucidate by traditional methods. The new results will significantly expand
the knowledge base about one of the key mechanisms that is responsible for the
maintenance of genomic stability and will lay the groundwork for future studies
of eukaryotic MMR including human MMR. Methodologies developed for this model
system may prove useful for studying other DNA repair systems and more generally
to investigate protein-protein and DNA-protein
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project will provide an
exciting education and research opportunity for two graduate students and one
undergraduate student. Because the project crosses several disciplines
(biophysics, biochemistry, molecular biology, mechanics, single-molecule
instrumentation) it will provide a rich learning experience for all people
involved, junior and senior researchers alike. It will expose engineering
students to important problems at the interface between modern biology and
nanoscience. One of the graduate students involved will visit South Korea to
receive training in sophisticated single-molecule optical methods to be used in
this research. This international exchange will be beneficial to expanding
international collaborations between leading US and foreign research and
educational institutions. The potential benefit to society is in the increase in
fundamental knowledge of mechanisms by which pre-mutagenic lesions are repaired
in DNA. Outreach activities will involve K-12 students, their teachers and the
general public.