* 1244630
* Assessment of Molecular Mechanisms involved in Nitrogen Cost Minimization of Oligotrophic Microorganisms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Joseph Grzymski, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 50,716.00

Intellectual Merit: Nitrogen cost-minimization (the reduction of nitrogen in
cellular structures, especially protein) is a common and important strategy for
marine microbes that thrive in oligotrophic waters. This is evidenced by the
most successful organisms having low G+C genomes and thus using amino acids that
have fewer N atoms in side chains and by the necessary trade-off this strategy
entails - that proteins are, on average, larger in mass (require more non-
limiting carbon). This project's core hypothesis is that cost-minimized
organisms have specific genomic and molecular adaptations that promote nitrogen
thrift and maintain a slow and steady approach to growth. Specifically, these
organisms have sacrificed potential efficiencies in translation and regulation
to maintain growth under any condition. They grow slowly regardless of substrate
availability - there are fundamental limitations in metabolic and cell
processes. It is posited that slow and steady growth hard-wired into the genetic
code alleviates the need for more complex transcriptional regulation and
complex, protein intensive redox sensing pathways. The experimental plan will
test this core hypothesis by quantifying the primary transcriptome and local
translation rates of a strain of Prochlorococcus grown under high and low
nitrogen conditions.

Broader Impacts: Transcription and translation are fundamental cellular
processes that help set maximum growth rates of an organism. New techniques will
be applied to capture a detailed picture of the transcriptional landscape of
Prochlorococcus, and this has the potential to yield transformative information
on the relationships between cost minimization and transcriptional complexity
for one of the most abundant microbes on earth. The data generated during this
project will be a rich resource to researchers in many fields; all of the data
generated during this project will be released to public databases. This project
has graduate and middle school educational components. The extensive laboratory
and computer work offers a diverse educational potential using cutting-edge
laboratory and bioinformatic techniques. Public outreach will involve a
continued effort by the PI and his lab to engage, promote and improve science
education in Nevada's poorest schools. This work will also contribute to the
further development of the NSF-EPSCoR infrastructure and research activities in
Nevada.