* 1244807
* Vertical Integration of Raman Spectroscopy into the Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Jerome Haky, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 01/31/2017
* USD 199,803.00

The faculty in the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department at Florida Atlantic
University are vertically integrating Raman spectroscopy experiments and
experiences into the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. The project is
addressing key, course-specific, student learning outcomes as well as
fundamental, anchoring concepts ('big ideas'). The project is accomplishing this
by acquiring a sophisticated Raman spectrometer and is using this instrument to
introduce and reinforce increasingly more complex chemistry concepts as a
student progresses through the course sequence. This project is part of a
restructured chemistry curriculum that includes a 'spectroscopy-to-learn'
approach. Raman spectroscopy is aiding students' deep learning of molecular
structure, quantitative analysis, the elucidation of reaction mechanisms, and
how spectroscopy aids research.

The project is demonstrating and establishing the methods by which a
sophisticated spectroscopic instrument can be utilized throughout the entire
chemistry curriculum to promote understanding of anchoring concepts at all
levels. Students are engaging with increasingly more advanced Raman instrument-
based experiments as they progress through the chemistry curriculum enabling
them to: (1) connect the theory taught in lectures with authentic research and
industry practice; (2) become more active and responsible participants in their
own learning; and (3) reinforce and extend their understanding of concepts
previously learned. Independent consultants are guiding the evaluation of the
effectiveness of this effort aimed at the over-arching ideas of improving
student understanding of chemical principles and their attitudes towards
learning.

The student body of the FAU campus ensures a diverse population is experiencing
a hands-on encounter with state-of-the-art instrumentation. The investigators
are disseminating their work through presentations and a dedicated web site. In
addition, an illustrated handbook featuring the novel undergraduate Raman
experiences and experiments is being prepared for publication. An instructor's
manual that contains both pre- and post-measures of learning outcomes is also
being developed.