* 1244135
* Collaborative Research: Information Processing by Gene Regulatory Network Controlling Bacterial Sporulation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Oleg Igoshin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2017
* USD 261,481.00

Collaborative research: Information processing by gene regulatory network
controlling bacterial sporulation&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
ability of an organism to change its phenotype in response to various
environmental cues is of fundamental biological importance, but the detailed
mechanisms are not fully understood even for the best studied systems. The soil
bacterium Bacillus subtilis detects currently unidentified starvation cues and
processes this information via its gene regulatory networks, resulting in
formation of a spore. Using this simple unicellular organism as a model, the
long-term goal of this research is to discover general principles underlying the
information processing by gene regulatory networks. Specifically, this project
will uncover how B. subtilis processes information under conditions of
environmental uncertainty and makes appropriate cell-fate decisions at the
systems level. The cornerstone of the approach is a combination of in vivo and
in vitro experiments as well as deterministic (population-average) and
stochastic (single-cell) mathematical models. The key to success is the
construction of synthetic strains which perturb various processes in the
networks and the comparison of their responses to one another and to those in
the wild-type strain. The experimental results will be analyzed using
integrative mathematical models. The interdisciplinary nature of this research
will uncover how signal-response characteristics and cell-fate decisions of the
network are affected by its architecture.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;As a model system, B. subtilis offers significant experimental
advantages including powerful genetic tools, large collections of mutant
strains, and a fully sequenced genome. Unraveling the mechanisms of information
processing by the sporulation network is a key step towards understanding the
molecular basis of cell-fate decision at the unicellular level. Thus, the
innovative approaches in this project may be applicable for addressing similar
problems in other organisms and can be used for teaching system-level concepts
to students of various levels and backgrounds. In particular, the resulting
collection of synthetic strains can be used for educational purposes in the
undergraduate laboratory setting because their networks are easy to perturb by
varying the inducer levels. As a result, students will gain an understanding of
the relationship between network architecture and system level properties. In
addition, mathematical models can be used as a cornerstone for systems biology
curriculum. The project will also provide abundant interdisciplinary training
opportunities for the participating students from various backgrounds working
together on experimental and/or mathematical modeling.