* 1244021
* Two Component Signal Transduction Networks in Myxococcus xanthus
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,02/28/2018
* John Kirby, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2018
* USD 938,033.00

Title: Two Component Signal Transduction Networks in Myxococcus
xanthus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Myxococcus xanthus is a
bacterial model for differentiation, intercellular communication, surface
motility and bio-complexity. It integrates complex stimuli from its environment
to regulate a decision-making process which culminates in formation of
stressresistant spores. One critical class of signaling systems is comprised by
"two components" (a sensor and a regulator) that directly link environmental
stimuli to control of behavior and gene expression. Typically, the sensor and
regulator are encoded by genes adjacent to one another on the chromosome and are
thus predicted to comprise specific "two-componentsystem" (TCS) to regulate the
biology of the cell. M.xanthus encodes at least 144 sensor histidine kinases
(HK) and 150 response regulator (RR) proteins, many of which appear to be
randomly positioned on the chromosome. As such, M.xanthus possesses one of the
most complex and largest repertoires for signal transduction capacity in the
bacterial world. Due to significant similarity between these evolutionarily
related two-component proteins, prevention of undesired "cross-talk" (aberrant
signaling or miscommunication) while also managing bona fide cross-regulation
between systems is a critical feature for regulation of M.xanthus community
structure. To probe features of TCS that maintain specificity or impart cross-
regulation, the proposed study will focus on a subset of highly similar systems
in M. xanthus delineated by their presence within gene clusters on the
chromosome. Previous work demonstrated complex interactions between two such
systems in M.xanthus that affects spore formation. Further dissection of the
those pathways led to the finding that the sensor HK functions both as a kinase
and as a phosphatase towards its target regulator. The current study will test
the hypothesis that a single amino acid residue (in the appropriate context) is
exclusively required for phosphatase activity for the majority of sensor kinase
proteins in M.xanthus. Because similar sequences exist in nearly all bacterial
sensor kinases, the proposed studies will impact understanding of similar
systems in nearly all bacteria. The plan is to identify those residues
exclusively required for kinase and phosphatase activity in a family of highly
related TCS signaling proteins in M.xanthus. Biochemical studies will determine
if these systems remain insulated or display cross-regulation. Network analysis
of the interacting partners will be assessed using both genetics and
biochemistry. A Systems Biology modeling effort will also be utilized to predict
control and functionality for identified networks and can be extended to the
remainder of the signaling systems in M.xanthus.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Research: Results from this study will broadly impact the signal transduction
field, understanding multicellular interactions in complex environments,
interspecies interactions, and facilitate identification of signaling pathway
interactions via systems biology in other organisms. Education: The laboratory
places a strong emphasis on mentoring postdocs, graduate students, and
undergraduates and has a consistent record of placing individuals in strong
research environments following their training. Postdocs and students have
received fellowships and national recognition for their accomplishments. The PI
has participated in multiple NSF-funded educational programs over the past
decade and taught in internationally recognized programs.