* 1244833
* OPES (Open-source Problems in Engineering Studies): Making the WeB WorK
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 06/30/2017
* USD 249,990.00

The project is expanding the WeBWork homework delivery tool into engineering. It
generates a repository of WeBWorK engineering problems for three core, semester-
long, sophomore-level engineering courses: Statics and Mechanics of Materials,
Electrical Engineering and Circuits, and Thermodynamics. The problem library is
being made available worldwide for free public utilization. The project includes
a research component to study the effect of online engineering homework on
student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the electronic nature of the
freely available repository, this project has the potential to impact students
and faculty from a broad range of schools, including minority institutions,
community colleges and non-PhD-granting institutions. The project builds on the
success of WeBWorK in mathematics and expands it to engineering. The project
team continues to embrace the open-source concept as a means to expand the
project and disseminate results, thereby enhancing infrastructure in engineering
education. A project website is being created and maintained, which updates the
engineering community about assessment studies, journal publications, and
training opportunities. In addition to in-house training, a two-day workshop is
being hosted for ten external participants, and a workshop is being offered at
an American Society for Engineering Education annual meeting. The research and
assessment from this project has the potential to shape future directions in
engineering education.