* 1244632
* Mechanistic Studies of the S-Adenosylmethionine Radical Enzyme Biotin Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Joseph Jarrett, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 455,796.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Enzymes can take advantage of the high reactivity
of radicals to carry out otherwise difficult chemical transformations. Such
enzymes are found in all branches of life, and are particularly ubiquitous in
the diverse classes of microbes. A large emerging superfamily of enzymes found
in virtually all organisms utilize S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet or SAM) as a
substrate or cofactor to generate substrate or protein radicals. An important
subset of the Radical SAM superfamily catalyzes the radical-mediated addition of
sulfur to biomolecules. Biotin synthase catalyzes the oxidative addition of
sulfur to saturated carbon atoms on dethiobiotin, generating the biotin
thiophane ring. Biotin synthase is an iron-sulfur enzyme, and isotopic labeling
suggests the sulfur atom incorporated into biotin derives from an iron-sulfur
cluster. Our research focuses on understanding the chemical details of radical
generation, substrate activation, and sulfur
incorporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the working hypothesis for the biotin
synthase reaction sequence, in a manner identical with all Radical SAM enzymes,
catalysis is initiated by reductive cleavage of SAM to generate methionine and a
5´-deoxyadenosyl radical. Hydrogen atom transfer from dethiobiotin to this
radical results in formation of 5´-deoxyadenosine and a dethiobiotinyl substrate
radical, which is then quenched through formation of a new C-S bond with sulfide
from a nearby [2Fe-2S]2+ cluster. A similar reaction sequence using a second
equivalent of AdoMet leads to completion of the thiophane ring. There is
previously demonstrated formation and decay of an isolable chemical
intermediate, 9-mercaptodethiobiotin (MDTB), and the parallel formation and
decay of an unusual signal observable by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopy assigned to a [2Fe-2S]+ cluster. This project will use pulsed EPR
methods with isotopically labeled substrates and enzyme to examine the structure
and electronic state of this paramagnetic intermediate. Mössbauer spectroscopy
and mass spectrometry will be used to determine whether the [2Fe-2S]2+ cluster
is regenerated following each turnover. In addition, site-directed mutagenesis
experiments will determine whether the [2Fe-2S]2+ cluster is truly essential for
activity. The exceptionally slow kinetics observed for the formation of both
9-mercaptodethiobiotin and biotin, both in vitro and in vivo will be
investigated by deuterium labeling and isotope effect analysis to determine the
extent to which the specific hydrogen trans,fer steps are rate limiting. A
detailed description of the factors that control substrate activation and C-S
bond formation will contribute to the understanding of mechanistic and
structural features common to all Radical SAM
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The research projects
described provide an excellent forum for teaching the basic techniques involved
in characterizing enzyme reaction intermediates to undergraduate and graduate
students. The PI is the organizer and director of a new undergraduate
biochemistry degree program, through which talented undergraduate students will
become involved in laboratory research through participation in a "Directed
Research" course. In particular, the University of Hawaii serves a diverse
student population that includes a significant percentage of students from
underrepresented groups in science. In addition, an improved knowledge of the
mechanism of biotin synthase will contribute to the development of organisms
engineered to overproduce biotin. Biotin is an expensive but essential vitamin
that is incorporated into both human nutritional supplements and, more
significantly, into animal feedstocks. A low-cost biological method for the
production of biotin (as well as other vitamins) would benefit society by
contributing to less expensive and more efficient food production.