* 1244506
* Designer Proteases for Complete Proteomics
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Elizabeth Komives, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2016
* USD 714,922.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to design proteases
from alpha-lytic protease (aLP) that have new and different substrate
specificities. The project will develop new methods and tools to determine the
primary structure of proteins, in particular to determine which amino acids are
post-translationally modified. Nearly all large-scale protein sequencing
experiments are currently performed using mass spectrometry to analyze pieces of
proteins that were digested with the protease, trypsin, which cleaves after
lysine (K) and arginine (R) residues. Trypsin cleavage produces enough peptides
to provide sufficient unique protein sequence for protein identification, but
more complete coverage of protein sequences is required for post-translational
modification (PTM) localization. Preliminary results show that aLP is ideal for
proteomics because a few active site mutations alter its substrate specificity
towards either small aliphatic residues or large hydrophobic residues. These
"orthogonal" types of amino acids (compared to K and R, which are charged) allow
access to more and different parts of the protein sequence. Building on the aLP
platform, a family of engineered proteases will be designed with varying
substrate cleavage specificities to enable coverage of entire protein sequences.
An application that will be investigated is the determination of which sites in
proteins are modified with the small ubiquitin-like modification (SUMO). The
generated mutants provide ideal substrate specificity for detection of
SUMOylation in the S. pombe yeast proteome. Cleavage of SUMOylated proteins
using a mutant aLP generates GG-tagged lysines that can be detected with
existing approaches. Thus aLP will provide the first comprehensive survey of
which proteins are SUMOylated in yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include development of novel
proteases that will be widely useful to the proteomics community. A survey of
researchers engaged in proteomics studies reveals the dire need for such
robustly active "orthogonal" proteases. The project will result in large
proteomic data sets that will aid in the prediction of modification sites and
provide information for basic research into cell biology and protein
structure/function. Data analysis programs will also be developed that will be
widely disseminated via the web. Two undergraduate researchers will be involved
in the project throughout the project period. The PI has a long history of
mentoring undergraduates, who have entered careers in science, with a particular
focus on encouraging diversity. The PI founded at UCSD the Research Scholars
program that provides research training for high school students from diverse
backgrounds. The participants are mentored by assigned pairs of faculty and
graduate students. Mentoring is continued up to the point where participants
choose colleges and majors. In the first two years, more than 90% of the
students completed the program having decided on a career in scientific
research. One and possibly 2 students from the Research Scholars Program will
work on aspects of this NSF project.