* 1244253
* Collaborative Research: Continued Research on the Jurassic Vertebrate Fauna from the Beardmore Glacier Region of Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* William Hammer, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 12/31/2015
* USD 190,374.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for research on
Early Jurassic vertebrate fauna of the Beardmore Glacier region of Antarctica.
The project will support preparation and systematic and paleobiological research
on four Antarctic dinosaurs, including two new species, collected in the Central
Transantarctic Mountains. With the new material Cryolophosaurus will become one
of the most complete Early Jurassic theropods known, and thus has the potential
to become a keystone taxon for resolving the debated early evolutionary history
of theropod dinosaurs, the group that gave rise to birds. Two new dinosaur
specimens include a nearly complete articulated skeleton of a juvenile
sauropodomorph, and the articulated hip region of another small individual. Both
appear to be new taxa. The dinosaurs from the Hanson Formation represent some of
the highest paleolatitude vertebrates known from the Jurassic. The PIs will
generate CT datasets for Cryolophosaurus and the more complete new
sauropodomorph species to mine for phylogenetic trait information, and to
investigate their comparative neuroanatomy and feeding behavior. Histological
datasets will be generated from multiple skeletal elements for all four Mt.
Kirkpatrick taxa to understand patterns of growth in different clades of polar
dinosaurs and compare them to relatives from lower paleolatitudes. This
paleohistological study of a relatively diverse sample of sauropodomorph taxa
from Antarctica may contribute to determining whether and how these dinosaurs
responded to contemporary climatic extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs have established a successful undergraduate training
program as part of previous research. Summer interns from Augustana are trained
at the Field Museum in specimen preparation, curation, molding/casting, and
histological sampling. They also participate in existing Field Museum REU
programs, including a course on phylogenetic systematics. Four undergraduate
internships and student research projects will be supported through this
proposal. The PIs will develop a traveling exhibit on Antarctic Mesozoic
paleontology that they estimate will be seen by 2.5 million people over the
five-year tour.