* 1244014
* Cells as an Intelligent Material: An integrated multiscale modeling approach based on coupled responses to chemical, electrical, and mechanical stimuli
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Donald Leo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2017
* USD 561,096.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
provide a thorough methodology for the creation of advanced networks of cellular
mimics. The natural world often exhibits elegant solutions to complex
engineering problems, many of which are derived from phenomena exhibited at the
cellular level. It is possible to recreate some of these desired behaviors and
provide insight into how networks of individual cells can display collective
behaviors by creating networks of cellular mimics in the laboratory. This multi-
disciplinary project focuses on coupling experimental, computational, and
theoretical approaches to aid in the development of a multiscale model for
predicting the behavior of these artificial cellular networks, focusing on their
unique transduction capabilities and responses to various stimuli. The approach
will involve the creation of individual biomolecular unit cells, constructing a
multiscale model for predicting the behavior of networks of these unit cells,
validating the model through the experimental results, and applying the
validated model towards more advanced systems demonstrating the potential in
using cellular mimics as intelligent materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The benefits of this multi-disciplinary research include a
more in-depth understanding of cellular networks through theoretical,
computational, and experimental efforts. The findings will provide insight into
how cells work in parallel to achieve collective goals, and illustrate the
potential for biologically-inspired approaches in engineering research by
demonstrating how cellular mechanics may be harnessed for tackling complex
problems. These dual goals will aid in increasing collaboration between the
biological and engineering worlds and may lead to further scientific discoveries
through fresh perspectives. Cells demonstrate the same characteristics as many
traditional intelligent materials, and properly tailored networks of cellular
mimics may offer possibilities for the design of new devices such as
microactuators and sensors. In addition, a new generation of biologically-minded
engineers will be encouraged through high school and undergraduate seminars that
highlight applications of biomimetic design.