* 1244871
* Meeting:   A Decade of Ecological Genomics: The Tenth Annual Ecological Genomics Symposium, October 26-28, 2012, Kansas City, MO
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Theodore Morgan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 07/31/2013
* USD 14,290.00

A decade ago ecological genomics was a field in its infancy. The field was
created to develop a comprehensive understanding of the genetic mechanisms that
organisms use to respond to changing ecological and environmental conditions at
the genome-wide scale. During the last ten years ecological genomics has grown
into a productive discipline that thrives via novel interdisciplinary research
that integrates the fields of ecology, evolution, genomics, and physiology to
address fundamental questions at the mechanistic level.

This meeting award aids the advancement of the field ecological genomics through
support of the tenth annual Ecological Genomics Symposium to be hosted by the
Kansas State University, Ecological Genomics Institute from the 26th to the 28th
of October 2012 at the Marriot Hotel on the Plaza in Kansas City, Missouri. The
Tenth Annual Ecological Genomics Symposium will accomplish two primary goals.
First, this symposium provides the only annual forum for the dissemination of
the rapidly advancing and diverse research in ecological genomics in the world
and thus it will continue to accomplish this goal. Second, since this is the
tenth annual symposium, this meeting will also allow participants to reflect on
the developments of the last decade, as well as chart the path forward for the
field. Thus, this symposium provides an essential venue for exchanging
scientific information from diverse disciplines and fostering novel research
directions for the field. The project will specifically support travel and
lodging costs for eleven domestic speakers and ten student/postdoctoral
fellowships. The speakers include both established and emerging leaders of the
field that is both scientifically and culturally diverse. The travel fellowships
will support young scientists working in ecological genomics. These fellowships
will be targeted to support individuals from historically underrepresented
groups in science. The meeting is designed around a single set of non-
overlapping invited talks over a two-day period affording ample opportunity to
cultivate interactions among the participants.