* 1244247
* Mechanisms that Protect Transcripts from Nonsense-mediate mRNA Decay
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Audrey Atkin, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 02/28/2017
* USD 620,647.00

Intellectual Merit. A key step in regulating gene expression is the rate at
which specific mRNA molecules are degraded. The protein synthesis machinery
translates single mRNAs repeatedly to produce multiple proteins. In part, the
amount of protein produced is dependent on the mRNA lifespan because this
determines how much of each type of mRNA is available for translation and how
many times each mRNA is translated. Each mRNA has a specific lifespan, and for
many mRNAs, lifespan is modulated in response to environmental or intracellular
changes. mRNA decay rates are determined by interactions between cis-elements
within the mRNAs and the mRNA decay machinery. RNA binding proteins can mediate
these interactions. However little is known about how these interactions lead to
functional changes in the rate at which an mRNA is degraded. The objective of
this project is to identify the mechanisms that permit wild type mRNAs with
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) targting signals to evade the NMD pathway.
NMD is a specialized pathway that is responsible for the recognition and rapid
degradation of mRNAs with premature stop codons and some wild type mRNAs as
well. However, not all wild type mRNAs with NMD targeting cis-elements are
degraded by the NMD pathway. The mechanism responsible for protection of these
mRNAs from NMD is unknown. The hypothesis that protection from NMD is mediated
by RNA binding proteins which interfere with the NMD pathway and thus redirect
these mRNAs for decay by the default pathways will be tested using both
biochemical and genetic tools in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This
research will provide valuable new insight into how the NMD pathway is regulated
and serve as a paradigm for how mRNA decay regulators modulate the decay of
specific mRNAs by influencing the mRNA decay machinery.

Broader Impact. The research will increase our understanding of the mechanisms
regulating gene expression at the mRNA level. The new knowledge of the
mechanisms regulating mRNA decay that will be generated by this project is
expected to lead to a new set of tools for controlling gene expression. The
project will also have an impact on human resource development through the
direct training of a Postdoctoral Researcher, a Graduate Student, Undergraduate
Students and High School Students in a lab with a proven track record of
providing meaningful research experiences for trainees. Participants will work
on an important, fundamental biological problem using integrative computational
and molecular genetics approaches developed for the powerful model organism
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The high school students will be recruited though the
Young Nebraska Scientists and Nebraska College Preparatory Academy programs
which emphasizes broadening participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
disciplines.