* 1244842
* Theory and Simulation of the Formation and Evolution of Meteor Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Yakov Dimant, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2019
* USD 362,416.00

This project addresses the topic of meteorite effects on the upper atmosphere by
using physics-based models and interpreting data collected at NSF radar
facilities. Particles that impact the Earth's upper atmosphere with sufficient
energy create high-density plasmas in the E-region ionosphere, seeding the upper
atmosphere with an array of metal ions and atoms. A better understanding of
meteor plasma dynamics and its radiowave scattering characteristics is needed in
order to be able to utilize the information that radars generate about meteors.
The project will address the following questions: (1) How do meteor plasmas
evolve from their initial ablation and ionization through the early-stage
kinetic expansion to their later-stage diffusion and turbulence? (2) What
characteristics of the meteor plasma influence radar head echoes? (3) Can more
accurate theoretical and computational models improve our quantitative
understanding of radiowave scattering? (4) How do large-scale atmospheric
inhomogeneities and neutral wind shears modify the evolution of the long-lived
plasma trail produced by the meteoroid? Answering these questions will lead to
progress in understanding the physics of the highly collisional lower ionosphere
and will provide better interpretations of measurements made by radar.

Beyond contributions to Aeronomy, the results of this work will be useful to
space science and engineering, and provide a better understanding of potential
hazards due to particles. The simulator development could be broadly applicable
to plasma physics problems. The project will support a full-time graduate
student and an undergraduate. The PI and CoPI will share their knowledge and
enthusiasm about space and meteor science with the larger community through
outreach to K-12 schools and at the University.