* 1244142
* The Chloroplast Copper Delivery System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Marinus Pilon, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT

Nutrient availability can limit plant growth and productivity. Plants need the
micronutrient copper to perform photosynthesis, the process in which sunlight is
used in order to fix carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and which is responsible
for all biomass formation on the planet. However, copper is also required for
other processes, next to photosynthesis. Therefore, when this element is
available in limiting amounts in the soil, choices must be made by the plant
about how to best use this precious resource. It was found that the transport
systems that control how copper is used within the cells of a plant leaf are
regulated by the amount of copper that is available. The mechanism of regulation
involves a copper-controlled selective degradation of a copper transporter
within the photosynthetic sub-cellular compartment. This finding implies that
plants can selectively sense the amount of copper that is available in various
cellular compartments within a leaf and that this information in turn is used to
control specific protein stability. Such a mechanism had not been observed
before in nature and this research is aimed at identifying the cellular
machineries that can sense copper and that control transporter turnover.
Implications of this regulatory process for photosynthetic productivity will be
tested. How micronutrient availability affects the assembly of the
photosynthetic machinery is a fundamental question in cell biology that has to
be addressed.

BROADER IMPACTS

Photosynthesis is the process which drives all of life on earth. A better
understanding of how the photosynthetic machinery is assembled will allow people
to make better decisions regarding the use of fertilizers and copper-based
fungicides, thus benefitting the environment and potentially improving
agricultural productivity, especially on soils that are marginal. The research
also has potential impact for biofuel production in which optimal photosynthetic
activity is required. The project will train a group of young scientists
including undergraduate students at Colorado State University and includes an
outreach component for local elementary schools in the form of modules about
plant biology and photosynthesis.