* 1244455
* Specific Interactions of the Ribosome with the Nascent Peptide
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Nora Vazquez-Laslop, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 09/30/2016
* USD 951,357.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The ribosome is a cellular molecular machine that
is responsible for synthesis of proteins. It has been recognized only recently
that the ribosome not only assembles new proteins, but can also inspect the
structure of the protein it makes. The ribosome can recognize specific signals
in the structure of the newly synthesized protein and it can respond to certain
messages encoded in these structures. Such ribosomal response is suspected to
control expression of many genes and to optimize protein production. However,
the mechanism of the protein inspection is not well understood, nor is the
spectrum of cellular genes regulated by this mechanism known. The main goal of
the project is to identify bacterial genes that are controlled by the mechanism
of the protein inspection and to understand how this mechanism operates at the
molecular level. The principles of communication between the ribosome and the
nascent protein will be investigated and new ways to affect these communications
will be explored. Cutting-edge genomics and proteomics techniques will be used
to inspect how the ribosomes read the genetic information of individual cellular
genes and to identify the sites of the ribosome pausing. Such sites usually
indicate that the ribosome received a "slow down" signal from the newly
synthesized protein. The structural similarities between the genes at which
ribosome pausing occurs will be identified and molecular mechanisms of signal
recognition and ribosomal response will be explored using novel biochemical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
study may significantly change our understanding of how proteins are being made
and how genes are regulated. The principles that might be unraveled in this
investigation likely apply not only to bacteria but also to other cells and
organisms. The newly acquired knowledge can benefit science as it may have
important biotechnological implications for optimizing production of useful
proteins in bacteria. The research will have a direct impact on education and
advancing scientific knowledge to the public. The results of the study will be
immediately used in the curriculum of the Pharmacy professional and graduate
students. Continuing the previous practices, the project will be used to attract
graduate, undergraduate and high school students to carry out relevant
fundamental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some parts of the study will be
offered as science projects for the high-school students from Chicago area. The
personnel involved in the study will participate in science-related activities
in the inner-city schools in Chicago, especially focusing the effort on schools
with a high proportion of students from ethnic groups underrepresented in
science. International students and interns will be enrolled to assist with the
study which will help to disseminate scientific knowledge to other nations. In
addition, it will support an ongoing international collaboration in Estonia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project is supported jointly with the Office of
International Science and Engineering.