* 1244852
* Using Web-based Video Peer-Feedback to Support the Diffusion and Enhancement of Teaching Practices
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Lisa Davids, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 199,339.00

The Video-Annotated Peer Review (VAPR) project addresses a growing need to
support the diffusion of research-based instructional practices and to create a
formative feedback process to enhance faculty development. The project is
developing an asynchronous video-based peer feedback system using commercially
available software to record faculty in their practice. A network of faculty
members review the videos using an instrument developed to facilitate feedback.
The software allows faculty peer reviewers to annotate the video with time-
stamped comments, thus enabling participating faculty and their peers to
identify specific instances of good practices, opportunities for improvement,
and opportunities where research-based teaching approaches can be included in
their classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VAPR is creating an approach to faculty
peer evaluation that supports the diffusion of research-based instructional
practices that can be used to supplement or support student evaluations of
instruction, and support student learning. This activity advances the knowledge
of learning communities within the context of higher education and faculty
development by integrating it with the use of educational technology and social
reflexivity's support of diffusion. The evaluation and research projects are
yielding findings related to the impact that peer feedback has on student
learning through direct assessments used for program accreditation, general
education assessments, student end-of-term evaluations, and a measure of the
rate of diffusion of research-based instructional practices.