* 1244978
* Promoting Early Learning in Science and Mathematics Through an Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Teacher Preparation Course
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Pamela Perfumo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,982.00

This project is developing, conducting, and disseminating an undergraduate-level
course designed to increase the confidence and ability of early childhood
education (ECE) students to teach science and mathematics to young children. It
leverages the strengths of the partnering institutions: (1) the Lawrence Hall of
Science (LHS), the public science center at the University of California,
Berkeley; and (2) Los Medanos College (LMC), a community college located in
Pittsburg, CA, which serves a large number of students pursuing certificates and
degrees in ECE. LHS has been a leader in developing and teaching hands-on,
developmentally appropriate science and mathematics programs for people of all
ages for over four decades. LMC brings educational expertise in child
development and teacher preparation. The Child Study Center on the LMC campus
serves as a site for field experiences, observations, and collection of
authentic documentation of real-world classroom activities.

The project is based on the idea that preparing teachers to teach early
childhood science and mathematics is most effective when they themselves
manipulate and investigate concrete materials, take time to develop and test
ideas, and experience a supportive and collaborative environment that nurtures
their curiosity. The course is tailored to meet the needs of the large number of
community college ECE students who are "nontraditional learners." The focus on
nontraditional college student development is important in addressing the needs
of diverse populations entering ECE. Early childhood educators often lack a
background in science and mathematics, and they often doubt their capacity to
effectively facilitate teaching and learning in those areas. In light of what is
known about the importance of early science and mathematics experiences for
young children, it is critical that early childhood pre-service and in-service
teachers acquire the appropriate blend of science and mathematics content and
pedagogical skills to increase confidence and attitudes toward science and
mathematics teaching.

As part of the evaluation, the project team is collecting and analyzing data to
understand the impact of the course on ECE students' content knowledge,
understanding of developmentally appropriate pedagogy, and confidence in and
comfort with engaging young children in science and mathematics. The
investigators are also developing a course guide, along with supporting
instructional materials, to allow the course to be implemented in early
childhood programs at colleges and universities nationwide. Ultimately, the
project is designed to promote change and improve community college coursework
and practical experiences related to teaching science and mathematics in early
childhood settings.