* 1244043
* Molecular Dissection of Transcription Termination Mechanisms in Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Claire Moore, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 869,613.00

Intellectual Merit. The transcription of eukaryotic mRNA is an obligate step in
the flow of information from the genome to expression of proteins needed by the
cell. The final step of transcription is called termination, and involves
release of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and the RNA from the DNA template. Defects
in termination can impair cell function due to the interference of read-through
transcription on downstream DNA elements needed for DNA replication, chromosomal
segregation, or the initiation of transcription. Poor termination can also lead
to decreased processing and increased degradation of the RNA as well as reduced
initiation at the gene's promoter. Despite significant advances in recent years,
termination remains one of the least understood steps of transcription. Pol II
termination downstream of mRNA poly(A) sites requires the concerted efforts of
the Rat1 exonuclease and proteins which recognize and act to cleave RNA at the
poly(A) site. Transcription by Pol II through a gene's body is both rapid and
processive, yet if stalled, the association of Pol II with DNA is remarkably
stable. Nevertheless, interactions of termination factors with the polymerase
overcome these challenges and induce changes that lead to pausing and release.
The goal of this research is to decipher the molecular mechanisms that lead to
Rat1-mediated termination of Pol II and to seek parallels in how Rat1 also
facilitates release of Pol I, which transcribes ribosomal RNA. Through genetic
screens in yeast, using both directed and random mutagenesis, this project
should identify critical regions of RNA polymerase that might interact directly
with termination factors or otherwise alter the termination behavior of the
enzyme. Previously, the lack of a defined, easily manipulated in vitro system in
which to study termination has made it difficult to determine individual
contributions of the various factors. This problem has been addressed by
developing a new in vitro assay in which mutant and wild-type polymerase can be
stalled and then challenged with purified factors alone and in combination. This
assay will be incorporated into an integrated strategy that examines
transcription in vivo and in cell extract. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. Scientifically, the successful completion of this project should give
significant new insight into the mechanism of transcription termination and lead
to a new fundamental understanding of points at which this step in the
transcription cycle might be regulated in all eukaryotes. Furthermore, it will
provide rigorous training for students in the disciplines of biochemistry,
molecular biology and genetics as well as multiple opportunities for trainees to
gain experience in the written and oral presentation of their research and in
mentoring younger students. In addition, the PI has been active in developing
new ways to train the next generation of scientists and to increase diversity in
biological research, and the members of the PI's lab participate in these
programs as mentors and trainees. These programs include summer research and
postbaccalaureate programs for underrepresented students, and a postdoctoral
training program that prepares fellows for successful academic careers that
involve research, mentoring and teaching undergraduates in the biological
sciences.