* 1244576
* Small RNA-mediated Translation Repression in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Heriberto Cerutti, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2018
* USD 566,910.00

Intellectual Merit: The growth and development of eukaryotes is determined by
complex interactions between their genetic make-up and the environment. In
multicellular organisms, the different types of cells, tissues, and organs are
ultimately defined by differential gene expression. Small RNAs (~20-30
nucleotides in length) play important roles in gene regulation as well as in
defense responses against parasitic genomic elements such as transposons and
viruses. The biogenesis and mode of action of these noncoding RNAs have
attracted great attention in recent years, but many aspects of small RNA (sRNA)
function are still poorly characterized. One central problem is our incomplete
understanding of the factors involved in these processes. Interestingly, in the
green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, sRNAs perfectly complementary to a target
transcript can inhibit protein synthesis without or with only minimal mRNA
destabilization. This mechanism operates at a post-initiation step of
translation and appears to alter the function/structural conformation of
translating ribosomes so that they display reduced sensitivity to inhibition by
some antibiotics such as cycloheximide. Evidence for sRNA-repressed transcripts
remaining associated with polyribosomes, a strong argument in support of post-
initiation translation inhibition, also exists in several other eukaryotes. The
project will focus on the mechanistic characterization of this relatively
unexplored process. It will involve the identification of molecular components
of sRNA-guided effector complexes, involved in post-initiation translation
repression, and the isolation and analysis of algal mutants defective in this
process. The research will also characterize endogenous transcripts
preferentially repressed by sRNAs at the translational level and begin
addressing the role(s) of small RNAs in algal biology. Chlamydomonas offers an
advantage for the isolation and characterization of novel factors involved in
sRNA-mediated translation repression since the RNA interference (RNAi)
machinery, despite being fairly complex, is not required for organismal
viability. Moreover, novel mechanistic insights may be obtained through these
studies because algae and land plants appear to lack orthologs of several of the
proteins implicated in sRNA-mediated post-transcriptional regulation in
metazoans. Characterization of RNAi in evolutionarily divergent eukaryotes is
expected to contribute to our understanding of both common as well as lineage-
specific mechanisms of sRNA-mediated silencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project will have an impact on human resource development
through the direct training of undergraduate and graduate students and one
postdoctoral fellow. Students will learn research methodology via hands on
experience, with the goal of fostering their interest in scientific discovery.
The laboratory findings will be used to stimulate the learning process and to
promote discussions on the benefits of algal/plant science research in two plant
biology courses. The training of a postdoctoral fellow for a career which
combines research and education is also a central component of the project.
Additionally, students will participate in a number of programs devoted to the
instruction of minority individuals and in outreach activities with a non-profit
organization working to educate the public on the nature and importance of
science. The results of the project may also have practical implications for the
genetic improvement of algal strains for biofuel production. One key constraint
for the commercial development of algal feedstocks is the very limited knowledge
on the regulatory mechanisms that control gene expression and metabolism. The
anticipated findings will contribute useful information for understanding the
function of small RNAs in microalgae and for the development of tools to
modulate gene expression.