* 1244182
* Biogenesis of Plant Peroxisomes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Bonnie Bartel, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT Understanding how cells partition molecules and functions
among organelles is a central goal of cell biology. Peroxisomes are unusual
organelles that form not only by growth and division, but also via budding from
the endoplasmic reticulum. Proteins facilitating peroxisome biogenesis
(peroxins) can function in membrane recruitment, assist in importing proteins
into the organelle, or promote organelle division or inheritance. Although
outlines of these processes are in place, significant gaps in understanding
remain. To fully understand the remarkable process by which these organelles are
assembled, it is essential to identify and characterize factors contributing to
plant peroxisome biogenesis - both peroxins with known orthologs and those that
are undiscovered or unique to plants. The project will elucidate molecular
mechanisms of plant peroxisome biogenesis. The first objective examines
peroxisome budding from the endoplasmic reticulum by using genetic and cell
biological approaches to characterize peroxins implicated in pre-peroxisome
formation in other systems. A microscopy-based genome-wide screen for factors
necessary for early peroxisome biogenesis will reveal important components
regardless of their conservation. The second objective follows the discovery of
a new peroxin, the peroxisomal protease LON2, and will characterize the roles of
genes altered in suppressors that ameliorate lon2 defects.

BROADER IMPACTS The research will provide undergraduate and graduate students
with interdisciplinary training bridging molecular genetics, cell biology,
genomics, and biochemistry. To extend research experiences to students at
institutions without extensive research capacity, the lab will host visiting
faculty and undergraduate researchers from nearby primarily undergraduate
institutions, focusing on students from underrepresented groups. To help broaden
research awareness and participation beyond her own research group, the PI will
organize seminars on local biology research to introduce freshmen to the
excitement of modern biological research using publications written at their
home institution coupled with lab tours and meetings with the authors and other
scientists. Together, these activities will reveal fundamental mechanisms of
plant peroxisome biogenesis, which may contribute to crop improvement strategies
or biofuel applications, while providing interdisciplinary training and
experiences that are indispensable to the emerging generation of scientists.