* 1244242
* Collaborative RUI: Regulation of Flagellar Biogenesis in H. pylori
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Timothy Hoover, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 238,615.00

Intellectual Merit The bacterial flagellum is a complex nanomachine responsible
for motility in many species. Assembly requires coordinated control of dozens of
genes and involves some of the most sophisticated regulatory mechanisms found in
nature. While much has been learned from the paradigm for flagellar gene
regulation in studies with Escherichia coli and Salmonella, significant gaps
exist in knowledge of how other bacteria regulate biogenesis, including the
epsilon-Proteobacteria, members of which have profound agricultural and
environmental significance. This collaborative project seeks to better
understand the mechanisms Helicobacter pylori and other epsilon-Proteobacteria
use to coordinate flagellar gene expression via interactions with proteins
involved in export of flagellar components. Two research groups will
participate: one at Kennesaw State University and the other at the University of
Georgia. The research will provide critical information about how H. pylori
coordinates expression of flagellar genes. Results will also inform as to how
flagellar and related pathogenic structural assembly occurs in other species. In
a broader sense, the results of these studies will provide a valuable framework
for gene regulation in H. pylori other epsilon-Proteobacteria and expand the
value of prokaryotic genome sequences by characterizing mechanisms of gene
regulation in the context of assembly of large scale macromolecular structures.

Broader Impacts Kennesaw State University is a large and rapidly growing
university that is fast becoming a destination of choice for undergraduates
interested in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) careers from
basic research to high school science teaching. Its researchers are making
valuable contributions to a number of fields including microbiology and
biochemistry. Among the broader impacts are enhancements in the research
environment through collaboration with University of Georgia, broadening of the
Kennesaw State University investigator's expertise and knowledge, and exposure
of students and faculty to methods they would not otherwise experience.
Extensive participation of Kennesaw State University and University of Georgia
students, particularly underrepresented minorities, will help train the next
generation of scientists. Continued maturation of the research environment and
infrastructure will help other researchers address their questions and lay the
foundation for future graduate programs. Integration of research into teaching
will be accomplished by development of instructional laboratories using methods
and experiments arising from the proposed work as well as outreach efforts to
improve science education by involving in-service teachers and science education
students. Outreach efforts will help to alleviate the critical shortage of
secondary science teachers in Georgia through collaboration with Kennesaw State
University's Noyce II Master Teaching Fellows and Master of Arts in Teaching
programs which will increase teacher recruitment and retention.