* 1244708
* KredibleNet - Building a research community and proposing a research agenda for the study and modeling of reputation and authority across informal knowledge markets
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Elisa Bertino, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 05/31/2014
* USD 179,594.00

Increasingly, online social media are playing a pivotal role in shaping public
opinion, but there are few tools available to gauge the reputation of
contributors to the informal knowledge marketplace anchored by platforms like
Wikipedia, YouTube, Facebook and Twitter. This project will develop a broad
multi-disciplinary community of experts from the social sciences, computer
sciences, and statistics focusing on researching expertise and reputation in
social media and develop a data-intensive approach for research in this area
(KredibleNet). It will create the community and capacity to design and build
large scale data analysis and management infrastructure to engage the challenge
of understanding how these new knowledge markets are shaped by social
interactions and reputations built around functional roles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a series of workshops and use of an online
platform, this nascent community will refine the conceptualization,
operationalization and measurement of reputation as a component of online
knowledge and create a roadmap for future research directions. The team will
also develop and disseminate tools for data management, analysis and
visualization of online reputation data and collaboratively design a prototype
reputation measurement cyberinfrastructure platform that can be used for
experimentation. This platform will include new data management and analysis
tools to enable access to live social media data from sources such as Wikipedia,
Twitter and YouTube. The resulting tools and dataset will equip the community
with the capability to experiment with data-intensive analytic strategies and to
better understand the nature of the reputation measurement problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of KredibleNet is to shape the next
generation of theoretical and analytic strategies needed for understanding how
knowledge markets are influenced by social interactions and reputations. The
community discussions will ensure that the infrastructure developed to fill the
current conceptualization and measurement gaps, data management capabilities and
analytic tools will provide as much benefit as possible to all the related
fields in industry and the sciences; they will also likely give rise to new
research synergies. The tools that will be developed will render the existing
large databases amenable to analysis allowing scholars and practitioners to
address a broad set of questions and gain valuable insights. The potential users
of these tools, data, and ideas are quite widespread extending to multiple
scholarly domains, policy communities, and industry partners. They will be made
available publicly, so others may benefit from the results of this project to
develop the next generation of "information gauges" that can help tomorrow's
information consumers make smarter choices.