* 1244129
* A New Interdisciplinary Technology Education Strategy Using State-of-art Wireless Sensor Network
* EHR,DUE
* 10/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Shuping Wang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,309.00

This TUES Type 1 project provides students at the University of North Texas
(UNT) with interdisciplinary learning experiences in wireless sensor networks
and structural design. The project is developing curricular material for a
upper-level course with construction engineering and electrical engineering
technology students emphasizing interdisciplinary teamwork and hands-on learning
experiences in real-world contexts. Students participate in hands-on activities
in collaborative environments solving problems with real-world contexts and
enhancing their knowledge in other disciplines. The four hands-on activities
include: 1) design, fabrication, and testing of the wireless sensor network, 2)
structural analysis and modeling of the test structure (UNT Apogee Stadium), 3)
on-site testing of the structure, and 4) data processing and analysis.

The project includes field trips and other outreach activities for middle and
high school-aged students from north Texas to provide an introduction to careers
in construction and electronics. The project team is partnering with Calhoun
Middle School, which has a large number of talented Hispanics students, in
Denton, TX, to coordinate field trips with UNT engineering technology students
serving as guides and with the "Texas Girls Collaborative" project to attract
women students to construction and electronics. Dissemination plans include the
curriculum materials and online resources created through this project
publically available online and a professional development workshop for
engineering faculty and professionals. Since the developed materials are
relatively low-cost and will be freely distributed, this increases the
possibility that other institutions may adopt the materials.