* 1244958
* Collaborative Research:  SNOWpack Photodenitrification from the Antarctic and Arctic Cryosphere (SNOWPAAC)
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Daven Henze, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2015
* USD 57,151.00

The importance of knowing the different sources of atmospheric nitrate to the
polar ice sheets of Antarctica and Greenland, along with their transport paths,
is of intrinsic interest to the atmospheric chemistry of polar NOx species. In
turn, surface photolysis of snowpack nitrate renders these ice sheets as
strongly oxidizing surfaces during sunlight. Attempts to derive past conditions
or variability of atmospheric NOx (= NO + NO2 +?) species from ice core records
will need to take photodenitrification and source transfer function effects into
account.

The approach willcontinue to use a inverse chemical transfer model (adjoint
GEOS-Chem) to test the sensitivity of nitrate deposition to the Antarctic
continent from various possible sources. The following questions are posed: 1)
what are the important sources of nitrate to Antarctia (and Greenland) in the
present and in the pre-industrial Holocene? 2) How does the recycling of
reactive nitrogen at the atmosphere-snow interface redistribute nitrate across
large polar ice sheets? and 3) are their implications for nitrate preservation
in ice cores and their interpretation?

Goals being pursued in this modeling study include the reconstruction of past
(polar) atmospheric composition and a better contemporary understanding of the
variability of atmospheric reactive nitrogen compounds as may be discerned from
measurements of nitrate concentrations retained in snow, firn and possibly ice
cores in polar regions.