* 1244707
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Student Learning Strategy to Bridge Virtual Learning and Hands-on Activity in Organic Solar Energy Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gon Namkoong, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

DUE - 1244707, 1244079 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATING INSTITUTIONS:
&lt;br/&gt;Old Dominion University (ODU)&lt;br/&gt;Norfolk State University
(NSU)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;There is a
significant demand for engineers with a solar energy background that possess the
problem-solving skills to successfully tackle the challenges associated with
implementing new solar technologies. This project is enhancing students' ability
to explore the underlying principles associated with solar technology by
developing and providing a mixture of virtual learning materials and hands-on
activities, in an attempt to transform the ways that organic physics and optics
related courses are currently being offered. The project is enriching electrical
and computer engineering capstone project experiences by connecting topics to
relevant, compelling challenges in solar energy, while simultaneously
introducing students to underlying systems-thinking
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is collecting data to assess the
students' reasoning, investigative, and problem-solving skills by analyzing lab
reports and poster presentations. The evaluation of student learning outcomes is
studying the students' ability to apply their theoretical understanding in real
situations. In particular, the project is examining how the use of virtual
learning resources can improve a student's ability to perform analysis, conduct
testing, interpret results, and solve problems in their hands-on
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The
project's focus on solar energy education is helping address the global priority
on energy security and the critical shortage of highly qualified scientists and
engineers to positively impact the nation and its related economy. The multi-
university partnership brings expertise in multiple disciplines of electrical
engineering, while also impacting both lower and upper undergraduate level
courses. The institutions associated with the project are coordinating and
implementing the effort across a diverse set of engineering student populations
and locations, increasing the potential for broad exposure and positive impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is creating a scalable model for developing
engineering course material that can be adapted for use by a wide range of
universities, which are not limited by geography. The collaborative outreach
programs of ODU and NSU will also broaden STEM communities by providing: a
"NanoDays" nanotechnology educational festival; readily adaptable activities for
students, teachers, and the general public; summer research programs that focus
on underrepresented minority and female students; and demonstrations of solar
technologies in a wide variety of elementary schools.