* 1244326
* RUI:  Dual Routes for Asparaginyl-tRNA Synthesis in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Kelly Sheppard, Skidmore College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2016
* USD 303,707.00

Intellectual merit: Life requires the production and use of proteins. Proteins
are polymers of amino acids, and the amino acid sequence of a protein is encoded
in a gene. To translate the genetic message into the proper amino acid sequence
requires the presence of adaptor molecules, aminoacyl-transfer RNAs, in a cell.
Twenty amino acids are commonly used in proteins. Each of the twenty amino acids
has a corresponding pool of transfer RNAs (tRNAs). For an amino acid to be used
in translation, it must be attached to its corresponding tRNA. For the amino
acid asparagine, nature has evolved two distinct pathways for forming
asparaginyl-tRNA used in protein synthesis. In the first pathway, asparagine is
directly attached to the tRNA. In the second pathway, asparagine is synthesized
on the tRNA itself. Computational analyses predict that Staphylococcus aureus
and Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus each encode both pathways in their genomes. These
studies will combine biochemical and molecular genetic techniques to verify that
both pathways are used in these two bacteria, and to determine how dual routes
for asparaginyl-tRNA formation are integrated into the life cycles of these
bacteria. The research will provide insight into the evolution of asparaginyl-
tRNA synthesis and the physiology of S. aureus and B.
bacteriovorus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will provide
three undergraduates each summer and academic year the opportunity to take part
in scientific research that challenges them to synthesize biochemical data with
bioinformatics and molecular genetics. The work will therefore provide them a
strong foundation for success in graduate or professional school in the
biomolecular sciences. The principal investigator will work closely with
Skidmore's S3M and Schupf programs to recruit students from underrepresented
groups. The project will also allow development of an experimental biochemistry
laboratory course at Skidmore enabling additional undergraduates to take part in
research. To expand scientific literacy and retain more women from
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines, the principal investigator and
Skidmore undergraduates will meet with and mentor students from the Brighter
Choice All-Girls Middle School in Albany, NY.