* 1244936
* Connecting Undergraduate Research with the Public through Innovative Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* George Barnett, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 02/29/2016
* USD 199,714.00

The project connects a core curriculum science course taught in the Earth and
Environmental Science department entitled, Science for Future Legislators, with
the public through the growing of hydroponic food, air quality data collection
using data eggs, and the use of touch foil technologies. Partnering with local
businesses and libraries, the project team places touch foils on windows to
engage the general public in understanding air quality data and the impact of
land cover use and changes in air quality. A touch foil is a thin film that can
be placed on any glass surface, for example a storefront window, which
transforms that window into a large interactive touch surface (in essence
transforming the window in a giant iPad). Using this guerilla science approach
affords the general public the opportunity to learn about science in places
where they would not expect to see science. The goal is to provide access to
scientific data and analyses that are understandable and of interest to the
general public in a way that does not require a visit to a museum or similar
institution but in a place where the public takes a regular walk, visits, or
spends their time. The project also engages non-science majors in growing
produce hydroponically and learning how to conduct scientific research to
investigate processes that maximize production. The produce is sold at a local
market to help sustain the program and to help the community have access to
fresh, healthy, and local food.