* 1244772
* Uncovering the Molecular Mechanisms of Selfish Genetic Elements
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Marce Lorenzen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2018
* USD 694,820.00

Intellectual Merit: Advantageous genes normally persist and predominate in
populations, while deleterious genes disappear. However, some non-adaptive genes
have found ways to counter the forces of natural selection and infiltrate
populations; these are known as selfish genetic elements or selfish genes. Such
elements are able to increase in frequency and spread through populations by
employing genetic mechanisms that circumvent Mendel's laws of inheritance. A
fascinating case is that of the Maternal-Effect Dominant Embryonic Arrest
(Medea) elements in the red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum. Heterozygous
Medea females transmit a dominant-lethal factor to hatchlings, but the lethal
effect is shut down in those progeny that inherit a Medea allele from either
parent. Thus, each Medea allele encodes both a maternally loaded "poison" and an
"antidote" expressed in the embryo. Little is known about how such elements
function. Therefore, this project is aimed at discovering the molecular
mechanism responsible for Medea's selfish behavior by using genetic and genomic
tools to uncover the genes involved in self-selection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will increase our
understanding of how selfish genes escape natural selection and infiltrate
populations. This knowledge could provide a new mechanism for transferring
traits into pest populations to make them less problematic. The project includes
several educational components. The PI is participating in an NSF Integrative
Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (Genetic Engineering and Society:
The case of transgenic pests) that is focused on training students in
technologies used for manipulation of pest genomes as well as methods needed to
assess the environmental and sociocultural appropriateness of specific products
of these genetic manipulations. This research will be integrated directly into
IGERT courses and research of IGERT graduate fellows. The project also includes
activities that will provide undergraduates from underrepresented groups with an
opportunity to participate in cutting-edge functional genomic research.
Moreover, this research will be widely disseminated through outreach events by
the PI and IGERT students to raise public awareness about the utility of
transgenic technologies.