* 1244162
* Regulation of the Cytoskeleton by Signaling Proteins during Quorum Sensing
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Derrick Brazill, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2018
* USD 671,495.00

The ability of mammalian cells to sense the density of the cells around them
(quorum sensing) plays an important role in such fundamental processes as
embryogenesis, proliferation and differentiation, and cell migration. Without
quorum sensing a developing embryo would be unable to properly proportion its
cells into different tissue types. Such control requires integrating secreted
factors, signal transduction molecules, and cellular machinery. In mammals, the
sheer number of players involved in these processes creates an unwieldy morass
of interconnected proteins, making it difficult to study. This project is
designed to untangle this snarl by using the social ameoba, Dictyostelium
discoideum, as a model. Dictyostelium cells display many of the characteristics
of mammalian cells, including, but not limited to, motility, differentiation,
development and cell to cell signaling. Thus, this protist is an excellent model
for mammalian cell behavior, especially quorum sensing. When starved,
Dictyostelium cells will undergo a period of differentiation and development
leading to the formation of a multicellular organism. However, this process will
not begin unless there are sufficient numbers of starving cells to form a full
sized organism. Therefore, these cells are able to sense the density of the
starving cells around them and respond appropriately. This project will
delineate how three signal transduction molecules (phospholipase Dbeta and the
protein kinases TklA and PakD) work together to control changes in the actin
cytoskeleton and the decision to develop. By uncovering the function of these
proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum, a better understanding of their roles in
quorum sensing in mammalian cells can be gained, and with it, a better
understanding of their roles in development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This project advances discovery while promoting participation
of underrepresented groups in the learning process, as Hunter College is a
minority serving institution with a 60% female student body. Underrepresented
students and one postdoctoral researcher will be actively engaged in designing,
interpreting and presenting experiments. As part of this project, two lab
modules designed to teach genetic analysis to Biology, Biochemistry and
Neuroscience majors will be created, implemented and assessed. The postdoctoral
researcher will help design the modules, train the lab instructors and teach
students, enabling him to acquire skills in course creation, coordination and
lecturing. These lab modules will be disseminated on-line to the broader
teaching community (www.dictybase.org), extending the reach to those
historically underrepresented in the sciences.