* 1244611
* RUI:  Thiols in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* John Constable, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 649,625.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Cyanobacteria or blue green algae encompass a large
and heterogeneous group of photosynthetic bacteria found in many terrestrial and
aquatic environments, which play a major role in the global carbon and nitrogen
cycles. These organisms are increasingly exposed to a number of environmental
stresses as a result of pollution and ocean acidification. Thiols, small
molecules, containing a characteristic sulfhydryl group, are key protectants
against environmental stresses. In particular, thiols react with the amino acid
cysteine in proteins, in a process called thiolation, and protect these amino
acids from irreversible inactivation by oxidative stress. It has long been known
that cyanobacteria contain a thiol called glutathione; however, recently another
thiol, ergothioneine, has been identified in cyanobacteria. This project
explores the role of glutathione and ergothioneine in cyanobacteria. First, in
an undergraduate microbiology course, a survey of thiols in species of
cyanobacteria, isolated from terrestrial, marine, and freshwater environments
will be undertaken to provide a comprehensive view of thiols in cyanobacteria.
Second, the function of glutathione and ergothioneine will be studied in the
model cyanobacteria, Synechocystis PCC6803 and Synechococcus PCC7942, with the
use of mutants lacking glutathione, ergothioneine, or both thiols. These mutants
will be exposed to various environmental stresses to see how well they deal with
them. Identification of proteins that require glutathione and ergothioneine as
cofactors will be attempted and proteomics will be performed to determine which
cyanobacterial proteins are protected by thiolation during environmental stress.
The ultimate aim of this research project is to evaluate the relative
contribution of different thiols in cyanobacteria in protecting the cells
against environmental stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research will be performed by undergraduate and Master's
level graduate research assistants, working on research projects and in project
oriented learning classes in molecular biology and microbiology. The students
will present their research findings to K-12 students in elementary/high schools
as a service learning exercise. Elementary and high school teachers will be
involved in this project through molecular biology workshops or through mentored
research experiences in the PI's laboratory. This project will shed light on how
photosynthetic bacteria cope with changes in their environment and may provide
insight into how global climate change might influence cyanobacterial
populations.