* 1244019
* Dot1 and Histone H3 K79 Methylation in Nucleotide Excision Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Shisheng Li, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 01/31/2017
* USD 642,444.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;In eukaryotic cells, DNA is packaged into
chromatin. The basic structure of chromatin is the nucleosome, which is
comprised of 146 base pairs of DNA wrapped around a protein octamer containing
two molecules of each of the four core histones, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. Both
normal metabolic activities and environmental factors such as sunlight and
industrial pollutants can cause damage to cellular DNA. To contend with the
constantly occurring DNA damage, cells are equipped with multiple, highly
conserved DNA repair pathways. One important DNA repair pathway, global genomic
repair (GGR), is responsible for repairing bulky DNA lesions throughout the
genome. It was discovered very recently that methylation of histone H3 lysine 79
(H3K79) by Dot1, a histone methyltransferase, is required for GGR. The goal of
this project is to investigate how methylation of H3K79 by Dot1 mediates GGR by
using the eukaryotic model organism brewer's yeast, Sacharomyces cerevisiae.
Three questions will be addressed in this project. First, mono-ubiquitination of
histone H2B lysine 123 and a basic patch in the N-terminal tail of histone H4
have been shown to trans-activate Dot1. The roles of these trans-activating
elements in GGR and how they crosstalk with Dot1 in modulating GGR will be
determined. Second, the nature of the GGR signal conferred by H3K79 methylation
will be determined by changing the different states of H3K79 methylation in the
cell. The roles of amino acids surrounding H3K79 on the nucleosome surface in
GGR will also be determined. Third, GGR factors recruited by methylated H3K79
will be investigated by using a novel crosslinking technique that allows for
detection of direct interaction between a rare protein and an abundant protein
even if the interaction may be transient in living cells. New GGR-specific
factors recruited by H3K79 will be identified by utilizing this novel
crosslinking technique in combination with mass
spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes a significant educational component, with most of the funding used for
research training of future professionals, including funding for graduate and
undergraduate students to present their data at scientific meetings and publish
results in scientific journals. Some of the new methods developed and findings
generated from the project will be presented in the classroom. Unique yeast
mutants and methodologies developed will be shared with the scientific
community. Given the fact that Dot1, H3K79 methylation, nucleosome structure and
the GGR process are highly conserved among eukaryotes, the findings generated
from the yeast studies are likely to be applicable to other eukaryotic species,
thus increasing the understanding of DNA repair processes, and the consequences
of unrepaired damage.