* 1244570
* Evolution of Translation:  From molecules to cells
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2018
* USD 821,855.00

The translation machinery is the center of protein synthesis and is present in
hundreds to thousands of copies in every cell. The translational pathway
requires a large number of macromolecular RNA:protein complexes to ensure its
proper function. While the individual components and reactions involved in the
pathway have been well studied, an integrated picture resolved both spatially
and temporally, progressing from molecules to an entire cell is still missing.
This research project is designed to extend our knowledge of the function and
evolution of translation to higher levels of organization and scale. On the
molecular level, the specific goals of the research are to study communication
pathways in the RNA:protein complexes that set the genetic code. Interaction
pathways that lead to evolution of specificity and editing in the aminoacyl-tRNA
syntheses and communication within the ribosome will be studied using network
properties and free energy surfaces obtained from molecular dynamics
simulations. The folding/assembly landscape of the ribosomal small subunit will
be computationally examined using all-atom and knowledge-based GO potentials.
These simulations will be carried out simultaneously with folding experiments on
the same systems. To study the kinetics of translation and the folding of DNA in
the crowded environment of the cell, stochastic simulations of
transcription/translation processes will be carried out using the GPU-based
Lattice Microbe program. The 3D lattice models are based upon spatial and
temporal information obtained from single molecule, proteomics, and cryo-
electron tomography data from intact cells. Hypotheses about how the process of
translation occurs at a cellular scale will be tested and extended using systems
biology approaches.

All of the visualization, simulation, and analysis tools to enable the study of
macromolecular RNA:protein assemblies will be made publicly available and
updated through the MultiSeq and Network View extensions to the popular VMD
biomolecular analysis software. Updates to the hybrid MD-Go and metadynamics
free energy modules will be implemented into the molecular dynamics program NAMD
that is available on all the NSF Supercomputer facilities. In addition any new
analysis tools and results will be incorporated into a series of tutorials for
teaching computational biology that will be available online. The PI's research
group will continue to participate in the NSF sponsored Graduate Teaching
Fellows program to help high school teachers prepare state-of-the-art scientific
curriculum for their classrooms. The Lattice Microbe method allows stochastic
simulations of complex cellular processes and reactions. All cell simulations
software will be made publicly available. As with the other computational
biophysics techniques developed by the principal investigator, tutorials and
users guides will be developed to assist other researchers in using the
methodology in their own studies. This project is jointly supported by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Physics Division and
by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Chemistry Division.