* 1244666
* Statistical Physics far from Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Beate Schmittmann, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 445,531.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education in a
continuing effort to understand the complex behavior in interacting many-
particle systems driven far from thermal equilibrium. Unlike their equilibrium
counterparts, these systems "both physical and biological" cannot be described
by the well established framework of Boltzmann and Gibbs. One essential
difference is that these systems are in contact with more than one reservoir in
such a way that nontrivial fluxes through the systems persist, even when they
are in time-independent states. Good examples include all living organisms, the
earth as an ecosystem, and many aspects of our modern infrastructure. The key
challenge is to devise a reliable theoretical framework which predicts
macroscopic observables from the underlying microscopic dynamics. An overarching
framework for non-equilibrium statistical mechanics is lacking. The PIs will
study the least complex models which include essential characteristics of far-
from-equilibrium physics. The PIs will focus on models with the potential for
applications to biological systems. The totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process will be a focus of study. Many properties of the original model are
known analytically. However, generalizations of the model become the building
blocks for a quantitative approach to modeling protein production in a cell.
Progress in this field will contribute to understanding biological transport
processes, inspire possible ways to design and synthesize proteins, as well as
to valuable insights for addressing fundamental issues in non-equilibrium
statistical physics, such as the role of non-trivial probability current loops
in configuration space.

Given the range of topics and methods in this research, it lends itself readily
to the education of young scientists at virtually all levels. In this way, this
award contributes to the training of the next generation of a globally
competitive workforce.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education in
statistical physics of systems driven far from equilibrium. Living things
provide an important example of a system composed of many particles or parts
that is far from the balanced state known as equilibrium. The main goal of this
research is to elucidate the foundations of a theoretical and conceptual
framework for materials and other systems that are far from equilibrium. The PIs
seek an overarching principle which generalizes the extremely successful
fundamental hypothesis of the field of equilibrium statistical mechanics. This
research covers a wide range of topics and exploits a variety of methods: from
the simplest mathematical models to models of complex living systems and from
readily accessible computer simulations to sophisticated field theoretic
techniques. A central focus of this research lies at the interface of biology
and materials research. The PIs will study protein production by messenger RNA
in cells. It will be modeled as an assembly-line-like activity and studied with
both simulations and powerful tools in mathematics and statistics. This research
will apply the insights gained to investigate a wider range of transport
systems, from traffic flow to information on the Internet.

Given the range of topics and methods in this research, it lends itself readily
to the education of young scientists at virtually all levels. In this way, this
award contributes to the training of the next generation of a globally
competitive workforce.