* 1244101
* RUI-Identification of Genes and Cellular Processes Targeted by Imprinted Pathways in Natural Variants of Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Jonathan FitzGerald, Rhodes College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2019
* USD 412,515.00

Although it is common knowledge that we receive half of our genes from our
mother and half from our fathers, it is less widely known that the genes we
inherit can play different roles depending on which parent provided them. For
example, genes regulated by parental genomic imprinting (PGI) are silenced
either maternally or paternally (depending on the gene) after fertilization. PGI
has been characterized in mammals and seed plants, and in both cases has been
linked in part to the regulation of maternal resources available to the
offspring. Using the plant model Arabidopsis thaliana, it has been found that
plants isolated from different regions can promote strong increases in seed size
depending on whether they are used as mothers or fathers in crosses. This might
further suggest that parental bias for resource allocation, or the even
selection of imprinted genes themselves, is subject to variation in natural
populations. This project aims to identify the genes involved in these parental
effects using recombinant inbred (RI) lines, which are genetic chimeras of two
initial parents, and mapping populations that carry visual markers for maternal
gene expression. In addition, seed development will be characterized at the
cellular level to better describe the developmental outcomes of variation in
imprinted or parentally-biased systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
This project seeks to identify seed size genes that may function in short-term
adaptive strategies for genomic regulation, accounting for some trait variation
between Arabidopsis ascensions. This aspect is directly translatable to novel
breeding strategies in agriculture. This project will also aim to advance
education at the boundary of biology and mathematics. The RI lines employed are
uniquely suited as a classroom tool to bridge basic genetics and physiology with
computational methods. A learning module has been created to conduct publishable
RI research in the Plant Genetics and Diversity course at Rhodes College.
Resources will be generated from these course materials allowing educators at
both the university and high school level to employ RI systems in the classroom.
Educational goals will be further supported by involving undergraduate
researchers at all stages of this work, and underrepresented minorities in
science will continue to be actively recruited for these research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research.