* 1244098
* Collaborative Research:  Elucidating Pre-initiation Complex Assembly and Transcription Initiation by Pol-II Using Advanced Single Molecule and Microfluidic Methods
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Shimon Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2019
* USD 900,000.00

Intellectual Merit: RNA polymerase II (also called pol II) is an essential
enzyme that catalyzes the transcription of DNA into messenger RNA (and most
other forms of RNA), an important first step in gene expression. This project
will elucidate key structural and functional aspects of the assembly of the Pre-
Initiation Complex (PIC) of pol II and the mechanism of transcription
initiation, i.e. the mechanistic steps involved in starting the transcription of
a new gene. Sophisticated solution-based single-molecule fluorescence
techniques, combined with microfluidics, will be applied to individual complexes
in order to study how pol II assembles at a promoter (gene start site) and how
it performs its catalytic function. Because single-molecule approaches remove
ensemble and temporal averaging, information about the order and the kinetics of
assembly will be unraveled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The "nano-
biotechnology revolution" and the emergence of single molecule biophysics and
super-resolution imaging have opened up tremendous opportunities in the
investigation of processes that define life. One such process, fundamental to
the "Central Dogma of Biology," is transcription. The approach for studying this
basic process to be taken in this research could break conceptual and practical
barriers that have hindered progress, and offers potential to catalyze discovery
in many new ways. The tools and methods to be developed, as well as the general
approaches pursued, will have greatest impact if distributed to a broad audience
of receptive and innovative young scientists. Through educational and outreach
programs, the project will expose a young audience (high school and college
students), as well as more mature scientists, to novel research tools and
methodologies that could be used to study many other biological processes and
molecular machines.