* 1244415
* RUI: Membrane Dynamics During Cortical Development in Tetrahymena thermophila
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Eric Cole, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2016
* USD 187,204.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;One of the more interesting questions in biology
is how seemingly simple cells assemble and position complex structures for
feeding, movement, and reproduction. The PI has identified genetic mutations
that affect the patterning of cortical organelles, through targeting membrane-
remodeling events. Further analyses reveal a novel process by which cells
extrude membrane-bound "micro-vesicles" (small packets of protein and RNA
molecules) into the outside world. Micro-vesicles have recently gained
widespread attention in that they represent a new class of signaling mechanism
to communicate developmental and physiological responses, and represent a
potential means of regulating cell-surface, pattern-generating molecules. The
work in this project will utilize high-resolution microscopic imaging of micro-
vesicle formation in both normal and mutant Tetrahymena cells to develop
mechanistic detail on how these structures form, function, and contribute to the
patterning of cortical organelles. Micro-vesicles will further be purified for
chemical analyses, to understand vesicle composition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: &lt;br/&gt;St. Olaf College is an
undergraduate institution, devoted to the teaching of science by sharing in the
process of discovery. NSF funds will support the research activities of 4
undergraduates, particularly during the summer of 2014. In Biology, students
will be trained in state-of-the-art fluorescence and confocal microscopy as well
as gain experience with transmission electron microscopy. In Chemistry, students
will be trained in organelle isolation, SDS-PAGE analysis, and will utilize the
department's mass spectrometer for proteomic analyses. An emphasis is placed on
first-hand undergraduate use of state-of-the-art instrumentation, to prepare
students for productive scientific careers. Along this line, undergraduates will
further be challenged to present their results at meetings and in publications.
Together, the scientific and broader impacts of this project will develop a
novel pathway that cells use to communicate and respond to environmental
information, and foster the training of the next generation of scientists.