* 1244586
* Assembly and Function of the Cyanobacterial Photosystem II Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Robert Burnap, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 741,486.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;If carbon-neutral energy and chemical feedstock
solutions are to be developed, these will likely include natural or engineered
photosynthetic organisms that manufacture valuable products and/or engineered
devices that mimic the principals of natural photosynthesis by coupling of light
capture to charge separation and then to endergonic chemical bond rearrangement.
An understanding of oxygenic photosynthesis is important on both counts. Despite
much progress, there are many important facets of the photosynthetic mechanism
that remain to be understood. Of central importance is the water oxidation
mechanism catalyzed by photosystem II (PSII), which utilizes water as the source
of reductant to fix inorganic carbon. Many aspects of the enzyme's oxygen-
yielding water oxidation mechanism remain poorly understood. This includes the
repair processes necessitated by incessant photodamage sustained by PSII. These
photodamage processes are due to the extraordinary high-potential multi-electron
redox reactions that PSII catalyzes; also an important consideration for natural
and biomimetic solar energy applications. This proposal addresses two major
questions: First, is there a signal conveying the occurrence of damage to an
individual PSII complex thereby targeting it for repair or is the repair process
a generalized response randomly operating on the population of PSII in response
to photodamage-inducing conditions? Second, how are the active site metals,
manganese and calcium, assembled into a catalytically active complex? The
project will combine molecular genetic, biochemical and biophysical approaches
to understand the D1 protein repair process and the assembly and function of the
catalytically active complex and also the role of the proteins that tune its
reactivity and organize its structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Immersing high school science teachers in a research environment that
will be combined with professional development activities will help educators
gain an explicit view of how scientific knowledge is generated and will also
help with their own curriculum development. Teacher participants will be trained
to conduct research and mentor students. They will perpetuate this acquired
knowledge with their students by implementing new content knowledge and
pedagogical skills into their existing curriculum, mentoring students in student
research projects and coaching students in science fair competitions. During
state and national conferences teachers will share their developed curriculum
and mentoring skills with other educators. The PI and Co-PI will disseminate the
science research findings and the educational outreach experience at science and
education conference, presenting at the OSU National Lab Day, and through
research and practitioner journals.