* 1244378
* Genome Evolution in Large, Reproductively Diverse Bacteria in the Epulopiscium Family
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Esther Angert, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 12/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Epulopiscium spp. are among the largest known bacteria with some cigar-shaped
cells reaching lengths in excess of 0.6 mm. Epulopiscium spp. and their
relatives are intestinal symbionts associated specifically with certain species
of tropical reef fish in the surgeonfish family. They are a conspicuous and
usual component of the community of microorganisms that inhabit the fish and
they contribute to the digestion of polysaccharides consumed by their fish host.
The Angert Lab has been using Epulopiscium sp. type B as a model for studies of
cell, developmental and evolutionary biology. This organism has been key in
providing a better understanding of how a simple bacterial cell can make small
changes in its cellular structure and organization to allow it to reach its
tremendous size. The current project seeks to improve this experimental system
further by completing the genome sequence of Epulopiscium sp. type B. These
efforts will yield an important resource for studying the genetic potential of
these exceptional bacteria in the context of cell and developmental biology.
Gene expression in actively growing populations of Epulopiscium sp. type B will
be characterized to identify genes that are essential for supporting cell growth
and metabolism. This profile will provide the basis for improving methods to
grow these bacteria in laboratory culture.

Broader impacts: This project provides significant educational and training
opportunities for postdoctoral and undergraduate research assistants. All
trainees will gain experience in molecular biology, microbiology, DNA sequence
analysis, and the application of basic bioinformatics tools. Through research
presentations, manuscript and proposal preparation, trainees will develop their
communication skills. Depending on the project, an individual will gain more
extensive experience in bioinformatics, evolutionary biology, and genomics. Such
research experiences are essential for the development of a young scientist.