* 1244383
* Flagellar Membrane Signaling Protein Transport Mechanisms:   A Single-Molecule Study
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Yan Mei Wang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2015
* USD 523,439.00

There is a growing recognition of the importance of cilia/flagella (hair-like
projections on cell surfaces) in sensing extracellular information in multiple
organisms. In order to understand the role cilia/flagella play in cellular
signal transduction processes, the transport mechanisms of flagellar membrane
signaling proteins and their intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery will be
examined at three parts of the intraflagellar transport cycle: (i) flagellar
entry, (ii) intraflagellar motion, and (iii) flagellar tip remodeling in the
model organism Chlamydomonas. For each part of the transport cycle, this project
will use quantitative single-molecule fluorescence imaging methods to test
competing models: (i) In the flagellar entry region, it will be determined
whether flagellar membrane signaling proteins synthesized in the cytoplasm enter
the flagella by diffusion or if they are carried into the flagella by IFT
machinery. (ii) Inside the flagella, the project aims to elucidate the IFT
carrier and quantitate the trafficking kinetics for selected flagellar membrane
signaling proteins. (iii) At the flagellar tip, it will be resolved whether the
IFT machinery components dissociate from microtubules and each other and
reassemble for the retrograde trip, or whether the reassembly occurs without
dissociation of the IFT transport machinery.

BROADER IMPACTS This project is a multidisciplinary joint effort between
laboratories with expertise in single-molecule imaging method, and Chlamydomonas
(algal) IFT genetics. This merger of genetics and imaging biophysics will
benefit both the flagellar and single molecule imaging fields. It will allow for
the application of advanced imaging tools to questions addressing fundamental
aspects of cellular signal transduction, while offering students exciting
opportunities to carry out interdisciplinary training in physics and biology. In
particular, the project will aim to support the training of female graduate and
undergraduate students, including students recruited from regional primarily
undergraduate colleges. The success of the proposed investigation will
strengthen collaborations among members of the Imaging Sciences Pathway, a
biological imaging program that includes faculty from the Schools of Arts &
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine at Washington University. In addition, for
the broader local community, the project's hands-on outreach activities to high
school students in the St. Louis region are designed to entice young minds to
choose science as a career.