* 1244489
* Enriching the General Chemistry Laboratory Experience with Pedagogical Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Mike Stieff, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,959.00

This project is developing and evaluating the Connected Chemistry Curriculum
(CCC), which incorporates software that employs visual representations embedded
in a modeling environment as the core component of undergraduate learning
activities in general chemistry. Students participating in the curriculum
visualize and manipulate individual molecules in a chemical system and visualize
the result of their experimental manipulations. The software makes the
information embedded in two-dimensional representations explicit, and provides
visual displays of molecular interactions for students to observe, as well as
multiple representations to foster conceptual understanding and emphasize
connections between symbolic representations. The goals of the project are to 1)
design ten self-contained learning modules and supporting materials that include
CCC simulations as a core component to address student difficulties in learning
general chemistry concepts, 2) optimize the modules using embedded assessments
and field observations of classroom practice, and 3) evaluate the efficacy the
modules for improving chemistry achievement via a quasi-experimental study that
compares the achievement of students learning with CCC modules to students
learning from traditional lecture and laboratory methods alone. The project is
expected to strengthen the knowledge base regarding student interpretation and
manipulation of scientific representations and the affordances of visualization
tools for teaching chemistry, as well as inform the design of new visualization-
based science curricula.