* 1244739
* EAGER:   RUI:   The genomic architecture of speciation in an avian hybrid zone
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* John McCormack, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2014
* USD 53,849.00

This study seeks to address how the genomes of different birds respond to
hybridization and what keeps them distinct. The two forms of the Western Scrub-
Jay, one found in coastal California and the other in the interior United
States, have different plumage colors and different bill shapes that are adapted
to local resources. This study will look at an area of contact between them to
address two important questions that are currently intensely debated in the
field of evolutionary theory: (1) whether genetic divergence on the sex
chromosomes plays an outsized role in keeping species separate; and (2) whether
genomic divergence tends to accumulate in just a few places in the genome, or
whether divergence is more evenly spread out throughout the genome. To
accomplish this, the researchers will use novel methods for sequencing large
subsets of the genomes of many individuals found inside and outside a contact
zone near Lake Tahoe.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding how species remain
distinct despite the fact that they sometimes interbreed and exchange genes is
an important basic question in evolutionary biology bearing on how and why
biodiversity is generated. It is also important from the standpoint of
protecting and managing our country's existing wealth of biodiversity, because
there are many natural and human-mediated cases of hybridization between
economically important species. This research will lead to a better
understanding of how the genome responds to hybridization, and what keeps
species distinct.