* 1244633
* Exocyst-Mediated Pathways to the Plant Cell Surface
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2015
* John Fowler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2015
* USD 139,999.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT This project seeks to understand the mechanisms by which
plant cells control the delivery of proteins and other functional molecules to
their outer surface, the region defined by the plasma membrane and surrounding
cell wall. This process is known as vesicle trafficking, as proteins are
produced within the cell, packaged into small, membrane-bound carriers
(vesicles), and then moved to the plasma membrane for final delivery. This
process is important because: 1) it is the primary mechanism used to build and
to control the plant cell interface with its outside environment, which can
affect how the plant interacts with harmful or beneficial microbes; 2) it is
crucial for cell growth; 3) it is a regulator of cell-cell communication between
cells; and 4) it is crucial for the acquisition of nutrients from the
surrounding environment via specialized plasma membrane-localized protein
transporters. The molecular mechanisms regarding how vesicle trafficking are
controlled are not well understood. One player that appears likely to control
this process in plant cells is the eight-protein exocyst complex, which provides
spatial regulation at the plasma membrane for vesicle trafficking. This project
uses the Arabidopsis root hair as a model and investigates the exocyst-mediated
vesicle trafficking pathway (EMVT). EMVT is required for proper growth of the
root hair, a key structure for nutrient acquisition. The project seeks to
understand how root hair growth relies on EMVT through: 1) Characterization of
exocyst interactions with other known components of the vesicle trafficking
system; and 2) Molecular identification of a new gene (NERD1) which interacts
functionally with the exocyst in the Arabidopsis root hair. The project should
build a deeper understanding of how the function of plasma membrane-targeted
molecules is enabled and controlled, and how precise patterns of cellular growth
are affected.

BROADER IMPACTS The knowledge generated in this project may have broad
implications for plant physiology and development. Due to its hypothesized
connection to the plasma membrane, EMVT may help mediate interactions between
root and soil. Thus, this work could inform applied work that seeks to manage
plant responses to abiotic stress induced by the surrounding environment (e.g.
drought, salinity, and nutrient-poor soils), to pathogens, and to interactions
with the rhizosphere microbial community. In addition, the project will train a
postdoctoral researcher in integrating genetic, cell biological and next-
generation sequencing approaches, and will mentor undergraduate students in
plant genetic research. Finally, this project will support outreach efforts to
high school students through the Apprenticeships in Science and Engineering
program at Oregon State University.