* 1244354
* Tonoplast Protein Trafficking in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Marcela Pierce, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2017
* USD 488,802.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT The long-term goal of this research is to identify and
characterize the mechanisms for trafficking of plant vacuole-tonoplast membrane
proteins. Chemical inhibitors of tonoplast protein trafficking and mutants with
abnormal localization of a tonoplast protein were previously identified. The
bioactive probes indicated that multiple pathways, including a novel Golgi-
independent pathway, target vacuole-membrane proteins. This project will
identify the mechanisms by which membrane proteins are targeted to the vacuole,
and how these contribute to its biogenesis. The work plan will test the
hypothesis that a Golgi-independent pathway engages in tonoplast protein
trafficking, and will investigate a novel role for phosphoinositide lipids in
plant vacuole biogenesis. The specific aims for this research are: 1) To
identify the roles of IMPAIRED TONOPLAST TRAFFICKING4 (ITT4) and ITT6 genes in
tonoplast-protein targeting by characterization of two mutants with defects in
tonoplast protein localization. 2) To determine the role of phosphoinositide
lipids in vacuole biogenesis. 3) To characterize the dynamics of the Golgi-
independent pathway for tonoplast-protein targeting using real-time microscopy
of live cells. Given the essential roles of vacuole membrane proteins in
regulating cell turgor, and the storage potential of the vacuole, these results
may have future impacts on the biology of environmental stress responses in
plants and its applications to agriculture.

BROADER IMPACTS Chemical and genetic screens employed in this project will
benefit the field by generating novel chemicals and mutants that will be
available to the scientific community. Some of the experiments in this project
are amenable for high school and undergraduate research activities, and will
promote the training of students in state-of-the-art techniques in molecular
biology and fluorescent high resolution live-cell imaging. The PI will use these
activities to continue to engage minority high school students from the NC
School of Science and Mathematics with the goal of increasing the interest of
minority students in pursuing science degrees within the University. The PI's
laboratory will also host visits from River Oaks Middle School students to spark
the interest of these students towards science-related fields, and to convey the
impacts of scientific research to the public.