* 1244735
* PaleoCore: A model for Developing Distributed Data Frameworks in SBE and EHR
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Denne Reed, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 203,337.00

A common scientific challenge is that of merging together results from
independent research programs in order to conduct broad, synthetic analyses, as
for example when astronomers focus on different segments of the night sky,
geologists on specific times spans, and biologists on specific groups of
organisms. In these cases, the answers to major scientific questions arise when
the independent groups can successfully exchange and integrate their data into a
comprehensive framework for analysis. Creating new, large-scale, next-generation
data resources in the social, behavioral and economic sciences (SBE) and for
education and human resources (EHR) too will require linking independent data
sources into larger, coherent data structures. The PaleoCore initiative will
create data standards and software tools to facilitate the aggregation of data
into federated data networks. The project leverages data standards, and software
solutions from other scientific disciplines to rapidly develop solutions
relevant to SBE and EHR. The approach taken by the PaleoCore initiative is to
start with a specific topic in SBE, human prehistory, and develop solutions that
are broadly applicable to other scientific domains within SBE and EHR. Toward
this aim the project has three main goals: 1) to develop and publish a data
standard for prehistory, 2) to develop software tools that facilitate
researchers' ability to record collected data directly into databases,
especially geospatial databases, and 3) to develop a web portal that integrates
individual project databases online into a federated network of data providers
serving information to researchers, students and the general public. Through
these objectives scientists in the SBE and EHR sciences will have a mechanism
for broad-scale data integration, visualization, analysis and dissemination.
This framework creates the foundation for answering big-picture questions beyond
the reach of individual research projects and opens the door to new knowledge
based on large, aggregated data sets.