* 1244755
* CAREER: Macromolecular glycosidase mimics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Susanne Striegler, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 176,372.00

With the support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program at the National Science Foundation, Professor Susanne
Striegler, of the Department of Chemistry at Auburn University will focus on
developing a novel method for selective glycosylation by examining templated
microgels as catalysts. The studies planned utilize challenging syntheses of
glycosides and metal complexes, and will employ inhibition assays to provide
crucial information on the use of the designed transition state analogues as
enzyme inhibitors. Modern spectroscopic and calorimetric methods will be applied
to provide fundamental insights into the coordination behavior between the
synthesized transition state analogues and copper(II) complexes. Emulsion
polymerization will be employed to immobilize the azaglycoside-metal complex
assemblies into templated microgels that will function as soluble, homogenous
catalysts. The material obtained will be characterized by kinetic experiments to
probe the metal complex accelerated glycoside cleavage, i.e. glycosyl transfer
to water. The results of this study will provide the foundation for novel
macromolecular catalysts as an alternative to conventional syntheses and
enzymatic approaches and open new directions towards the synthesis of
glycoconjugates with prospective pharmacological effect.

With this CAREER award Professor Stiegler will significantly enhance the current
knowledge on transition state analogues to act as both inhibitors of enzymes and
templates for the preparation of advanced synthetic materials. Foundations are
being laid for the development of sophisticated macromolecular catalysts, which
transfer glycosyl moieties to complex acceptors other than water. The studies
proposed also open new research directions for the preparation of efficient,
macromolecular enzyme mimics based on coordinative bonds. The experimental
demonstration mini-course will highlight the merits of chemistry and provide
connections to daily life. Explanations of a visible phenomenon will spark
interest for sciences in an audience that will include students from nearby,
historically black high schools and colleges, e.g. Bullock County High School or
Tuskegee University, their teachers and instructors, and other interested
members of the public. Research opportunities in the PI's laboratory include a
summer research project and a short organic synthesis course for students from
local high schools. Hands-on experience in organic chemistry and networking
opportunities will be offered to further manifest the students' interest in a
career in chemistry. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
program will be trained at the interface of chemistry and biology. They will
obtain skills to perform (in)organic syntheses including polymerizations,
conduct spectroscopic and calorimetric characterization of coordination events,
and determine kinetic profiles of enzymes and synthetic catalysts. Additionally,
they will participate in outreach programs to the general public with particular
focus on the African-American students in rural Alabama.