* 1244106
* Activation of an Endoribonuclease by Non-intein Protein Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2013,07/31/2016
* David Stern, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 07/31/2016
* USD 445,069.00

The sequence of a protein can be predicted from that of the RNA which specifies
it. In other words, there is usually a correspondence between the code embedded
in an RNA molecule, and the protein resulting from the activity of that RNA as a
template. A protein called RB47 fails to follow this paradigm and is the main
focus of this project. Specifically, RB47 is synthesized according to its RNA
template, but then an internal portion of the protein is removed, with the two
flanking portions being combined into a spliced, smaller protein. Such protein
splicing reactions are known in nature, but are normally spontaneous. In the
case of RB47, specific cellular factors are required to splice it. The research
is focused around the mechanism of this splicing, which has no obvious
precedent. A second aspect of RB47 is that the initial version of the protein is
enzymatically inert, but the spliced version harbors an RNA cleavage activity.
Thus, protein splicing activates this enzyme. This hints that the splicing has a
regulatory function as well. The project has three specific goals: first, to
define the signals within the protein itself that are required for RNA cleavage
activity; second, to discover the molecular apparatus that carries out the
splicing reaction; and third, to use genetic experiments to discern the
biological role of RB47. Although RB47 is a protein from the chloroplast of the
green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, the mechanism under study may well occur
in many organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project has
potential for broad biological impacts, and will also be used as a training
opportunity. The major novelty is that the form of protein splicing under study
is newly described, and therefore suggests a previously unrecognized mechanism
for creating diversity in proteins. This research may therefore stimulate or
facilitate exploration of protein splicing on a larger scale, i.e. in other
organisms. If this type of protein splicing is widespread, there will be
important implications for analyzing the current large datasets of RNA and
protein sequences, which in turn impinges on the analysis of the ever-growing
deluge of genomic information. The project will train students at the high
school and undergraduate levels, including those from underrepresented groups,
through an internship program run at the host institution (Boyce Thompson
Institute). This program has a strong record of diverse participation, and
ensures through strong management a broad exposure to plant science, as well as
career-related guidance and perspective. The project will create a video
publication on a key biochemical technique employed in this project; a prior
video was widely viewed and has assisted re-searchers in many laboratories.
Boyce Thompson Institute has committed resources to a robust training
environment not only for the next generation of scientists, but also for high
school teachers. In addition, it will commit resources to support programmatic
development for a variety of outreach programs. These programs provide numerous
opportunities for postdoctoral fellows at Boyce Thompson Institute, including
those to be trained in this project, to participate directly in outreach efforts
and thus enrich their career paths.