* 1244944
* EAGER: Ethnographic Investigation of Fat Stigma in Three Countries
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Alexandra Brewis, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 42,300.00

This award is an Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER). The
project will provide the first data closely exploring the changing meanings that
people attach to being overweight ("fat stigma") in the developing world. The
PIs are building a conceptual model of the relationship between obesity stigma
and upward mobility as mediated by symbolic body capital that can be applied
cross-culturally. They hypothesize a tipping point of economic prosperity where
the idea of fatness as an undesirable personal and social characteristic begins
to proliferate. In this phase of the project they will evaluate ethnographically
the key concepts that that they will test with more extensive survey-based
research in a later phase.

The growing global prevalence of obesity is associated with increased engagement
in the global economy, affecting diet and work patterns. At the same time there
appears an increase in stigma against overweight even in societies that
traditionally valued larger bodies. Little is known about the predictors and
processes of the rise of fat stigma. Even less is understood about changing
understandings of shifts in body size, body size ideals, and fat stigma. The
researchers will collect ethnographic data in a typically upwardly mobile
segment of these populations -- university students -- as well as among their
non-student age-matched peers. They will conduct participant-observation on
university campuses and in community sites in Belize, Jamaica, and Nepal, three
countries that vary in obesity rates, wealth, and culture. Interviews will be
conducted with infomants matched by age (18-25) and gender in each of the six
sites (for a total of 120 interviews). They will also conduct a survey of a
larger sample.

Findings from this research will contribute to theory on embodiment, moral
personhood, and social transition. They will also inform health-promotion
programs and provide timely opportunities for two-way international educational
collaborations in cultural anthropology. Three graduate students and two
undergraduate students will be engaged in data collection, and two graduate
students and two undergraduate students will assist in data coding and analysis.