* 1244557
* Mechanisms of Acquired Immunity in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Jennifer Doudna, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,682,910.00

Title: Mechanism of Acquired Immunity in Bacteria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior
personnel: Jennifer Doudna, University of California at Berkeley (Principle
investigator)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific research: Control of viral
infections in bacterial populations is critical to the use of microbes for a
wide variety of applications including bioremediation and biofuel production.
The discovery of RNA-based acquired immunity in bacteria, mediated by Clustered
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPRs), provides an exciting
opportunity to exploit natural pathways for regulating gene expression if the
underlying molecular mechanisms can be discovered and manipulated. This project
aims to determine how self versus non-self recognition is achieved, how new DNA
sequences are acquired during viral infections and used to immunize cells
against future infections. This project has the potential to transform the way
we understand gene regulation in bacteria, and to reveal the molecular basis for
a previously unknown and unanticipated mechanism of anti-viral defense. To
understand the independent evolution and physiological functions of bacterial
pathways utilizing RNA molecules to control genetic elements, it will be
necessary to determine the molecular mechanisms of CRISPR activity. The
potential impact of this project includes both discovering the mechanisms by
which microbes acquire immunity to viruses, and providing the knowledge
necessary to manipulate or engineer those systems for various applications. The
project provides an exciting avenue of research for students, and is
particularly appealing to undergraduates who are being exposed to protein and
RNA biochemistry for the first time. There are ample opportunities for students
to make truly new discoveries in this field, with potentially very high
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The primary investigator's lab has
a successful history of training students at all levels in the creative
dissection of molecular mechanisms involving RNA and RNA-protein complexes using
a variety of experimental methods. The project will be conducted in a highly
collaborative environment at UC Berkeley, which has become a de facto center for
CRISPR research encompassing ongoing work in the laboratories of Jill Banfield,
Phil Hugenholtz and Adam Arkin. An annual CRISPR conference attracts scientists
from around the world to UC Berkeley to share their latest results. Students
attend and present their work at this meeting, providing an outstanding
opportunity for learning and discussing new results.