* 1244691
* BCC-SBE: Addressing Challenges for Geospatial Data-Intensive Research Communities: Research on Unique Confidentiality Risks &amp; Geospatial Data Sharing within a Virtual Data Encl
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Douglas Richardson, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 389,296.00

Research combining a variety of intensive geographically-referenced data streams
is spreading across many scientific domains, ranging from environmental science
to transportation to epidemiology, and opportunities to create new multi-
disciplinary and data-intensive scientific collaborations are expanding. Yet,
the unique characteristics of georeferenced data present special challenges to
such collaborations. These data are highly identifiable when presented in maps
and other visualizations. The potential opportunities and benefits of
collaboration are constrained by the need to protect the locational privacy and
confidentiality of subjects in research using georeferenced data. This research
addresses the challenges facing geospatial data-intensive research communities
by focusing on the unique confidentiality characteristics of geospatial data and
their visualizations, on disclosure risks, and on the potential for sharing
geospatial data within a Virtual Data Enclave.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Association of American Geographers and the Interuniversity Consortium for
Political and Social Research at the University of Michigan will engage the
geospatial research community to (1) conduct research on the unique confidential
characteristics of large georeferenced data sets and on viable ways to
manipulate these data and their geovisualizations to protect confidentiality and
privacy; (2) conduct research on methods and procedures to assess and reduce
disclosure risks in maps and other research projects derived from locationally
identifiable data; (3) conduct research regarding the viability of sharing and
archiving confidential georeferenced research data using a Virtual Data Enclave
to enable sophisticated analyses of these data under conditions that protect the
privacy of research subjects, and (4) intensively test confidentiality methods
within the geospatial Virtual Data Enclave to reduce disclosure risk and develop
standards for disclosure review.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in geographic
technologies (such as geographic information systems, computer mapping, and GPS)
have provided new and increasingly powerful tools for researchers to visualize
and analyze a wide range of phenomena ranging from the environment to
transportation to disease prevention. Geographic analyses and visualizations of
geographic data associated with such phenomena have created opportunities for
innovation and advanced research across a broad range of disciplines. Yet,
analysis and mapping of individual-level data associated with specific locations
(i.e., georeferenced data) may reveal patterns of interaction between people and
their social and physical environments. Individuals become more identifiable
when their individual locations (e.g., home or work) and itineraries (e.g.,
travel to work) are available. This research will examine ways to protect the
confidentiality and locational privacy of geographic data collected and shared
among researchers. Specifically, this project will conduct research on the
unique challenges to using and sharing confidential georeferenced research data
and their visualizations, including: (1) the development and testing of
technologies and procedures to protect confidentiality of geographic data while
also allowing access to and sharing of important data among researchers, and (2)
the development of standards for disclosure of information that protect
individuals' privacy.