* 1244339
* Biosynthesis of phycoerythrins, photoysnthetic light harvesting proteins in cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Wendy Schluchter, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 623,284.00

Intellectual Merit: Small unicellular cyanobacteria such as Synechococcus RS9916
are estimated to contribute 25-30% of the total marine productivity.
Synechococcus is likely to be one of the most ubiquitous phytoplanktonic
organisms in the world's oceans and numerically the second most abundant marine
phototroph in this ecosystem. This ubiquity and abundance is in large part due
to its remarkable phenotypic plasticity in its use of a diverse set of
photosynthetic pigments, which is sustained by a complex set of genes and
regulatory systems that can be laterally transferred between lineages. Much of
this diversity occurs within the protein Phycoerythrin (PE), which has five
phycoerythrobilin (PEB) or phycourobilin (PUB) chromophores attached at six
cysteine residues. These posttranslational modifications are catalyzed by bilin
lyase/isomerase enzymes. As blue light is the dominating wavelength present in
the oligotrophic open ocean, strains capable of a process called Type IV
chromatic acclimation (CA4) have adapted by increasing the PUB content on their
PE to take advantage of the light filtering through the water by a novel
mechanism: induction of a bilin lyase/isomerase. The research in this project
will contribute to defining the function of these PE bilin lyase/isomerase
enzymes that are critical to the success and adaptation of this diverse group of
photosynthetic prokaryotes. A better understanding of this novel type of
chromatic acclimation (CA4) will be achieved. The first objective is to
characterize the biosynthesis of a "simple" PE in Fremyella diplosiphon. Six
genes with similarity to known bilin lyase enzymes are upregulated with
phycoerythrin structural genes. The second objective involves characterizing the
function of bilin lyases specific for PEI and PEII in Synechococcus RS9916,
focusing on the characterization of lyases responsible for CA4 changes. Analyses
of PE produced in the bilin lyase knockout mutants will be performed, and
recombinant protein expression in E. coli to test for bilin ligation and
isomerization activity will also be used.

Not only will these studies contribute to understanding how these ecologically
important organisms acclimate to thrive in the ocean, they will also
biochemically characterize enzymes which will have very important potential
biotechnological and cell biology applications for the use of phycoerythrins as
fluorescent tags.

Broader impacts: The PI has a strong track record of training undergraduates and
graduate students, especially members of under-represented groups in science,
and these efforts will continue during this granting period. The PI will
incorporate her research into a course called Biological Research Tools where
students learn basic molecular cloning and protein expression/purification of
phycobiliproteins in E. coli. At least two undergraduates (over the course of
the grant) will be selected to go to the laboratory of Dr. David Kehoe at
Indiana University (after working in the Schluchter lab for a year first) for
6-8 weeks in the summer in order to learn techniques to generate clean deletions
and to study gene regulation related to the CA4 collaboration project. The
student is likely to be a member of an under-represented group (50% of the PI's
past undergraduates have been minorities), and the purpose of these exchanges is
to expose these students to a larger, research university.