* 1244517
* RUI: Defining Structural Features of C. elegans histone H2A Variants Important for Transcriptional Regulation in Different Cell Types
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Diana Chu, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2018
* USD 668,113.00

Intellectual Merit: Different types of cells rely on the expression of distinct
sets of genes for their development and function. Altering the accessibility of
different sets of genes is one way genes can be regulated. The accessibility of
genes can rely on incorporating histone H2A variants into the nucleosomes that
compact DNA. For example, C. elegans express H2A variants that include the
evolutionarily conserved H2A.Z (HTZ-1) and the sperm-specific HTAS-1. This
project will test the hypothesis that structural differences in HTZ-1 and HTAS-1
alter DNA accessibility to regulate gene expression in a cell-type specific
manner. First, biophysical approaches will define structural properties of C.
elegans H2A proteins. Second, fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) and
biochemical approaches will identify differences in the stability, DNA
unwrapping, and packing of nucleosomes containing H2A, HTZ-1, and HTAS-1.
Cytological assays conducted in genetic mutants will correlate how H2A variant
incorporation affects gene expression. Swapping domains of HTZ-1 and HTAS-1 with
H2A in vitro and in vivo will identify structural domains of these H2A variants
that are important for their incorporation and roles in transcription in
distinct cell types. Overall, these studies will elucidate the structural
properties of C. elegans histone H2A variants that contribute to the
specification of different cell types. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The research will be conducted at San Francisco State University, a historically
minority-serving public institution. Undergraduate and master's students from
the Biology and Chemistry and Biochemistry programs will be trained by the PI
and her collaborators at SFSU and UCSF in the theory and practice of
biochemical, biophysical, and molecular genetic methodology to understand
fundamental aspects of DNA organization and transcriptional regulation. Students
will work in cohorts to share resources, ideas, and expertise. Under the
supervision of the PI, students will learn to critically evaluate scientific
research, plan experiments, and interpret experimental data to become
independent critical thinkers. The interdisciplinary training and mentorship
provided by the proposed work will provide a strong foundation to advance the
education and careers of SFSU's diverse students in the sciences.