* 1244518
* Investigating Mechanisms of RNA Polymerase II Transcription and Regulation Using Single-molecule Fluorescence
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* James Goodrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2018
* USD 795,941.00

Intellectual Merit: The process of mRNA synthesis (transcription) is a principle
control point for regulating gene expression during growth, development, and
normal cellular metabolism. The first step in transcription is formation of a
complex of proteins at the promoter of the DNA template. The goal of this
project is to investigate the assembly mechanism, dynamics, and heterogeneity of
human transcription factor/DNA complexes, and how these parameters contribute to
transcriptional control. This research will take advantage of single-molecule
fluorescence techniques, which have emerged as essential contributors to
revealing the dynamic behavior, conformational states, and heterogeneity of
biological complexes, thus providing unprecedented insight into their function.
Specifically, studies will investigate human HMGB1, a biologically essential
architectural protein that facilitates the formation of protein/DNA complexes
important in transcriptional regulation by dynamically binding and bending DNA.
The mechanism by which HMGB1 binds and distorts DNA, and how this activity
facilitates DNA binding by the transcriptional activator protein p53 will be
determined. The research will also investigate the parameters that define the
assembly and activity of complexes containing human RNA polymerase II, general
transcription factors, and promoter DNA. Fundamental questions about the
macromolecular interactions that govern the onset of transcription will be
answered. The results from the research will be integrated with previously
published biochemical and cell-based studies to provide a comprehensive view of
the mechanism by which HMGB1 functions and how RNA polymerase II complexes
assemble and transcribe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The future of
science is intimately tied to integrating research and education. Graduate and
undergraduate students will perform the research in this project, and
significant effort will be made in training these students in experimental
design, interpretation of data, creative thought, preparation of manuscripts,
and oral presentations. Importantly, efforts will continue to be made to recruit
underrepresented minority students into the laboratory. The project also
contains an educational component. An experimental module for an undergraduate
laboratory course will be developed and implemented. It will teach the
relationship between fluorescence energy resonance transfer efficiency and
distance between fluorophores in a discovery-based experiment emphasizing
experimental design, application of acquired knowledge, data interpretation, and
literature searches.