* 1244786
* Probing the Inverted Classroom: A Controlled Study of Teaching and Learning Outcomes in Undergraduate Chemistry, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Darryl Yong, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 222,844.00

An inverted, or "flipped," classroom reverses the paradigm of traditional
lecture courses by delivering lectures outside of class -- by means such as
videos or screencasts -- and using class meeting time for instructor-mediated
active learning. This format has the potential to transform science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education by increasing student time spent
with the most effective teaching techniques (i.e., varieties of active learning)
without sacrificing material coverage or educational scaffolding. Many educators
are beginning to flip their classrooms, but limited data on learning gains are
currently available. With the rising popularity of teaching via online videos,
there is an urgent need to assess the effectiveness of approaches that
incorporate this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are
rigorously examining the impact of four instructors inverting three STEM
courses, in chemistry, engineering, and mathematics, by measuring student
learning gains. The hypothesis is that increased student learning will arise
primarily because of the additional time that students will have with
instructors actively working on meaningful tasks in class. If this hypothesis
proves true, it will have implications for institutions that are seeking to push
more instruction online, including Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), where
instructor-student interaction is limited. In addition, because this study
involves three different disciplines, the results should be applicable across
STEM fields and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of the study
design is threefold: (1) the use of direct assessment measures specific to each
of the three courses/disciplines, in addition to indirect assessment measures;
(2) comparison of control and experimental sections offered simultaneously (to
reduce student demographic variability) using the same instructor (to limit
instructor bias); and (3) direct assessment of learning gains and application
both within the course and in downstream courses to determine whether learning
gains persist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By elucidating the role of classroom
inversion in STEM education, this study is aiding other STEM instructors in
course design. By rigorously examining the effectiveness of the flipped
classroom across three STEM fields and four instructors, the study is providing
evidence-based recommendations to STEM educators via publications in peer-
reviewed literature, online communities, and presentations at relevant
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also offering two workshops to
train faculty on how to achieve the most effective aspects of the flipped-
classroom experience. A detailed website with examples, study results, and tips
for STEM educators on flipping the classroom enables a wide audience to benefit
from this work.