* 1244641
* RUI:   Interplay between epigenetic methylation and oxidative damage: effects on DNA stability, structure and dynamics.
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Sergey Smirnov, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 263,171.00

Intellectual Merit: The genetic information in living organisms is stored as
linear polymers of four DNA elements: guanine, cytosine, adenine, and thymine.
Chemical modifications of genomic DNA have principal roles in both natural gene
regulation and DNA damage. In the cell, gene activity is regulated via enzymatic
modification of cytosine (methylation). Cytosine modification rates are vital as
their alteration can compromise cell function and organism survival. Unlike this
modification of cytosine, which serves a regulatory role, modification of
guanine (oxidation) is detrimental to the integrity of the genetic information.
Left unrepaired, this common type of guanine damage (lesion) can lead to genome
instability and mutations. In the human genome, there are many occurrences of
cytosine and guanine being adjacent (clustered). Repair of a guanine lesion
neighboring a modified cytosine is known to be compromised. Likewise, normal
cytosine modification rates are altered within the sites containing a modified
guanine. The chemical reasons for these adverse enzymological effects have yet
to be determined. One of the missing links is the characterization of DNA with
modified guanine and cytosine clustered together. To close this gap, the project
aims to investigate the fundamental biophysics (stability, structure and
dynamics) of DNA with a guanine lesion adjacent to a modified cytosine, using
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques along with molecular dynamics
simulations. Such a comprehensive study of linked damage and regulatory
modifications in DNA will be performed for the first time, pioneering new
research in genome stability and regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project engages students at Western Washington University, a
primarily undergraduate institution. Every effort is made to include students
from minority and underprivileged populations. The participating students are
involved in modern, inter-disciplinary academic research spanning areas of
chemistry, biology, physics and computer science, a combination of principal
scientific and instructional value. The project gives the students an early
opportunity to experience the full scope of academic research in the lab. The
students also communicate the results as co-authors, which further advances
their professional development. As a benefit to a wider student body, some of
the DNA samples developed during this investigation will be used for classes
taught at Western Washington University. Overall, the project helps to integrate
research with education and prepare undergraduate students for industry careers
and Ph.D. studies.