* 1244651
* Robust Gd3+ -based spin labels for structural studies of membrane proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2016
* USD 848,526.00

Intellectual Merit: The border between the interior and exterior of a living
cell is a membrane that is only a few nanometers thick. Proteins embedded in
cell membranes are the molecular machines that control the flow of matter,
energy and information across the border of the cell, and understanding their
structures helps to understand how they function. Unfortunately, structural
techniques like crystallography and NMR don't work as well for membrane
proteins, so new methods are needed. This research project will develop new
molecular probes and experimental methods that will provide information on
protein structure. The new probes take advantage of the remarkable magnetic
properties of ions of the element gadolinium (Gd3+), which are already used to
enhance contrast in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). When excited by a laser
inside a very high magnetic field, gadolinium ions precess (wobble) like tops at
a frequency of 240 billion cycles per second (240 gigahertz); this occurs about
20,000 times before relaxing most of the way to thermal equilibrium. When a Gd3+
ion is close to another, it relaxes more quickly. Moreover, when the two are
less than 10 nanometers apart, the precession amplitude oscillates between the
two ions at a "beat frequency" that varies sensitively with the distance between
the ions. Together, the relaxation times, precession frequencies, and beat
frequency give distance (and ultimately structural) information. These
parameters will be measured using newly developed electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectrometers at UC Santa Barbara (240 gigahertz) and the
Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel (95 gigahertz). To calibrate the new
methodologies, measurements of the distance between gadolinium ions will be
performed on "ruler" compounds consisting of Gd3+ ions separated by a stiff,
linear polymer to known distances between 2 and 12 nm. Distance measurements
will then be performed between carefully-chosen sites on proteorhodopsin.
Proteorhodopsin is a light-activated proton pump isolated from a marine
bacterium and is similar in structure to membrane proteins that occur in all
other organisms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project is a new
interdisciplinary international collaboration between the U. S. (Song-I Han and
Mark Sherwin, UC Santa Barbara), Israel (Daniella Goldfarb, Weizmann Institute
of Science), and Germany (Adelheidt Godt, University of Bielefeld, probe
synthesis). The collaborators and co-PI are female physicists with considerable
expertise in developing new technology. This proposal will support two graduate
students and one undergraduate. These students are cross-trained by shuttling
between the Han lab (physical chemistry and biochemistry) and the Sherwin lab
(experimental physics), and are thus immersed in the science of "soft matter,"
magnetic resonance, proteins, microwave electronics, terahertz science and
technology, and visible optics. Students also will perform experiments in the
remarkable magnetic resonance community at the Weizmann Institute of Science in
Israel, greatly enriching their training with an international scientific
experience. The Gd3+ spin labels and high-field electron paramagnetic resonance
techniques that the students develop will enable new studies of membrane
proteins in life-like environments by many other scientists. These labels are
stable enough to be used inside the complex environment of living cells, where
measurements of protein structure and dynamics are most interesting but also
most challenging.