* 1244180
* Experimental Model Systems for Intracellular Compartmentalization: Dynamic Formation/Disassembly of Model Organelles in Artificial Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Christine Keating, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2018
* USD 812,480.00

Technical Description: This proposal is based on the idea that it may be
possible to realize key structural and functional aspects of subcellular
organization due to the physicochemical phenomena that arise in solutions that
are crowded with macromolecules "like the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm are" even in
the absence of specific biomolecular interactions. Of particular interest is
aqueous phase separation, which commonly occurs in polymer solutions and offers
a means of compartmentalization. This work will evaluate two hypotheses: (1)
that phase separation in the crowded intracellular environment could be largely
responsible for the existence and properties of non-membranous organelles, and
(2) that these structures could in turn serve as templates for membrane
assembly. Experimental models of subcellular cytoplasmic and nuclear
compartments will be developed based on crowded solutions of RNA, polyamines,
proteins, and neutral polymers. Protein phosphorylation will be used to drive
formation and disassembly of microcompartments that will serve as model
organelles. Three research objectives are proposed: (1) Dynamic
assembly/disassembly of model non-membranous organelles based on aqueous phase
compartments that form in response to protein phosphorylation state. (2)
Templated membrane formation around these model organelles. (3) Primitive model
for mitosis/cell cycle in cell-sized lipid vesicles that contain the crowded
solution and phase compartment-based model organelles.

Nontechnical Description: Intracellular organization is a hallmark of living
cells, with both membrane-bounded (e.g., nucleus) and non-membranous organelles
(e.g., nucleolus, P-granules) performing key cellular functions. The central
questions driving these investigations are: What role do relatively nonspecific
chemical and physical effects play in subcellular organization and the
associated functions of biological cells, and how does complexity arise from a
small number of simple molecular components? The investigators hypothesize that,
despite the deliberate simplicity of the proposed model cells, they will be able
to mimic complex biological processes and specific biochemical interactions,
such as the reversible formation and dissolution of RNA and protein-rich
compartments, the formation of interior membranes around pre-existing protein-
rich compartments, and finally to model cell division in a very primitive mimic
of the mitotic cell.

Broader Impacts. Two graduate students will be trained at the interface of
molecular and cell biology, chemistry, biophysics and materials science.
Undergraduate students will be recruited to work on this project during the
academic year for course credit and in the summer through the various on-site
REU programs, with a target of one student during the academic year and one or
two students during the summer. Support for one K-12 teacher each summer is
included in the budget. The investigators will team with the existing Research
Experiences for Teachers program in the PSU MRSEC. Teachers will perform
experiments and develop curriculum materials to bring back to their own
classrooms the following school year. Real-world examples go beyond the
intracellular organelles that motivate the intellectual merit of this proposal
to also include, e.g., food science, drug delivery, and environmental
remediation.

This award is being funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in
MCB/BIO and co-funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in CHE/MPS.