* 1244509
* Using a Viral Protein to Study the Functional Organization of ER-mitochondrial Membrane Contacts and Trafficking Across this Compartment
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Anamaris Colberg-Poley, Children's Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2016
* USD 167,999.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT Membrane contacts between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
mitochondria, known as mitochondria-associated membranes (MAM) are communication
hubs that play crucial roles in diverse cellular functions, including ER to
mitochondrial calcium (Ca2+) signaling, mitochondrial bioenergetics, lipid
exchange, innate immunity, and apoptosis. The MAM is now emerging as a site for
ER to mitochondrial trafficking of cellular proteins and viral proteins. This
project characterizes a cytomegalovirus (CMV) protein, known as UL37 exon 1
protein (pUL37x1) that targets the MAM, alters some of its functions, and
traffics from the ER to mitochondria. This project will examine how proteins use
the MAM to traffic from the ER to mitochondria. It is projected that CMV pUL37x1
trafficking uses MAM vesicular or tether mediated mechanisms to traffic to
mitochondria. This project will test whether MAM tethers or vesicular components
underlie ER to mitochondrial trafficking using complementary approaches of
inhibition (siRNAs, knock out cells, dominant negative mutants, and chemical
inhibitors) and overexpression of MAM tether or MAM vesicular pathway
components.

BROADER IMPACTS These studies will impact the intracellular protein trafficking
field, as well as education and society (technology development). The project
aims to understand MAM organization and its regulation, which affects cellular
physiology and responses. The use of multifocal structured illumination
microscopy (MSIM) will advance the intracellular protein trafficking field and,
more broadly, cellular imaging. The studies will include training of
undergraduate researchers, and in particular will continue to support the
efforts of the participating labs in training underrepresented minorities in
science. Because of the multidisciplinary approaches employed in this project,
students will benefit from training in confocal live cell imaging, MSIM imaging,
and molecular virology and biochemical approaches, participating in scientific
discussions, and presenting their work at scientific meetings.