* 1244219
* The Functional Basis of Genetic Interactions Underlying Quantitative Trait Variation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* David Gresham, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2017
* USD 700,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Most inherited traits are quantitative and
determined by variation in multiple genes dispersed throughout the genome.
Genetic variation in these different genes can interact in ways that are
difficult to predict. The project aims to identify principles governing
relationships between genes that underlie quantitative trait variation. This
project will study genetic interactions in a model experimental system for
naturally occurring quantitative trait variation and identify general principles
regarding the functional relationships between interacting genes. The research
entails selecting yeast mutants that have increased cell growth rates by
performing evolution experiments in carefully defined environments. Experiments
will be designed so that mutants accumulate a small number of mutations relative
to the founding strain. This project will identify all the acquired genetic
variation using whole genome resequencing and construct a panel of strains
carrying individual mutations and all possible combinations of mutations. It
will quantify growth rates for each genotype combination and determine the
nature of the interactions between the gene variants. It will then study the
functional relationships between genes that interact in different ways using the
extensive functional annotation available for the yeast genome. Just as genes
and their products are conserved across the kingdoms of life, interactions
between genes, and the principles that govern the outcome of those interactions,
are likely to be conserved. Thus, findings from the study will inform our
understanding of the genetic architecture of quantitative traits in model and
non-model organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project
will contribute to an understanding of how genes interact with potential
applications to improving agricultural breeding practices. This work will have a
number of broader impacts in undergraduate and science education, inclusion of
underrepresented groups, and enhancement of scientific understanding. The
project will include undergraduates, underrepresented minorities and students
from primarily undergraduate institutions. It will involve training scientists
in genetics, computational biology and microbiology at the graduate and
undergraduate level. In addition, the project will include an outreach program
that provides high school students with the opportunity to work in a laboratory
environment. High school students from diverse backgrounds will be provided with
training in experimental and computational biology and undertake an independent
research project in the laboratory. The project will provide mentorship so that
high school students can submit their research to national science competitions.
Concomitant with the proposed project, a new integrative course for
undergraduate students will be developed that combines instruction in
statistics, genetics and computing.