* 1244089
* RUI: Intein Structure and Catalysis of Protein Splicing and Hedgehog Autoprocessing: An Integrated Research and Education Program
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Kenneth Mills, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 02/29/2016
* USD 567,115.00

Intellectual Merit This project will study the chemical mechanism of protein
splicing. Protein splicing is the means by which an intervening polypeptide, or
intein, catalyzes its own removal from flanking polypeptides, or exteins. The
intein also links the extein segments. The research project will investigate the
following: 1. How the activity of an intein from an extreme thermophile is
influenced by its unusual structural stability. The investigative approaches
will examine how the intein balances the need to be stable at high temperatures
with the need to be sufficiently flexible to be catalytically active; 2. The
manner in which conserved residues in the intein catalyze each step of the
reaction, providing insight into how enzymes catalyze and coordinate multi-step
reactions at a single active site without cofactors; 3. The catalysis of
cyclization of the amino acids asparagine or glutamine, coupled to peptide bond
cleavage. This is an unusual reaction in protein chemistry which will be studied
in the context of an intein as well as with a combination of model peptide
experiments and computational modeling; 4. The regulation of intein activity,
either by temperature or oxidation state. This process of regulation might
suggest how inteins could control the activity of their flanking, interrupted
proteins; 5. The autoprocessing of hedgehog-like domains, which resemble inteins
in structure and sequence, including how conserved residues and the binding of
cholesterol may influence the initial step of the reaction. These aspects of
protein splicing will be investigated with the use of a combination of
structural, biophysical, biochemical and computational techniques in projects
suitable for undergraduates.

Broader Impact The research program will have a significant impact on the
careers of undergraduate research students. The undergraduates will perform the
experiments, present the results at national meetings and in peer-reviewed
publications, and, through close mentoring, prepare to be future leaders in
STEM. Students from the Biochemistry Concentration at the College of Holy Cross
will be recruited to work on this project. In addition to research activities,
the students will sponsor outreach in the community by hosting lectures aimed at
broad audiences and by participating in the Science Ambassadors student outreach
program. The project will broaden access to STEM by recruiting local students to
the lab through the Worcester Pipeline which is a program that is conducted in
conjunction with the University of Massachusetts Medical School