* 1244847
* Comparison of Active Learning Strategies in Cell Biology Education:  Is All Active Learning Equally Effective?
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Alison Crowe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2017
* USD 180,672.00

This project is comparing the effectiveness of different active learning modules
(ALM) designed to increase student understanding of cell biology in a large
lecture environment. The activities are focused on three central processes in
cell biology: protein translation, eukaryotic gene regulation, and the cell
cycle. These processes are fundamental to an understanding of how cells
function; and, due to their complexity, present significant teaching challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Many studies have
demonstrated the benefits of integrating active learning into the college
science classroom. However, two questions then arise: Are all active learning
strategies equally effective? Are some strategies better for specific topics
than are others? In this study the ALMs are being tested in a large-enrollment
course at the University of Washington that has already implemented teaching
innovations such as peer TAs, automated response systems (clickers) and some
guided group activities. ALM effectiveness is being measured in terms of how
much students learn and how engaged they are in the different activities.
Learning gains are being measured by comparing student performance on validated
tests. Data on student perception and engagement are being gathered from student
focus groups convened after each activity and videotape analysis of student
participation during each activity. The ALMs are also being measured in terms of
their relative 'cost' to design and execute in a large classroom. This study
will result in the production of research-validated in-class activities that
promote student learning in cell biology. Direct comparison of different active
learning strategies will provide insight into what elements make one strategy
more effective than another for teaching a particular concept.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Improvement of STEM education
requires an appreciation for the relative benefits of different teaching
strategies for diverse populations of students. This study investigates the
interplay between topic, active learning strategy and demographics with the goal
of identifying active learning strategies that are effective for a broad
population of students. There is evidence that collaborative learning exercises
have a particularly beneficial impact on underrepresented groups, suggesting
that advances in designing collaborative active learning strategies may play a
significant role in decreasing the 'learning gap' in STEM classrooms. The
activities developed and tested in this study will be made available for
distribution to other institutions and thus have potential to impact the
approximately 300,000 students who take introductory biology in the U.S. each
year. Further, an improved understanding of the relative benefits and challenges
of different active learning strategies may help guide future resource
allocation decisions by STEM educators in terms of faculty development and
design of instructional materials. Training of a postdoctoral scholar and
involvement of undergraduates as research assistants will help broaden the base
of young professionals with experience in STEM education research and contribute
to the development of a growing national STEM education network in the U.S.