* 1244286
* Dynamic Characterization of a Model Signal Transduction System
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Barry Wanner, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 01/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual merit

The goal of this research is to further our understanding of how cells respond
to environmental signals and stresses and specifically to quantitatively
investigate and model phenotypic variations in this response. Towards this goal,
this project will critically examine the dynamics of the response of the model
organism Escherichia coli (E. coli) to environmental stress in the form of
nutrient limitation (specifically, inorganic phosphate). Under these conditions,
the PhoR/PhoB two-component system signaling pathway is activated with the
ultimate response being the activation of gene transcription of the proteins of
the PhoR/PhoB two-component system in an attempt by the cell to scavenge the
dwindling supply of nutrient. The response to changes in environmental phosphate
will be monitored through direct imaging of the production rate of a fluorescent
protein biomarker placed in the E. coli genome under control of the PhoR/PhoB
two-component system. Quantification of the protein production rate and its
variance among a population of cells will be performed using epi-fluorescence
video microscopy with single fluorescent protein sensitivity. Beyond measurement
of the response, this project will also develop simplified models of the two-
component system which are mathematically tractable and use Stochastic
Simulation and Finite State Projection methods to predict both the mean and
variance of the response in these models. Predictions from models can be tested
experimentally and guide new experimental directions while experimental results
may necessitate modifications of the simplified models. Through this, the
project will obtain new quantitative insight into the mechanism of phenotypic
variation in the cellular response to environmental signals/stresses.

Broader Impacts

This project affords opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral trainees, classically educated in the life or physical sciences, to
conduct multidisciplinary research at the interface of physics and biology. The
principal investigators are involved in undergraduate education in research both
through their institutions and through participation in REU and MARC programs. A
primary goal of this project is to train multidisciplinary scientists at all
levels. The students and post-doctoral trainees will be encouraged to attend and
present their research at major national and international meetings to expose
them to the breadth of research being performed in the life and physical
sciences which will translate into novel ideas and approaches in their own work.
General lectures will be periodically given to local high school classes to
pique the interest of tomorrow's scientists in multidisciplinary research.
Further, both principal investigators are committed to improving diversity and
gender equality in the life and physical sciences.