* 1244320
* Defining the Mechanistic Strategies of Defulfonation in the Alkanesulfonate Sulfonate Monooxygenase System
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Holly Ellis, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 677,249.00

Sulfur is an essential element for all life. Bacteria play a key role in the
sulfur cycle through diverse metabolic pathways. When sulfur is limited in the
environment, bacteria express specific proteins to retain intracellular sulfur.
The alkanesulfonate monooxygenase system provides bacteria access to an
alternative sulfur source under sulfur limiting conditions. These studies will
elucidate the essential role of the alkanesulfonate monooxygenase system in
supplying sulfur to bacteria. The broad objective of this project is to fully
establish the mechanism used by the alkanesulfonate monooxygenase system to
better understand its physiological role in sulfur acquisition and the overall
sulfur cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An educational component of this project
seeks to encourage students from underrepresented groups in the sciences to
participate in research at Auburn University. The PI is collaborating with the
Minority Programs Coordinator in the College of Science and Mathematics (COSAM)
to participate in the Summer Bridge Program for incoming minority freshmen
planning to major in sciences, mathematics, or pre-professional programs. An
interactive talk on the importance of research in an undergraduate education
will be presented followed by a hands-on laboratory experiment to stimulate
interest in undergraduate research. The grant will provide a summer research
fellowship to a minority student in COSAM for each funding year.