* 1244831
* Workshop: Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VisWeek 2012
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Leland Wilkinson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 19,766.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Colloquium (workshop) of about 12
dissertation stage doctoral students, in a variety of visualization subfields,
for a day of discussions and interactions with 6 distinguished research faculty,
to be held in conjunction with this year's IEEE VisWeek meeting, which will take
place during the week of October 14-19, 2012, in Seattle. Visualization, or the
use of interactive graphics to support data analysis and understanding, has
become an integral part and critical component of many application areas. IEEE
VisWeek is the premier forum for visualization advances in science and
engineering for academia, government, and industry, now bringing together about
900 researchers and practitioners from around the world with a shared interest
in techniques, tools, and technology. VisWeek consists this year of the 23rd
annual IEEE Scientific Visualization Conference (SciVis), the 18th annual IEEE
Information Visualization Conference (InfoVis), and the 7th annual IEEE Visual
Analytics Science and Technology Symposium (VAST). Co-located symposia this year
include the IEEE Symposium on Large-Scale Data Analysis and Visualization
(LDAV), the IEEE Symposium on Biological Data Visualization (BioVis), and the
International Symposium on Visualization for Cyber Security (VisSec). The papers
published in the special conference issue of IEEE Transactions of Visualization
and Computer Graphics are rigorously refereed and widely cited. More information
is available online at http://www.visweek.org.

The Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VisWeek is a research-focused meeting which has
taken place annually at the Visualization conference since 2006, and has helped
launch the careers of a number of outstanding young researchers. In 2012 the
workshop will convene on Sunday, October 14 or on Monday, October 15, with
follow-up events during the VisWeek technical program. A primary goal of the
Doctoral Colloquium is to allow students to discuss their research directions in
a supportive atmosphere with a panel of distinguished leaders and with their
peers, who will provide helpful feedback and fresh perspectives. The workshop
supports community building, by connecting beginning and advanced researchers,
one of the objectives being to build a cohort group of new researchers who will
then have a network of colleagues across the world. Student research will be
disseminated via posters during the VisWeek technical program, and via
publication in the VisWeek Extended Abstracts. Feedback about the Doctoral
Colloquium will be provided to future conference committees.

Broader Impacts: The VisWeek Doctoral Colloquium brings together the best of the
next generation of visualization researchers and allows them to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers, which plays a major
role in their enculturation into the profession. Since the students and faculty
are a diverse group on several dimensions (nationality, scientific discipline,
research specialization), the students' horizons are broadened at a critical
stage in their professional development. The PI has affirmed that in managing
this event the organizers, while trying to identify and include the broadest
possible group of highly qualified participants, will also make an effort to
encourage participation by women, racial/ethnic minorities, and persons with
disabilities. They will furthermore ensure that NSF funds are used chiefly to
support participation by students enrolled in graduate programs in the United
States.