* 1244709
* Collaborative Research BCC-SBE: Using Archival Resources to Conduct Data-Intensive Internet Research
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Kristin Negulescu, Internet Archive
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 22,000.00

Project Description: The BCC-SBE Collaborative Research Project, "Using Archival
Resources to Conduct Data-Intensive Internet Research," has three goals: (1) to
build a community of scholars focused on tackling next-generation questions of
Internet research through the use of archival digital data; (2) to create sample
databases and develop a prototype research tool, HistoryTracker, using data from
the Internet Archive, a library of Web pages from the World Wide Web; and (3) to
maintain an active community of scholars using the cutting-edge community
platform HUBzero. Co-PIs Weber, Lazer and Carpenter will lead a community
building initiative to coalesce scholars around these three goals. In the long-
run, this work will support ongoing interactions among community participants,
including the collection of feedback, sharing research, and dissemination of
databases collected through the course of this research and beyond. Convenient,
efficient access to archival Internet data has the potential to open up
countless new avenues of social science research. In addition, evidence from
this research project will inform the creation and dissemination of general
guidelines for conducting theoretically and methodologically rigorous
longitudinal research using archival Web data.

Broader Significance/Nontechnical: The Internet Archive is the single largest
repository of archive Web data in existence, yet there is a significant lack of
research-ready databases and tools available to the scholarly community. Funding
of the BCC-SBE Collaborative Research Project, "Using Archival Resources to
Conduct Data-Intensive Internet Research," will inform the creation and
dissemination of general guidelines for conducting theoretically and
methodologically rigorous longitudinal research using archival Web data. Co-PIs
Weber, Lazer and Carpenter will work to bring together a community of scholars
focused on research utilizing archival digital data. Subsequently, the principal
investigators will lead the development of initial tools and sample databases
for conducting ongoing research examining numerous issues pertaining to the
development of the World Wide Web, and the behavior of individuals and
organizations on the Internet.