* 1244568
* Kinetically-stabilized mesoscopic protein aggregates
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Peter Vekilov, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2016
* USD 605,997.00

It is generally accepted that a protein's amino acid sequence is optimized so
that the molecule consistently folds into a unique, stable 3D shape while
avoiding aggregation with other biomolecules. Yet this view is overly
simplistic. On the one hand, many proteins are not monolithic structures; for
instance, myoglobin must reliably deform to let in oxygen. On the other hand,
under certain conditions, proteins may aggregate into amyloid fibers while in a
misfolded conformation. Although very complex, these phenomena can still be
understood thermodynamically. Proteins are deformable given a sufficiently large
native state entropy, while amyloid fibers are stabilized by multiple amino acid
contacts within the fiber. Much less understood are the mesoscopic liquid-like
aggregates recently found in several protein solutions, including lysozyme,
hemoglobin, and gamma-crystallin. These clusters are important as nucleation
sites for protein crystals. The objective of this project is to test a
microscopic hypothesis for the formation of the mesoscopic clusters by which the
clusters result from the formation of long-lived protein complexes stabilized at
high densities. The unusually large cluster size stems from the long lifetime of
the complexes, which in turn owe their stability to the conformational freedom
of constituent protein molecules. A key component of the proposed mechanism is
that proteins partially unfold prior to binding and may even undergo domain
swapping, whereby protein segments bind to complimentary segments on a different
protein. The PIs will employ a combination of dynamic light scattering, Brownian
microscopy, amide exchange NMR, and theoretical modeling to test this mechanism
in several systems, including proteins barnase, RNase A, hemoglobin, insulin,
and lysozyme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a multidisciplinary effort
by a theoretical physical chemist and experimental chemical engineer. A
synthesis of a wide range of physicochemical and biochemical measurements and
physical modeling will be undertaken to tackle this difficult problem; the
outcome is expected to produce fundamental understanding of biological processes
and provide new avenues for making new materials. Graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students will be trained at the interface between physics,
chemistry, and biology. The home institution of the PIs, the University of
Houston, is one of the most ethnically diverse research universities in the
nation, and is one of only three Hispanic-Serving Institutions in the US.
Existing collaborations with local writers and radio personalities will be
utilized to publicize the societal benefits of the research. This project is
jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in
the Physics Division.