* 1244203
* Mechanism of Intrinsic Hydrolysis in Small GTPases
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Carla Mattos, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 12/31/2015
* USD 809,353.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The superfamily of small GTPases includes five
distinct groups of proteins that collectively touch on virtually all aspects of
cellular function. They are inactive when bound to guanosine diphosphate (GDP)
and functionally active when bound to the triphosphate form (GTP). GTPases have
been very well studied for over 25 years and a general mechanism through which
they are regulated is so well accepted that it routinely appears in Biochemistry
and Cell Biology texts books. This project is based on a paradigm-shifting
hypothesis that modifies this mechanism for some GTPases under particular
circumstances, elucidating a subtle level of regulation associated with
different forms of the GTP-bound protein. The research performed under this
project focuses on Ras GTPase as a model for elucidating the chemical mechanism
through which its function is deactivated in the newly discovered context, tests
the mechanism on a second GTPase and uses computational approaches to look at
sequence patterns across the family, mining the database of GTPase structures to
assess the generality of the regulatory mechanism recently uncovered with aid
from previous NSF support. This project will use multidisciplinary approaches
focused on X-ray crystallography, neutron crystallography, quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics calculations (QM/MM), kinetic experiments and a
crystallographic water analysis across the superfamily of GTPases using our in-
house program Detection of Related Solvent Positions (DRoP) developed with
previous NSF funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The project
supports three graduate students who will be trained in a thriving and diverse
research and educational environment where mentoring is an important aspect of
teamwork in the group at all levels of the academic ladder. Each will work
closely with and mentor an undergraduate student on the project. Undergraduates
constitute and integral part of the research, engaged in the Co-op program that
supports Northeastern undergraduates for extended period of full time in the
laboratory. The PI is developing strong alliances with minority serving
institutions through the Northeastern Faculty Seminar Program, which she has
initiated since arriving at Northeastern. The goal is to increase the diversity
of applicants to the Ph.D. program in Chemical Biology while engaging minority
students in exciting research that will promote long-term commitment to science.
Through a partnership with Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) network the PI
is reaching out to undergraduates from minority-serving institutions that do not
have research opportunities. Two minority undergraduate students will be
supported for summer research during the duration of the project. Each will have
a graduate student mentor on the project and will work closely with the PI to
assure effective learning and productivity in the laboratory.