* 1244890
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Enhancements to Support Data-Driven Discovery at the University of Washington
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Edward Lazowska, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 497,461.00

The University of Washington is home to leading research programs conducted by
internationally recognized faculty from diverse domains including oceanography,
astronomy, physics, genomics, computer science, bioengineering, and climate
modeling, among others. These efforts depend on high throughput data transfers
between UW and remote sites, as well as between UW laboratory systems and
centrally managed scalable research compute and storage systems residing in our
campus network Science DMZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enhances the
connectivity options of the University of Washington campus network facility
dedicated exclusively to research, using a hybrid Layer-2/Layer-3 (L2/L3)
approach. These enhancements replace previous ad hoc approaches to meeting the
requirements of leading researchers with sustainable and scalable approaches.
The enhancements are catalyzing advances in a broad range of high-impact science
projects by enabling the emerging world of data-driven discovery. The UW
eScience Institute provides the "intellectual infrastructure" for data-driven
discovery. The enhancements generated from this project provide a critical
component of the "physical infrastructure". The two together are essential for
UW to remain at the leading edge as the nature of discovery
evolves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort directly and immediately provides a
dramatic enhancement to the capabilities of a broad range of science programs
involving faculty, postdoctoral fellows, research scientists, and undergraduate
and graduate students. It also dramatically increases the accessibility of key
UW facilities and data to scientists regionally, nationally, and
internationally, and the accessibility of remote facilities and data to UW
scientists.