* 1244749
* BCC-SBE: An Urban Sciences Research Coordination Network for Data-Driven Urban Design and Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Charles Catlett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 592,567.00

Global urbanization raises challenges and opportunities related to density and
scale in areas including transportation, food production and distribution, human
health and wellbeing, education, social policy and services, and management of
water and energy. The accelerated creation of city-scale developments and
regional megalopolises brings urgency to understanding their impact on the local
and regional environment and inhabitants. New computational and information
capabilities, along with unprecedented and growing volumes of relevant data,
suggest new opportunities to understand the state of urban social and economic
systems and to develop calibrated, validated computational models to explore the
potential impact of new policies, investments, and accelerating expansion of
urban built infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers recognize the
potential for new insights and more effective policy and planning if research
teams had the ability to explore these data as an integrated corpus, yet the
equilibrium state is one of daunting fragmentation and access restrictions that
can only be overcome by a critical mass of researchers and a compelling, broad
research agenda that resonates with the near- and long-term challenges
of policymakers and citizens. Moreover, new data organization and analysis
approaches will require partnerships between social, behavioral, education, and
economics scientists and computational scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will create a research coordination network that brings these
communities together to develop an integrated research agenda for an
interdisciplinary, data-driven approach to urban research, analysis,
and planning, exploring and prototyping methods, processes,
tools, and infrastructure necessary to support such science. The RCN will
leverage a unique and growing collection of data sets and research
teams spanning The University of Chicago, the School of the Art Institute of
Chicago, the City of Chicago, and Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, a global
architecture firm designing city-scale urban infrastructure.