* 1244693
* Collaborative Research:   Center for Historical Information and Analysis (CHIA)
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* John Gerring, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2015
* USD 79,596.00

This project will strengthen the organizational and technical infrastructure of
the Center for Historical Information and Analysis (http://chia.pitt.edu), a
multi-institutional collaborative of scholars in social, natural, and
information sciences structured as a Research Collaborative and a Headquarters.
The Research Collaborative links participating institutions that are collecting
data on population, climate, and other topics with a crowdsourcing tool to
demonstrate the feasibility of building a continuously growing collection of
diverse historical data and metadata. The Headquarters assembles and develops
knowledge on repository design to develop a repository sufficient to house the
incoming data and permit global and interactive analysis. The Center for
Historical Information and Analysis?s future plans include expanding its
collection and processing of historical data, broadening its community of social
and natural science researchers, analyzing historical patterns of global change,
and sharing its resources with researchers, policy-makers, teachers and
students. CHIA is headquartered at the University of Pittsburgh with
participating research groups at Boston University, Harvard University, Michigan
State University, and University of California-Merced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand global social patterns as they exist today, it is increasingly clear
that we need to understand how they have evolved over recent centuries. The
Center for Historical Information and Analysis responds to this need and takes
historical analysis into the realm of Big Data. It is expected that the data
resources will grow to several terabytes in size. This project will stimulate
development of more efficient research collaborations, enabling systematic
large-scale consolidation of diverse historical data sources. Once collected and
integrated, the data repository and analytical system will allow scholars to
address a wider set of questions testing hypotheses about long-term and short-
term social change at the global scale and catalyzing an expansion of the
evidence base in social sciences. For example, our understanding of important
societal issues can advance by linking health to demography and by incorporating
climate and health factors into economic studies. Disciplinary theory will
advance through interaction among the various scientific fields, so that a
global network of social-science researchers will emerge.