* 1245402
* Transforming Developmental Mathematics Education in Partnership with Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Beth Herbel-Eisenmann, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2016
* USD 194,717.00

Transforming Developmental Mathematics Education in Partnership with Teacher
Preparation targets students in developmental mathematics courses (DMCs) while
strengthening preparation of prospective secondary mathematics teachers (PSMTs).
Almost 40% of U.S. undergraduates take at least one DMC (Attewell et al., 2006).
Increasingly, technologies like adaptive web-based tutoring systems are used to
teach DMCs. Research shows, however, that methods supporting student
collaboration are essential for student success in DMCs (Hodera, 2011). This
project implements and evaluates a hybrid structure where PSMTs teach DMCs,
testing the hypothesis that students enrolled in DMCs, taught using research-
based materials and methods, perform better on measures of mathematical
proficiency than students not in such classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core
feature is that PSMTs, mentored by experienced mathematics educators and using
research-based materials and methods, assume responsibility for teaching
sections of a DMC. Measures to assess the efficacy of this model include: pre-
and post-assessments of students' mathematical proficiency; surveys and
interviews soliciting students' interest and self-efficacy in mathematics; video
records of PSMTs' instruction, self-reflections about their teaching, and
interviews about learning to teach through this
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project are
two-fold: 1) contribution to the scant literature on hybrid structures that
maximize the potential of web-based, adaptive tutoring with face-to-face
instruction in DMCs; and 2) development of materials for DMCs that provide
guidance to instructors for implementing the instructional model. As a result of
disseminating these materials, broader impacts include improved outcomes for
under-represented groups, increased STEM participation, and contributions to a
teaching force better prepared to teach students who have struggled in
mathematics.