* 1245706
* Flying with IBIS: Integrated Biology and Inquiry Skills
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Suann Yang, Presbyterian College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 01/31/2017
* USD 155,987.00

This project is establishing an innovative introductory biology course open to
both biology majors and those majoring in other fields. Both lecture and
laboratory are integrated as regards teaching approaches used and subject matter
covered. Both use an inquiry-based approach to teaching. The particular teaching
approach used has been piloted at the institution and found to be superior to
other approaches in retaining majors and gaining an interest in and knowledge of
the discipline by those students not biology majors. Class time is devoted to
group discussions of student-generated questions and peer review of each other's
work under the guidance of faculty and experienced upper division students. This
experience provides an opportunity for upper division students to enrich their
research skills.

Intellectual Merit: Web-based background materials are used to prepare students
for investigations, while scenarios and discussion questions are of high quality
and connect basic concepts in the life sciences (such as the nature of
respiration) to real world problems in subjects ranging from molecular biology
to animal behavior.

Broader Impact: The entire department is engaged in faculty development
activities to prepare both the upper division students and the faculty for this
student discussion-centered mode of teaching and research-centered approach to a
student laboratory so the impact will go beyond this institution. In addition
the web-based background material prepared for students is being made freely
available to facilitate easy adaptation by other institutions.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward support of Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education