* 1245827
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: ASCED -- An Advanced Scientific Collaboration Environment and DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Mark Gardner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 291,260.00

NSF CC-NIE Network Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt; ASCED - An Advanced Scientific
Collaboration Environment and DMZ&lt;br/&gt;M.K. Gardner, S.W. Ellingson, K.R.
Bisset, R.B. Knapp, and E.J. Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration in
scientific discourse is as much about building&lt;br/&gt;community as it is
about data sharing. It is about discipline-specific&lt;br/&gt;web portals to
ease data discovery and to facilitate access. It is&lt;br/&gt;about validated
tools for working with the data and about the means&lt;br/&gt;for replicating
results. It is about data curation and management. It&lt;br/&gt;is about
controlling access to the data in order to obey
regulatory&lt;br/&gt;requirements. And it is about the social interactions
between&lt;br/&gt;scientists. Successful collaborations already address these
issues,&lt;br/&gt;but in ad hoc ways. New collaborations must tackle the same
challenges&lt;br/&gt;over and over gain. It would be much more productive if a
standard&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure existed for building and hosting
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;environments and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Advanced Scientific Collaboration Environment and DMZ (ASCED) is
a&lt;br/&gt;standardized infrastructure, based upon open source components,
for&lt;br/&gt;building and hosting scientific communities. It is built upon
the&lt;br/&gt;Science DMZ, an infrastructure for efficiently sharing data,
by&lt;br/&gt;including a private cloud for hosting collaboration environments.
It&lt;br/&gt;supports role-based access control, facilitates data management,
and&lt;br/&gt;provides PIs with tools for abiding by regulatory requirements. It
is&lt;br/&gt;a standard base upon which scientific communities can be
built,&lt;br/&gt;allowing future proposals to focus on the specifics of their
research.&lt;br/&gt;It is also envisioned that ASCED will be used as a platform
for&lt;br/&gt;educators to engage students at all levels. And it can be a
platform&lt;br/&gt;for engaging the public, both in the dissemination of results
and in&lt;br/&gt;participating in research.