* 1245362
* Collaborative Research: Distributing the load: using the Structure-Behavior-Function framework to inform instructional design in introductory biology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jennifer Momsen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2017
* USD 40,997.00

This collaborative project transforms learning in introductory biology courses
through a&lt;br/&gt;technology-supported, active-learning pedagogy that is
informed by theory and&lt;br/&gt;evidence about learning systems. Specifically,
this project overcomes students'&lt;br/&gt;problems in understanding complex
biological systems and distributes learning in a way&lt;br/&gt;that actively
engages students in and out of class. This project evaluates
the&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness of the pedagogy, provides research on how
introductory biology students&lt;br/&gt;articulate complex processes within and
across biological systems, and investigates&lt;br/&gt;development of reflective
and deep learning approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project results from a technology-rich approach,
allowing&lt;br/&gt;instructors to communicate selected content outside of class
and replacing traditional&lt;br/&gt;lectures with promising active learning
strategies in class. An approach adapted from&lt;br/&gt;engineering that
analyzes systems in terms of their Structure, Behavior, and Function
is&lt;br/&gt;the theoretical framework employed to facilitate learning and
understanding of biological&lt;br/&gt;systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
creates broader impacts by building and strengthening community
within&lt;br/&gt;and across institutions. At the collaborating institutions
alone, several hundred students&lt;br/&gt;are expected to benefit from the
enhanced instructional framework. Dissemination of&lt;br/&gt;practices and
curricular materials should impact students at multiple institutions
and&lt;br/&gt;levels in the biology curriculum. Research findings are expected
to be disseminated as&lt;br/&gt;oral and poster communication at local and
national meetings of professional societies.&lt;br/&gt;Further, outcomes of this
research are also expected to be disseminated via&lt;br/&gt;manuscripts targeted
for science education journals. Contributions to the STEM&lt;br/&gt;education
research literature should yield insights to the broader academic and
science&lt;br/&gt;education research communities.