* 1245872
* Solar Cell Imaging: A Gateway for Visualization and Learning in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Richard Chiou, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 05/31/2016
* USD 180,480.00

The project is developing, validating, and disseminating a series of educational
modules based on a "tool box" of solar cell imaging techniques with the aim of
teaching undergraduates the concepts and methods of core and advanced STEM
subjects. These topics include optics; infrared physics, image capture,
processing, and analysis; thermography; heat transfer; semiconductor devices and
technology; metallography and materials science; statistics and signal
processing. By using a battery of imaging techniques to study diverse physical
effects in similar-type samples, students are gaining an appreciation of how
seemingly unrelated phenomena are connected, and how different measurement
techniques can be used to corroborate, complement, or supplement the limitations
of other techniques. Data on student learning outcomes are being collected and
analyzed to evaluate the effectiveness of the modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is elevating imaging, both optical and thermal, to a more prominent
place in undergraduate education, and is facilitating students' learning core
STEM subjects by providing visualization of optical, electrical, mechanical, and
thermal effects in semiconductor energy conversion. This works exploits and
leverages the advent of low-cost but powerful imaging technology to teach core
concepts in science and engineering. This innovative project is preparing
students for the ever-expanding, and increasingly important, applications of
imaging in quality control, process automation, biomedical fields such as
diagnostics imaging, materials science, electronics manufacturing, homeland
security, biorecognition, infrastructure inspection, remote sensing, gas
detection, and energy efficiency.