* 1245728
* Game-Aided Pedagogy to Improve Students' Learning Outcomes and Engagement in Transportation Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Chang-Tien Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2016
* USD 199,575.00

The goal of this project is to supplement traditional teaching methods in
Transportation Engineering with well-designed and novel games. The project
follows a cyclic approach to the design and implementation of games for several
transportation engineering classes, creating curriculum modules that combine the
games, assignments and student assessments. These modules are being evaluated
for their effectiveness in promoting student learning gains and engagement in
transportation engineering. The curriculum modules are being shared through a
website that can be used by faculty members at other universities. The focus of
this project is not only on developing the tools, but also on increasing
educators understanding of students' learning outcomes and effective game
teaching methods. The intellectual merit of the project includes creating new
pedagogical methods for teaching critical concepts in transportation
engineering. The instructional modules are being developed in tandem with
assessment in order to produce effective learning tools that will improve
engineering education for transportation engineering programs. The broader
impacts include increased understanding of critical driver behavior and other
transportation issues that can reduce a significant percentage of crashes and
save lives.