* 1245526
* BioLEAD: Biology Laboratory Experiences Across the Discipline
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Kimberly Karnas, Cedar Crest College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2017
* USD 186,032.00

For the past three years, students involved in the Molecular Genetics course
have collaborated with students from either the Developmental Biology or
Diseases of the Nervous System courses to conduct a research-based, multi-week
project using microarrays to measure changes in gene expression in chicken
embryos or neurons following chemical exposure. Chicken microarrays were
obtained from and scanned by the Genome Consortium for Active Teaching (GCAT), a
project geared towards motivating undergraduate research, formerly sponsored by
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. To continue the cross-course collaboration
and give students access to newer techniques, the current project switches to an
alternative, more current technology, PCR-based arrays, and adds
electrophysiology and qPCR to enable follow-up confirmatory studies and extend
student learning. This effort has three foci: 1) redesign of lab activities to
incorporate the use of PCR arrays, electrophysiology, and other molecular
techniques to study altered gene expression levels, 2) inclusion of faculty at
neighboring institutions to reach additional first generation and minority
students, and 3) dissemination of lab protocols to other institutions as a
viable methodology for teaching development, neuroscience, and molecular biology
in college lab courses.

Intellectual Merit: The initial project increased the learning gains of students
across the biology sub-disciplines by engaging them in the process of discovery.
Participating students in the current courses are gaining skills in experimental
design, collaborative research, use of multiple technology platforms, and data
presentation.

Broader Impacts: At the national level a large number of institutions that
relied on the GCAT program are now seeking to fill the gap left by the
termination of that resource. The new approaches being developed by this project
offer important alternative strategies to the GCAT-user community.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward support of Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education