* 1245302
* The Third International Symposium on Sustainable Chemical Product and Process Engineering, Dalian, China, June 2-5, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/2013
* USD 40,000.00

Depletion of nonrenewable resources, air, water, and soil pollution, global
warming, depletion of stratospheric ozone and forests, scarcity of water for
drinking and agriculture, and excessive population growth are among the major
challenges to the global society. The United Nations indicated in the Brundtland
Report1 that the ?current patterns of resource consumption and environmental
degradation could not continue as they were and in order to reduce the problem
facing us, society must act as a whole.? Today, environmental sustainability,
energy sustainability, manufacturing sustainability, process and product
sustainability, water sustainability, business sustainability, etc., are studied
and practiced extensively. How to ensure engineering sustainability becomes a
focal point for long-term development. The chemical and allied industries have
been working collaboratively towards solutions to the pressing issues that we
need to address today and in the future. This has greatly stimulated the
academic institutions to develop sustainable-engineering-focused innovative and
aggressive research and educational programs. A forum for the researchers and
practitioners in this area to share their research and educational experience
will be highly desirable. Therefore, the 3rd International Symposium on
Sustainable Chemical Product and Process Engineering on Sustainable Chemical
Engineering is proposed that is planned to be held in Dalian, China, June 2-5,
2013.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The 3rd symposium will
have the following main objectives: (i) to share knowledge and research
experience in studying economic, environmental and social sustainability, (ii)
to assess the state-of-the-art green chemical product and process engineering,
(iii) to bridge the gap between research and development, strengthening the
linkage between academia and industries, (iv) to discuss research directions for
the chemical and allied industries to move towards sustainability and
educational approaches for the integration of industrial sustainability into the
chemical engineering curriculum, and (v) to explore opportunities for
international collaboration in the proposed technical
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The project will
facilitate US researchers/educators to exchange knowledge with leading
researchers and educators in over 10 countries, and help the US delegates
identify international collaboration opportunities in the research and education
of sustainable chemical engineering. Junior faculty and researchers as well as
graduate/undergraduate students, especially those in the underrepresented ethnic
groups, will be encouraged to participate in the symposium. This symposium will
also include two mini-workshops for catalyzing international collaborations on
sustainable chemical engineering research and education