* 1245803
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Developing a Paleoenvironmental context for Middle Stone Age Behavioral Transitions: A Multi-site Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2014
* John Kingston, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2014
* USD 31,200.00

In the distant past, our ancestors experienced highly variable environmental and
climatic conditions. During the Middle Stone Age, a period extending from
250,000 to 30,000 years ago, early humans experienced a series of wet/dry cycles
in Africa related to ice age climates in more temperate parts of the world.
Although theories of modern human origins and the evolution of human-like
culture and behavior are generally based in the Middle Stone Age of Africa, our
understanding of what makes the Middle Stone Age so important for these modern
human features is limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One avenue of research is to
investigate the nature of these cycles of glaciation in equatorial and southern
African habitats where the earliest evidence for evolution of our species
exists. In this project, conducted by Emory University doctoral student Joshua
Robinson, under the mentorship of Dr. John Kingston, a series of established
Middle Stone Age sites in Kenya, Ethiopia, Zambia, and the Democratic Republic
of Congo will be utilized to study the local manifestations of global and
regional environmental and climatic events. Through chemical analyses of the
teeth of fossil animals from these archaeological sites, the research will
reconstruct dietary patterns and climatic conditions. Specifically, carbon and
oxygen isotopic analyses will form the basis for reconstructing vegetation,
humidity, and rainfall at eight sample sites. These analyses will directly test
the hypothesis that regional records fail to document local conditions that
might be associated with these evolutionary
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the research is to
improve our understanding of the development of distinctly modern human
behaviors, and the relationship between behavior and climate. This relationship
is one of the enduring questions in anthropology, and the data to be collected
here will provide new insights into when modern behavior emerged and delineate
possible reasons for this emergence. The high-resolution, long-term database of
environmental and climatic data generated by the study also will find broader
application as an innovative framework for contextualizing and understanding
modern climate change.