* 1245597
* Bridging Mathematics Contents to Engineering Contexts; Just-In-Time Assessment and Review Modules
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Henry Trussell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,999.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: North Carolina State University (Primary) Louisiana
State University, Kentucky University, UNC-Ashville, UNC-Charlotte and NC A&T
University

PROJECT DESCRIPTION Mathematicians and engineering educators are collaborating
to address the mathematics needs that can adequately support engineering
students. The project is developing a series of individualized, just-in-time
assessment and review (JITAR) mathematics modules that can help students in
their engineering courses. The modules are part of an on-line system that can
assess the mathematical competency level of a student and provide individualized
developmental learning opportunities. The just-in-time learning opportunities
will help students to successfully apply the necessary mathematics in their new
engineering courses.

The project is creating an on-line software system that: 1) challenges students
to address their conceptual understanding by emphasizing the engineering
motivation for the mathematics reviewed; 2) supports diverse learning styles by
offering formative feedback and guidance through the review process; and 3)
provides instructors with content that can be customized for their mathematics
needs, the goals of their course and their teaching approach. Classroom delivery
of the modules is provided in a just-in-time fashion, whenever the relevant
mathematics content is needed.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE This effort addresses an urgent national need to improve
the preparation of engineering majors, in order to increase motivation and
degree success. Engineering retention is of particular concern among members of
underrepresented groups, as well as among transfer students and non-traditional
students returning to school from workplace. The project is helping students in
underrepresented groups improve their mathematics skills, thus creating multiple
pathways for them to excel in STEM courses. The online system is impacting
engineering students at schools throughout the country and can be customized to
also support other discipline areas (e.g., statistics, physics, chemistry). The
individualized approach to assessment and review of the mathematics concepts is
increasing the confidence and ability of students, providing valuable feedback
to their instructors, and helping to improve the retention of underrepresented
groups in engineering programs.