* 1245778
* Phage Discovery Goes Viral: Engaging All Biology Students in Research
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Nancy Staub, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 129,675.00

The purpose of this project is to engage all of the introductory biology
students at Gonzaga University (n=350) in a transformative research-based lab
course during their freshman year. The project goals are to 1) increase the
science competencies of students at all three developmental levels (beginners,
intermediate, and advanced), 2) increase the retention rate of underrepresented
minorities in the sciences by engaging students early on in research, and 3)
inspire other institutions to implement authentic discovery-based research on a
large scale in introductory laboratory courses. Because of the growing
recognition that research experience in the first year is a critical influence
on retention in science, many programs are now offering an alternative
introductory lab sequence based on discovering new mycobacteriophages and
annotating their genomes) in a two-semester course, the HHMI (Howard Hughes
Medical Institute) SEA-PHAGES (Science Education Alliance-Phage Hunters
Advancing Genomics and Evolutionary Science) program. Based on the assumption
that the gains observed among this select group of students are the kinds of
gains all students could experience, the project team has devised several
strategies to effectively scale up SEA-PHAGES and make it the introductory
biology lab course for 350 students per year. The strategies involve 1)
introducing a one-semester Gonzaga Phage Discovery Lab course for all students
in the introductory biology class, 2) implementing a Phage Genomics module
embedded within the 200-level Genetics Lab course, 3) offering a third course,
Advanced Phage Research Lab, for upper division students, and 4) teaching the
Phage Discovery Lab course for non-science majors, as well.

Intellectual Merit: With this number of students engaged each year, this project
is obtaining strong measures of the effectiveness of the one-semester Phage
Discovery lab as a research experience for a wide variety of beginning science
and non-science majors.

Broader Impacts: The outcomes of this project, can increase the science
education community's understanding of how best to increase the scientific
literacy of all undergraduates. The project is also producing teaching and
learning materials adaptable by other institutions.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward support of Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education.