* 1245622
* Integrating Campus Sustainability Initiatives and Data into Instructional Practices
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Susan Powers, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 01/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

A cyber-learning tool was developed to enable the integration of campus
sustainability projects into a wide variety of classes as relevant, experiential
learning sites. The broad goal of this endeavor is to engage undergraduate
students in order to help them develop the STEM related skills needed in the
21st Century. The goal of this project is to develop, pilot and assess a
framework that can be employed as a step towards future use at other
universities. The framework includes the cyber-learning infrastructure for
campus sustainability (CLICS), as well as examples of how these data can be used
in project-based learning experiences, and an agenda for training instructors to
design experiential learning modules using such a tool in their own classes.
Assessment and evaluation provides preliminary evidence that the approach
engages students and helps them excel in 21st century STEM skills. The
development and assessment of a framework for cyber-infrastructure tools and
training to help bring the value of CLICS into the classroom represents the
primary intellectual merit of this project. CLICS includes specifications for
sensors, data acquisition and a schematic-based open-source graphical interface
to enable easy user access and interpretation. Eleven faculty members are
trained to use CLICS in their classrooms, impacting over 300 students per year.
Many classes that do address sustainability issues have a relatively high
percentage of female students. Thus, this project disproportionately supports
gender diversity in STEM classes.