* 1245677
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Sophomore-Level Course "Introduction of Renewable Energy Manufacturing" and Faculty Expertise
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Jahangir Emrani, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 62,871.00

The project is to develop, assess, revise, and disseminate a sophomore-level
course, ?Introduction of Renewable Energy Manufacturing,? and to develop faculty
expertise in teaching the course. Project tasks include: (1) draft the textbook
for the course and publish it though a self-publishing company; (2) develop lab
modules; (3) draft the lab manual and publish it though a self-publishing
company; (4) establish a website that contains links to relevant YouTube videos
and homework assignments; (5) develop assessment questions for students; (6)
visit related manufacturing companies and national renewable energy labs; (7)
teach the course at three institutions and conduct both informative and
summative assessments; (8) analyze assessment results; (9) revise the draft
textbook and lab manual based on assessment results; (10) submit revised
textbook and lab manual to a regular publisher; and (11) publish journal and
conference papers and make presentations to disseminate
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have significant impacts
on training the nation?s future workforce in renewable energy manufacturing.
Such a workforce is critical for the U.S. to secure its global leadership in the
renewable energy industry. This will greatly benefit the U.S. economy, energy
security, environment, and society in general. The collaborative work among the
three institutions, one of which is a HBCU, will broaden participation and
promote diversity in STEM education.