* 1245504
* Using Electronic Assessments to Inform Student Learning and Instruction in Introductory Statistics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Amy Froelich, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,855.00

This research project develops an electronic assessment model with vocabulary,
clicker, and homework assessment questions for a broad range of undergraduate
introductory statistics courses. Report generating programs incorporating the
current state of data visualization research will be developed to automatically
generate reports for students, course instructors, and supervisors, enabling
rapid feedback on learning and instruction to all parties. The effectiveness of
this new technology on student learning will be evaluated along with the
progression of student learning of course outcomes and impact of different
styles and methods for delivering questions. The intellectual merit of this
project is its contribution to the field of statistics education by extending
previous work on course level student learning outcomes (GAISE College Report)
to the topic level and by developing assessments to measure these outcomes.
These assessments will inform student learning and instruction by finding the
relative difficulties students have in learning course outcomes, obtaining the
most common patterns exhibited by students in their understanding of course
learning outcomes, and identifying the most common problems students have in
learning particular outcomes. The broader impact of this project is to affect
assessment in undergraduate introductory statistics courses at many institutions
by providing instructors at other institutions with an electronic assessment
model with report generating software. This project will provide a template for
electronic assessments in other introductory courses in STEM fields.