* 1245025
* Collaborative Research: Geodesy curriculum for the 21st century--Innovative science for addressing societally critical issues
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Beth Pratt-Sitaula, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 194,144.00

This project is a collaborative effort among a university consortium, community
college, university, STEM education center, and geoscience professional
organization to develop, test, and disseminate undergraduate teaching resources
that incorporate recent and exciting advances in geodesy (the science of
measuring and monitoring the size, shape and distribution of mass on Earth).
Curricular development emphasizes societally relevant modules (e.g., earthquake
and landslide hazards, water resources), which feature authentic data from such
geodetic sources as land-based global positioning systems (GPS), satellite-based
gravity and topographic measurements with unprecedented spatial and temporal
resolution, and aerial light-detection-and-ranging (LiDAR) surveys. Modules
developed for both introductory and advanced geoscience courses are undergoing
rigorous assessment and revision at a range of institutions. Dissemination to
the broader geoscience-education community includes workshops, webinars and web-
accessible modules and a developer's manual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in its compelling rationale for the need
of high-quality educational materials, currently not available in textbooks or
laboratory manuals, which merge recent geodesy-related advances and insights
with societally relevant cases. The project team leverages the diverse expertise
of the partnering institutions and organizations in geodesy content, in
research-informed pedagogy and assessment, and in effective approaches to
dissemination. Broader impacts include the diverse range of students and
institutions involved, ensuring both direct benefits during materials
development and high potential for widespread adoption, aided by proactive and
effective dissemination pathways. Incorporation of geodesy principles and
methods in the undergraduate curriculum also enhances quantitative skills, aids
workforce development in this rapidly growing area, and enhances basic earth-
science literacy.