* 1245716
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Undergraduate Chemistry Education with Dynamic Open-Access ChemWiki HyperTextbooks
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Leverett Smith, Contra Costa Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 05/31/2015
* USD 56,114.00

This hyper textbook project is a team effort led by the University of California
at Davis with participation by Sonoma State University, Diablo Valley College,
Contra Costa Community College, Hope College, and University of Minnesota at
Morris. The partnership is developing, delivering and expanding transformative
content for chemistry education within a single, integrated online resource
known as The ChemWiki. The ChemWiki is organized around a collaborative approach
to chemistry education where an Open Access textbook is constantly being written
and re-written, partly by students and partly by faculty, resulting in a no-fee,
high-quality textbook, accessible anytime, anywhere, by anyone with internet
access. The ChemWiki is enabling Wikitexts to be created by individual faculty
by ordering modular content in a way that is meeting localized needs, and is
allowing other Core Modules to be modified via an embedded graphical editor, and
then incorporated into the Wikitext. The ever growing list of Wikitexts is
available for anyone to peruse, adapt and adopt as needs dictate. The ChemWiki
is incorporating a separate application, the 'Student Ability Rating and Inquiry
System' (SARIS) that is addressing the need for student practice, by
incorporating an extensive question database augmented with links to the
ChemWiki core material. SARIS is providing quiz and homework questions, drawn
from a deep pool, and is providing students with immediate formative feedback
designed to enhance their problem-solving skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ChemWiki is enabling student participatory learning by engaging them in the
content construction. The nature of The ChemWiki modular concept is permitting
content to be used and re-used in multiple courses at multiple levels. The open
and dynamic nature of The ChemiWiki is allowing both straightforward error
correction and timely content with near instantaneous modification possible for
state-of-the-art material. The multiple author construction approach is
enhancing usage flexibility by the very nature of the breadth of strategies
employed. Finally, the inter-institutional development scheme is leading to a
product of distinct value across a broad swath of institutions of higher
education.