* 1245310
* Accessible Access Control
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Ching-Kuang Shene, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,164.00

Access control is a last line of defense for protecting computer system
resources from a compromised process. This is a primary motivation for the
principle of least privilege, which requires that a process be given access to
only those resources it needs in order to complete its task. Enforcement of this
principle is difficult. A strict access control policy can contain tens of
thousands of rules, while errors in the policy can interrupt service and put
system resources at risk unnecessarily. This project is developing materials
that facilitate education on modern access control models and systems. A policy
development system leverages visualization to enhance student learning. The
policy development system allows graphical development and analysis of access
control policies. It runs at the user-level, so that student work does not
impact operation of the underlying system and so that access to a specific
operating system is not required. A set of web-based tutorials is being
developed that are suitable for study out of the classroom. The project results
will increase the number of institutions that offer deep coverage of access
control in their curriculum and will facilitate devdrlopment of the relevant
expertise by workers who are not able to pursue formal education. Computer
system security breaches cost companies billions of dollars per year. By helping
to create a workforce trained to use modern access control systems effectively,
this project increases the ability of industry to protect electronic data.