* 1245745
* An application-based learning approach to introductory C programming language courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Wesley Lawson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* rebecca bates
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,354.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTION: &lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;One of the
first hurdles that college students majoring in electrical or computer
engineering and related fields must overcome is a freshman programming class.
Introductory programming courses for engineers are still typically taught in a
traditional manner, with large classroom lectures and laboratory sessions where
students implement software-only programming assignments. Lectures and
assignments can too often obscure how programming can be embedded in a broader
design problem. Therefore, introductory computing courses are perceived by many
students as disconnected from issues of design and problem solving. As a result,
many students lose enthusiasm toward their intended
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing a project-driven
programming course for first-year electrical engineering (EE) majors. The course
assumes no previous programming or engineering knowledge. Students design
C-programs in an integrated development environment (IDE) for microprocessor
applications utilizing a variety of electronic sensors and actuators. In
addition to teaching the syntax and semantics of a language necessary to be
successful in more advanced programming classes, the course gives students an
appreciation for the enabling role of programmable devices in technological
systems and applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE
&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on an important aspect of early engineering
education by seeking to improve the teaching and learning of introductory
programming. The applications will provide a rich context for learning to
program, additionally serving as an introduction to components and techniques
that are commonly utilized in the EE profession. Introducing students to
engineering-relevant programming projects at the freshman level is also likely
to have a positive effect on retention. The project tackles a national issue,
improving computing education for engineers, with interwoven strands of basic
research and curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation being
conducted will help inform other educators that are considering revisions to
entry-level programming courses. By following students into subsequent
programming classes, the team is evaluating the longer-term effects of the new
course. The existence of the current computing class running in parallel with
the new class allows the project to more rigorously study the effects of the new
approach.