* 1245580
* Developing a New Paleoclimate Proxy for Polar and Alpine Glacial Regions Based on Noble Gases
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Fabien Kenig, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 10/31/2016
* USD 271,167.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Noble gases in groundwater systems can indicate
past climates in ice-free regions through estimation of noble gas temperatures.
Traditional noble gas temperatures cannot be derived in ice-covered regions
where water is not in contact with the atmosphere. The goal of the proposed work
is to take advantage of noble gas properties in ice covered lakes at the
ice/water interface to develop a new paleoclimate proxy with the potential to be
routinely used in both polar and alpine glacial regions. The evolution of the
Taylor Valley lakes is intimately connected to the dynamics of nearby glaciers,
as well as the advance and retreat of the Ross Ice Shelf, both of which are
dictated by climate change. The perennial ice cover of the lakes form at the
water/ice interface and sublimate at the top rendering these lakes ideal to test
and develop this new proxy. The proposed research involves conducting an
extensive noble gas sampling campaign of lake water, stream water, ice covers
and glacial ice. This data set, together with data continuously collected in the
area will provide a solid basis to develop, test and refine mathematical models
capable of accurately describing heavy noble gas concentration profiles as well
as their overall inventory in the lakes over time. These will provide
information on the occurrence of major climatic events while simultaneously
providing temporal constraints on such events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The findings of this work will be inserted into a new class
that the PI has created at the University of Michigan targeted at non-science
majors. It will create research opportunities for 1-2 undergraduates each year
and will support a PhD student. The outcomes of this research could have strong
societal relevance.