* 1245944
* INSPIRE: Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics of Natural Climate Variability: Sea-Surface Temperature and Ocean Heat Content
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Royce K Zia, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 709,682.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Physical Oceanography Program in
the Division of Ocean Sciences in the Directorate for Geosciences, and the
Mathematical Physics program in the Division of Physics, the Computational
Mathematics Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Condensed
Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials Research, all
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The natural variability of
the climate system is primarily understood through observations, climate
modeling, and analysis. Natural climate variability takes the form of large-
scale, coherent patterns such as El-Nino and the North Atlantic Oscillation.
There is currently no fundamental theory to explain or predict the natural
variability of the climate system. The climate system is driven by energy from
incoming solar radiation, which is then released back to space as outgoing long-
wave radiation. The climate system, apart from anthropogenic forcing, is
approximately in a thermodynamically non-equilibrium steady-state. Recent
progress within the physics community has led to a new and deeper understanding
of natural variability in non-equilibrium steady-states. Non-equilibrium steady-
states have energetic pathways that channel their natural variability into well-
define lifecycles. These lifecycles are manifested as the patterns of natural
variability seen in the climate system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE
project will create a new interdisciplinary collaboration between physicists and
climate scientists developing and applying theories of non-equilibrium
fluctuations to the problem of understanding and predicting climate variability.
This project leverages a technical linkage between these two communities. Linear
Gaussian Models (LGMs) are among the simplest models that display non-
equilibrium steady-state fluctuations. LGMs have independently been extensively
studied by both the physics and climate communities, and have demonstrated
predictive skill for some climate phenomena. LGMs allow the immediate
application of results from non-equilibrium physics to climate phenomena, and
provide a focus for new developments in non-equilibrium
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE project will develop a new approach
to understanding the natural variability of climate and introduce the climate
system as a new application area for statistical physics. The context of non-
equilibrium steady-states provides a new theoretical framework for understanding
the patterns of natural variability. New diagnostics, based on the phase-space
dynamics of the patterns, will be developed and applied to a hierarchy of models
and data. Study of models with different constant carbon dioxide concentrations,
and models with anthropogenic forcing will provide insight into how the natural
variability of Sea Surface Temperature and ocean heat content will evolve under
climate change and how well-represented these processes are in present climate
models. New theoretical work in non-equilibrium physics will extend current
theory in directions motivated by climate variability. The project has two
threads: 1) the application of non-equilibrium theory to a hierarchy of sea
surface temperature and upper ocean heat content datasets; and 2) theoretical
work to advance non-equilibrium physics in directions that are important for the
climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed work will
serve as a template for application of statistical physics to other patterns of
natural climate variability. The natural variability of Linear Gaussian Models
can provide a null hypothesis for the entire spectrum of natural climate
variability, and will provide insight even in situations where it fails. The
project will serve to cross-fertilize the physics and climate communities and
provide new directions for research. Finally, the project will cross-train one
graduate student and one post-doctoral researcher in climate modeling,
statistical physics, and climate data analysis, and will support the
intellectual growth of a young faculty member.