* 1245410
* Collaborative Research: Distributing the load: using the Structure-Behavior-Function framework to inform instructional design in introductory biology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Elena Bray Speth, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2017
* USD 158,571.00

This collaborative project transforms learning in introductory biology courses
through a technology-supported, active-learning pedagogy that is informed by
theory and evidence about learning systems. Specifically, this project overcomes
students' problems in understanding complex biological systems and distributes
learning in a way that actively engages students in and out of class. This
project evaluates the effectiveness of the pedagogy, provides research on how
introductory biology students articulate complex processes within and across
biological systems, and investigates development of reflective and deep learning
approaches.

The intellectual merit of this project results from a technology-rich approach,
allowing instructors to communicate selected content outside of class and
replacing traditional lectures with promising active learning strategies in
class. An approach adapted from engineering that analyzes systems in terms of
their Structure, Behavior, and Function is the theoretical framework employed to
facilitate learning and understanding of biological systems.

This project creates broader impacts by building and strengthening community
within and across institutions. At the collaborating institutions alone, several
hundred students are expected to benefit from the enhanced instructional
framework. Dissemination of practices and curricular materials should impact
students at multiple institutions and levels in the biology curriculum. Research
findings are expected to be disseminated as oral and poster communication at
local and national meetings of professional societies. Further, outcomes of this
research are also expected to be disseminated via manuscripts targeted for
science education journals. Contributions to the STEM education research
literature should yield insights to the broader academic and science education
research communities.