* 1245632
* Hypothesis-driven Computational Genomics: Engaging Students in Lab Protocols and Bioinformatics via Inquiry
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Gail Rosen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2018
* USD 214,993.00

This project is utilizing three interdisciplinary courses to educate students in
the realms of genomics, molecular evolution, and the bioinformatics analyses of
genes and genomes. Students participating in these courses come from several
majors, departments, and colleges, providing a diverse multidisciplinary
environment with great potential for peer learning. While developing hypotheses,
students are gaining hands on skills in DNA sequence analysis in the Molecular
Ecology Laboratory and Bioinformatics courses. They analyze metagenomic datasets
that they helped to generate, using these to test hypotheses about microbial
ecology, symbiosis, and the roles of microbes in digestion and
nutrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This thematic strategy is expected to actively
engage students in the learning process, helping them to develop as critical-
thinkers who understand the scientific method. To measure the success of this
approach, students are answering a series of questions about their impressions
and perceived understanding of bioinformatics throughout the sequence. They are
also being tested on their knowledge of bioinformatics at the beginning and end
of the sequence. Assessments of students taking all three courses, one or two of
the courses, or none of the courses are being compared to determine the
program's impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the sequence is
producing students who are highly qualified for careers in bioinformatics,
having worked with the types of datasets that bioinformaticians routinely
analyze. The generation and analysis of high throughput datasets is modernizing
bioinformatics education at Drexel, and the three-course sequence (and case-
study based approach) is expected to serve as a model for other institutions.