* 1245957
* Long Term Trans-disciplinary Project-Based Instruction in Biology and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Paul Camp, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2016
* USD 193,297.00

This novel project is developing robust links between multiple courses in
biology to the general physics for biology majors' course. Aspects of this
project include creating several large scale, open ended, project-based
investigations that revisit physical and biological concepts multiple times in
different courses. These investigations are integrating biology into physics
courses and vice versa, enabling biology majors to see their curriculum as a
unified whole. Furthermore, this project is providing measureable outcomes
quantifying (i) performance on standard disciplinary measures, (ii) attitudes
toward required courses, (iii) understanding physics and biology in an
integrated manner, and (iv) transfer of knowledge between courses and
disciplines. The project is implementing course reform that includes
sustainability and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this proposal stems from a reform of pedagogy, which turns a collection of
independent courses in different departments into a unified whole. This
transformation is being accomplished in a novel way by explicitly developing
expert skills over an extended period of time using real and engaging
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts resulting from this project
include improved STEM training for women of African descent because Spelman
College is an historically black women's college. Further, this project is
contributing to a paradigm shift in undergraduate education by weaving together
strands of research in Learning Sciences and Physics Education Research. Plans
are in place for dissemination of project outcomes via conferences and
publications in both biology and physics education journals as well as in the
broader education research community.