* 1245595
* Enhancing the STEM Curriculum Through a Multidisciplinary Approach That Integrates Biology and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Stephanie Farrell, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 199,791.00

The increasing prevalence of cardiovascular and orthopedic disorders has
generated a need to engineer biomaterials that improve the quality of life for
people with painful and debilitating diseases. Specialized instruction in these
areas is needed at the undergraduate level. Yet there are few published lab
activities for biomaterials and tissue engineering, and existing activities lack
a foundation in materials science. This project is developing interactive
experiments that introduce tissue engineering through a biomaterials design
perspective, emphasizing mechanics, cell behavior, and drug delivery. In these
experiments, cutting-edge methods are adapted so that they can be applied
starting at the freshman level through upper-level electives in chemical,
mechanical, or biomedical engineering and cellular/molecular biology.

The interdisciplinary project team is producing detailed experimental designs to
engage students in the guided discovery of polymer science and its application
to the characterization of polymers for meniscus replacement, the study of cell-
biomaterial interactions in tissue engineering scaffolds, and the design of
magnetic stimuli-responsive hydrogels for pulsatile drug delivery. Through the
lab activities, students have research-like experiences that contribute to their
development as innovative engineers who are adept at approaching novel problems.
Results of the project include tested curricular materials that fulfill a need
in STEM education, increased student interest in undergraduate and graduate
study in STEM disciplines, higher student retention in science and engineering
majors, and students who are prepared to find multidisciplinary engineering
solutions to the growing health care needs of the world.