* 1245059
* Flipping Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* John Williams, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 04/30/2017
* USD 172,136.00

The purpose of Flipping Calculus is to transform the teaching and learning of
the material in Calculus. Flipping a course describes an instructional approach
in which the delivery of a majority of the content is moved outside of class,
via online videos, lecture notes, and readings, while homework, such as problem
sets, labs, and applications, are shifted into the classroom. Instructors in
Flipped Calculus are devoting class time to supporting small groups of students
who are engaged in collaborative discussions and problem solving. Senior faculty
are creating a library of videotaped lessons which correspond to key calculus
concepts. In addition, they are developing and refining guided problem sets and
assessments to evaluate the progress made by the students. Eventually, a website
for flipping calculus will be created, which will host the videos and course
materials, available for broad dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
activities are based on research on how students learn and are designed to
actively engage students in Calculus so they obtain a deeper understanding of
the material, ultimately remembering and applying the skills and concepts they
learn. This project involves at least six mathematics faculty members and is
having a direct impact on more than 200 students during the first year of the
project and upwards of 300 students in year two. The project leaders are
extending the impact by presenting their findings and materials at regional and
national conferences, sharing the videotapes, problem sets, labs and discussion
questions on a website dedicated to flipping Calculus, as well as publishing
articles in mathematics education journals.