* 1245463
* Exploration of a Statistically Accurate and Energy Efficient Accelerated Testing Methodology
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Haitao Liao, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 04/30/2014
* USD 213,465.00

The objective of this fundamental research is to explore a new accelerated
testing (AT) methodology that improves the reliability estimation accuracy of an
AT experiment while minimizing its total energy consumption. The basic idea of
AT is to expose test units of a product to harsher-than-normal operating
conditions to expedite failures. However, AT often consumes significant amounts
of energy. To avoid the waste of energy in a wide spectrum of product
development processes, this research will increase our knowledge by
incorporating control theory into such complex experimental designs that require
new tools to jointly handle statistical estimation accuracy, controller design,
and energy assessment via computer simulation. The methodology will determine
the interrelationship between various stress loadings and total energy use,
establish a generic framework to facilitate the optimum experimental design and
energy reduction process, and provide advanced control strategies capable of
following various stress loadings. To validate the methodology, the long-term
reliability of solder joints will be studied, which is quite challenging in the
microelectronics industry and is essential for millions of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will change the current
reliability testing practices in developing highly reliable products (or
materials) that are continually faced with increasing needs for time- and
energy-saving technologies. Considering millions of products being developed in
the U.S. and the world, energy reduction in reliability testing for each stage
of a development process will eventually lead to substantial energy savings.
This research complements the world-wide sustainability efforts in actively
seeking new energy resources. The research findings will also enhance education
and knowledge dissemination in reliability engineering, equipment and control,
statistics, and energy-saving technologies. Moreover, the results will be
broadly disseminated through publications, workshops, and industry
collaborations. Furthermore, minority and female students will be recruited in
this project and K-12 teachers and students will be exposed to cutting edge
research experiences.