* 1245821
* Collaborative Research: The Taylor Glacier, Antarctica, Horizontal Ice Core: Exploring changes in the Natural Methane Budget in a Warming World and Expanding the Paleo-archive
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 394,744.00

1245659/Petrenko

This award supports a project to use the Taylor Glacier, Antarctica, ablation
zone to collect ice samples for a range of paleoenvironmental studies. A record
of carbon-14 of atmospheric methane (14CH4) will be obtained for the last
deglaciation and the Early Holocene, together with a supporting record of CH4
stable isotopes. In-situ cosmogenic 14C content and partitioning of 14C between
different species (14CH4, C-14 carbon monoxide (14CO) and C-14 carbon dioxide
(14CO2)) will be determined with unprecedented precision in ice from the surface
down to ~67 m. Further age-mapping of the ablating ice stratigraphy will take
place using a combination of CH4, CO2, &#948;18O of oxygen gas and H2O stable
isotopes. High precision, high-resolution records of CO2, &#948;13C of CO2,
nitrous oxide (N2O) and N2O isotopes will be obtained for the last deglaciation
and intervals during the last glacial period. The potential of 14CO2 and
Krypton-81 (81Kr) as absolute dating tools for glacial ice will be investigated.
The intellectual merit of proposed work includes the fact that the response of
natural methane sources to continuing global warming is uncertain, and available
evidence is insufficient to rule out the possibility of catastrophic releases
from large 14C-depleted reservoirs such as CH4 clathrates and permafrost. The
proposed paleoatmospheric 14CH4 record will improve our understanding of the
possible magnitude and timing of CH4 release from these reservoirs during a
large climatic warming. A thorough understanding of in-situ cosmogenic 14C in
glacial ice (production rates by different mechanisms and partitioning between
species) is currently lacking. Such an understanding will likely enable the use
of in-situ 14CO in ice at accumulation sites as a reliable, uncomplicated tracer
of the past cosmic ray flux and possibly past solar activity, as well as the use
of 14CO2 at both ice accumulation and ice ablation sites as an absolute dating
tool. Significant gaps remain in our understanding of the natural carbon cycle,
as well as in its responses to global climate change. The proposed high-
resolution, high-precision records of &#948;13C of CO2 would provide new
information on carbon cycle changes both during times of rising CO2 in a warming
climate and falling CO2 in a cooling climate. N2O is an important greenhouse gas
that increased by ~30% during the last deglaciation. The causes of this increase
are still largely uncertain, and the proposed high-precision record of N2O
concentration and isotopes would provide further insights into N2O source
changes in a warming world. The broader impacts of proposed work include an
improvement in our understanding of the response of these greenhouse gas budgets
to global warming and inform societally important model projections of future
climate change. The continued age-mapping of Taylor Glacier ablation ice will
add value to this high-quality, easily accessible archive of natural
environmental variability. Establishing 14CO as a robust new tracer for past
cosmic ray flux would inform paleoclimate studies and constitute a valuable
contribution to the study of the societally important issue of climate change.
The proposed work will contribute to the development of new laboratory and field
analytical systems. The data from the study will be made available to the
scientific community and the broad public through the NSIDC and NOAA
Paleoclimatology data centers. 1 graduate student each will be trained at UR,
OSU and SIO, and the work will contribute to the training of a postdoc at OSU. 3
UR undergraduates will be involved in fieldwork and research. The work will
support a new, junior UR faculty member, Petrenko. All PIs have a strong history
of and commitment to scientific outreach in the forms of media interviews,
participation in filming of field projects, as well as speaking to schools and
the public about their research, and will continue these activities as part of
the proposed work. This award has field work in Antarctica.