* 1245703
* Collaborative Research:  Biological Adaptations to Environmental Change in Antarctica - An Advanced Training Program for Early Career Scientists
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Dennis Hedgecock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2020
* USD 340,706.00

This project will support two training courses that will introduce early-career
scientists from a wide range of disciplinary backgrounds to key issues in polar
science, and especially to provide the opportunity to gain hands-on experience
in Antarctic field activities. Antarctica is an ideal location to study a wide
variety of questions in biology. However, few students and early-career
scientists have the opportunity to work on-site in Antarctica unless they are
directly associated with a senior scientist who has a funded Antarctic project.
The project will further the NSF goal of training new generations of scientists
by providing hands-on training in Antarctica during one course at Palmer Station
in 2016 and another at McMurdo Station in 2018. This represents a continuation
of nine previous courses at McMurdo Station which have a proven record of
introducing participants to Antarctic science under realistic field conditions,
providing opportunities to understand and appreciate the complexities and
logistical challenges of undertaking science in Antarctica, enhancing the
professional careers of the participants, and increasing international
collaborations for early-career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
training courses will be open to Ph.D. students and post-doctoral scientists who
have interests in the study of Antarctic marine organisms to help prepare them
for success in developing their own independent research programs in polar
regions. Long-standing and recent questions in evolution and ecology of
Antarctic organisms will be examined with 1) field collections, 2) physiological
experiments on whole organisms, 3) studies of isolated cells and tissues, 4)
experiments on macromolecular processes (e.g., enzymes), and 5) molecular
biological analyses.