* 1245068
* ChANgE Chem: Transforming Chemistry with Cognitive Apprenticeship for Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Treavor Boyer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 194,617.00

The Transforming Chemistry with Cognitive AppreNticeship for Engineers (ChANge
Chem) project is working to improve the quality of undergraduate STEM education
by transforming the general chemistry curriculum for engineering students to a
more contextually relevant and engaging experience. The ChANge Chem endeavor
employs the use of cognitive apprenticeship strategies, an educational framework
steeped in our understanding of how students learn, to develop a sequence of
activities that emulate and make explicit the way engineers think, comprehend,
and work. The transformed curriculum situates water, air, waste and energy as
fundamental organizing principles in practical engineering problems,
communicated as human interest stories. Project goals are organized around the
three overarching themes of the Design, Develop and Test components of the
research and development cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;ChANgE Chem advances our understanding of how people learn
chemistry and develop the skills for addressing engineering design problems. The
project applies a unique approach to create new learning materials and teaching
strategies, develop faculty expertise, implement an educational innovation and
assess student achievement. Collectively, the project leadership has extensive
experience with instructional materials development, innovative pedagogical
practices and the use of technology as a learning tool. Individually, the team
possesses expertise in chemistry, environmental engineering, chemical
engineering, chemical education and STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;ChANgE Chem broadens
participation in STEM by designing for the recruitment and retention of women
and individuals from diverse cultural, racial and ethnic backgrounds. Producing
a transferable model of chemistry education for engineers and communicating
results through established networks affords the potential of widespread
adoption by a variety of institutions. By contributing a more diverse and
better-qualified engineering workforce, ChANge Chem serves society by
facilitating sustained economic growth, national security and an informed
electorate.