* 1245795
* CC-NIE Integration: Creation of an Institutional Cyberinfrastructure to Enable Researcher-Oriented, Federated Environment for Large, Collaborative Science Projects
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Ye Duan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

Wide spread adoption of cyberinfrastructure advances has been a challenge to
researchers mainly due to the traditional cyberinfrastructure equipment,
policies and engineering practices at campuses. This University of Missouri (MU)
project enables a 100 GB connection extending across the state of Missouri from
St. Louis through Columbia to Kansas City directly on the I2 Innovation Network
backbone. It includes wide-area network experimentation to seamlessly integrate
MU's cyberinfrastructure and Science DMZ with a remote campus (Ohio State
University) cyberinfrastructure. It also involves integrating advanced
technologies (e.g., 100Gbps connectivity, perfSONAR, OpenFlow, RoCE/iWARP)
relevant to the use cases of diverse researchers at MU and
OSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building CI in this environment requires
authentication, authorization, and policy-limited access to resources. The
project engages all three elements of Internet2's Innovation Network: Software
Defined Networking (SDN), OpenFlow and Federated Identity. The University of
Missouri is modifying its existing cyberinfrastructure to accommodate advanced
tools enabled by OpenFlow and SDN. The existing science DMZ is compatible with
the Innovation Network Science DMZ. MU is also customizing Shibboleth Federated
Identity Management services &lt;br/&gt;to provide fine-grained authorization
and access to specific resources. The entitlement server implements policy that
controls the bandwidth consumed by individual users or programs. The project
broadly disseminates research results through publication on the project web
site, disseminated through various regional and national conferences, and
journal articles. Open source software from the project will also be made
available.