* 1245707
* The use of high-frequency data to engage students in quantitative reasoning and scientific discourse
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Catherine O'Reilly, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2017
* USD 217,328.00

This project is developing modules that introduce quantitative activities based
on large, long-term and sensor-based systems for undergraduates at a diverse
suite of institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project is
developing the skills required to manipulate large datasets at different scales
while improving the students' reasoning skills by engaging them in authentic
research experiences. The project's methods are designed to sharpen the highly
transferable skills (i.e., data integration, statistical proficiency and
analysis) necessary for doing science in the digital age. Online datasets
supported by National Atmospheric Deposition Program, Global Lake Ecological
Observatory network (GLEON) and the National Snow and Ice Data Center, among
others, will be used to develop a framework for modules that yield important
ecological information for the biological community while providing engaging
experiences with authentic data for the undergraduate students at a variety of
academic institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: From an
educational perspective, this project provides an opportunity for undergraduates
from a diverse group of schools to partake in analyses on authentic data
provided from national centers on real and pressing environmental issues.
Assessment of the project focuses on the effects of the modules on competency in
inquiry, quantitative reasoning, and students' ability to conduct scientific
discourse. The project also represents a collaboration of scientists in a range
of environmental disciplines and career stages brought together by a common
desire to improve undergraduate student experience and learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts toward support of
Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.