* 1245747
* Interactive Web-Based Visualization Tools for Gluing Undergraduate Fuel Cell System Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Nina Orlovskaya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,355.00

It is critically important for engineering graduates to have the appropriate
knowledge to respond to the nation's energy need. This project will create
interactive web based visualization materials and tools and will evaluate their
effectiveness for enhancing student understanding of fuel cell theory and
design. This will provide a greater number of engineering graduates who possess
the required abilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interactive nature of the web
based materials will enable students to easily navigate the learning materials
so they can investigate areas of interest to them. This will increase student
interest, retention and amount of time spent learning. An interactive forum tool
will also allow active learning to be implemented more easily in a classroom
setting. Active learning is a proven method for enhancing student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Products from this project include interactive
fuel cell learning materials that can be implemented nationally. Another product
is an innovative material navigation system enabling students to easily identify
materials that interest them. This navigation system will contribute to more
time studying, and increase student retention. An interactive forum being
developed will help instructors create active classrooms that will enhance
student learning. The project also includes data driven assessment and
evaluation of the effectiveness of interactive visualization materials on
student learning.