* 1245818
* Enhancing Undergraduate Education in Signals and Signal Processing using Advanced UltraWideband Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Laurie Joiner, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2018
* USD 199,220.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: &lt;br/&gt;University of Alabama in
Huntsville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION
&lt;br/&gt;UltraWideband (UWB) is a radio technology that operates at a very low
energy level for short-range, high-bandwidth communications using a large
portion of the radio spectrum. The technology offers a solution to the future
connectivity needs of the next -generation consumer electronic devices that
cannot be met with today's wireless LAN and WPAN technologies. The attributes of
high bandwidth, high fidelity, low power, low cost, and compact physical size
which make UWB ideal for enabling wireless connectivity is also ideal for a
hands-on instrumentation platform for learning the basic concepts in signals and
signal processing for an electrical engineer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is enhancing undergraduate education in electrical engineering by incorporating
recent advances in high performance UWB instrumentation into laboratories to
improve student learning. This approach allows key fundamental concepts in
signal and signal processing (e.g., the impulse response, modulation, time-
domain/frequency-domain duality, sampling, signal orthogonality, correlations,
and filtering) to emerge from mathematical theory using the UWB technology and
materialize in hands-on experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
addressing the need to provide students unique hands-on practice with real-world
technology to connect the dots between signal and signal processing concepts and
system performance. Students crave these practical exercises so they can see the
"big picture" and understand why learning these concepts is important. This
laboratory fills a void in the curriculum that has been long overlooked.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The project holds promise
to bridge the gap between theoretical signal processing concepts and wireless
operations via experiences in a practical laboratory environment. As future
employee or graduate researchers, the students can immediately engage in the
design process, an often-rare commodity. External feedback provided by industry
is facilitating a line of communication, which is creating a better alignment of
course content with current technology trends. Finally, the targeted materials
developed during the project increase the likelihood of curriculum adoption by
other institutions.