* 1245427
* Design Challenges and Stories: Integrating Reflective Design Learning in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* James Palmer, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2017
* USD 187,195.00

Design is a core activity in computer science and software engineering and it
determines the function and quality of software systems. As a result, it is
vitally important that computer science graduates possess strong design skills.
Conventional curricula, however, do not adequately support design learning since
they isolate the explicit study of design to only a few selected courses while
using ill-suited instructional techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
aiming at significantly improving the strategies used to support design learning
in computer science, through two key thrusts: the first is developing a modular
instructional approach that enables students to use reflective learning in
creating narratives called design stories; the second thrust is developing the
Design Learning Repository, which allows educators to search, access, and
contribute instructional materials that adopt the project's approach. This work
is addressing the shortcomings of current practice by infusing the study of
design throughout the computer science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A solid
grounding in reflection-based learning theories contributes to the project's
intellectual merit, further added to by adopting techniques well-suited to the
nature of design and by using evidence-based evaluations of learning gains. The
broader impacts of this project have far reaching potential: the intervention
method is being strongly institutionalized at the home university and is
affecting a highly diverse student body, while collaborations are promoting
adoption at partner universities. More broadly, the dissemination activities and
transformative strategies being pursued may change how design learning is
supported throughout the computer science educational community.