* 1245947
* INSPIRE: Automating Reasoning in Interpreting Climate Records of the Past
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* James White, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 658,815.00

This INSPIRE award is jointly funded by the Information Integration and
Informatics Program in the Information and Intelligent Systems Division of the
Computer and Information Sciences Directorate, the Marine Geology and Geophysics
Program in the Ocean Sciences Division of the Geosciences Directorate, the
Arctic Natural Sciences Program in the Arctic Sciences Division and the
Antarctic Glaciology Program in the Antarctic Sciences Division in the Office of
Polar Programs, and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
critical first step in the analysis of paleoclimate records like ice or sediment
cores is the construction of an age model, which relates the depth in a core to
the calendar age of the material at that point. The reasoning involved in age-
model construction is complex, subtle, and scientifically demanding because the
processes that control the rate of material accumulation over time, and that
affect the core between formation and sampling, are unknown. Geoscientists
approach this problem by treating the core like a crime scene and asking the
question: "What physical and chemical processes could have produced this
situation, and what does that say about the timeline?" However, the sheer number
of possibilities, coupled with the volume and complexity of the climatology data
that is currently available and is continually collected, severely limit the
scope of these investigations. The goal of this project is to remove this
roadblock. This research will lead to an integrated software tool called
CScibox, that uses automated reasoning techniques to help scientists analyze ice
and sediment cores. It employs a cyberinfrastructure that provides powerful,
intuitive tools on a scientist's desktop while taking full advantage of modern
data- and computation-intensive computing and networking infrastructure --
including workflow-based computation, parallel execution, distributed systems,
cluster machines and the cloud. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CScibox will not only
improve the ability of individual geoscientists analyze single cores; it has the
potential to transform the field of paleoclimatology by facilitating rapid,
reproducible analysis and synthesis of the information in the diverse
collections of raw data available in data archives to foster understanding and
improved scientific decision making. This will have broad impacts for society by
allowing scientists to develop deeper insights into the roles of various factors
in the complex relationships that give rise to geological records of the earth's
climate that are used in today's models of environmental change. This project
also has a broad educational impact. Students involved in the development and
implementation of CScibox will develop skills in interdisciplinary research and
will learn how to apply computational methodology in a challenging scientific
context that has not yet significantly benefitted from developments in
information technology. CScibox is designed to be easy to install and use; see
the project web site (http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~lizb/cscience.html) for source
code, documentation, and examples of its use. Future steps include extending the
work to other paleoclimate data, working with geoscientists to make the user
interface as intuitive as possible, and holding demos and workshops at
geosciences conferences to educate that community about what the tool can do and
how to use it.