* 1245433
* Interactive Textbook
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* C. Clemens, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

This project is providing open-source tools for converting LaTeX documents into
interactive course materials. For students, who are now surrounded by
interactive media, such materials are increasing demand for active learning and
are leading to gains in educational outcomes. For researchers, the platform is
providing quantitative data addressing the ongoing debate between pure and
guided discovery and the debate over the effectiveness of inquiry-based and
constructivist pedagogy. Since many STEM researchers and STEM educators are
comfortable with using the near-ubiquitous markup language LaTeX, this project
is making it possible for these content experts to broadly disseminate their
scientific understanding and engaging course materials in a compelling and
interactive way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is enhancing the
infrastructure for research and education. For example, using the platform, a
researcher is able to measure exactly how much time and in what way a student
engages with the various components of an interactive activity. From this data,
the researcher is gaining insight into student learning, while the content
author is receiving valuable feedback about what activities are particularly
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is being evaluated from the point-
of-view of an industrial or UX (user experience) designer, addressing questions
of author and student experience. The resulting content authoring tools are
available as open-source software on the web. To ensure broad dissemination and
to increase user expertise, a five-day workshop is providing training to content
authors.