* 1245783
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Enabling data-driven research
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Jay Aikat, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2015
* USD 499,529.00

This project identifies science labs at the University of North Carolina Chapel
Hill with large data-intensive research projects on campus that would benefit
most from improvements in network infrastructure. The project focuses on network
enhancements by replacing networking equipment, both building links and access
layer, related to these research labs on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
enhancements consist of upgrading the existing 100 Mb-only switches in the
affected departments with gigabit Ethernet switches providing multi-gigabit
links back to upgraded building aggregation switches that, in turn, connect to
the existing network backbone at 10Gbps. This provides 10Gbps connectivity from
each building to the campus research computing services, as well as to Internet2
resources. The enhancements also include a monitoring machine equipped with a
10Gbps DAG monitoring card to collect traffic header traces at the ingress-
egress routers at the edge of the campus network. These enhancements will enable
better and faster access to the large amounts of data transferred regularly by
these labs, thus enhancing data management in their respective research
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research labs directly and significantly
impacted by this project are involved in the following research projects:
&lt;br/&gt;* Biological Sciences: producing mathematical models of animal flight
(e.g., hummingbird, butterfly), using recordings of high-speed and high-
resolution video from locations throughout the campus. &lt;br/&gt;* Biological
Sciences: studying the evolution and genetics of de novo genes; obtaining the
data, particularly the raw data, demands several minutes to several hours of
uninterrupted downloads. &lt;br/&gt;* Geological Sciences: collecting,
aggregating, and moving data from volcanic and seismic monitors (some in real-
time), real time analysis of ongoing geologic processing.&lt;br/&gt;*
Environmental Science and Engineering: Lattice Boltzmann modeling that requires
large lattice sizes (8003) that translate to state storage of 8.7-95.3GB per
state point. &lt;br/&gt;* Computer Science: transferring large network traffic
datasets captured at the main campus link to clusters of data processing
machines in the lab for use in network experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project additionally has direct impact on the undergraduate and graduate
curricula in the various departments represented by these research labs,
broadening the participation of student researchers. These research labs
continue their investment in promoting undergraduate research by involving
undergraduate students, including actively promoting women and minorities in
their groups.