* 1245864
* CC-NIE Integration: Bringing Distributed High Throughput Computing to the Network with Lark
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Todd Tannenbaum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 573,344.00

The Lark project provides network-aware scheduling for distributed computing
resources, allowing workload management schedulers to make network-aware
provisioning decisions and providing mechanisms for individual batch jobs to
describe and request the networking topology required. Specifically, Lark will
integrate the capabilities of the perfSONAR, a network performance monitoring
tool, and DYNES, a cyber-instrument for allocation of bandwidth guarantees, into
distributed computing grid middleware such as Condor and glideinWMS. By using a
multi-site IPv6 test-bed and collaborating with a Nebraska project to provide
small starter clusters to local colleges, the project aims to produce
production-quality technology that could be deployed into the Open Science Grid
(OSG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will enable better trade-offs between
selection of a site to execute jobs, data location decisions, performance, and
security in large distributed computing environments, hence providing more
effective use of limited resources. This project addresses a clear and immediate
need in the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) computing environment, as network-aware
scheduling will increase the amount of analysis the LHC experiment
collaborations can perform. By integrating this work into the widely-used Condor
high throughput computing software and into the OSG stack, the benefits will
become available not only to LHC researchers, but to a number of science and
industry projects that rely upon distributed high throughput computing.