* 1245589
* CodePractice: Developing Coding Skills Using Social and Adaptive Drill-and-Practice Exercises
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Manuel Perez-Quinones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 06/30/2017
* USD 321,090.00

Rudimentary programming skills are essential to developing fundamental
proficiency in computer&lt;br/&gt;science. However, learning programming
techniques can be challenging and frustrating for many&lt;br/&gt;students.
Without interventions to curb these frustrations, introductory computer science
courses will&lt;br/&gt;suffer from attrition and poor retention rates will
follow. Drill-and-practice tools are emerging to help&lt;br/&gt;students develop
basic programming techniques and improve their confidence. However, there
are&lt;br/&gt;currently no programming practice systems that actively and
adaptively assist students when they&lt;br/&gt;require help on exercises.
Likewise, the potential for peer learning is currently untapped
without&lt;br/&gt;effectively leveraging online, social collaboration in
practice tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel approach to organically refine
learning materials also offers broader implications for
using&lt;br/&gt;automatic assessment in social eLearning environments. We will
study students? behaviors with the&lt;br/&gt;system and objectively measure
their outcomes. Consequently, our research will offer results
associated&lt;br/&gt;with a framework for supporting social and adaptive drill-
and-practice. Overall, we expect to improve&lt;br/&gt;student performance and
retention in computer science while contributing to the evolution of
instructional&lt;br/&gt;technology.