* 1245673
* Collaborative Research: Developing Inquiry Oriented Instructional Materials for Linear Algebra
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Megan Wawro, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 05/31/2017
* USD 66,986.00

Linear algebra is widely viewed as pivotal yet difficult for university
students, and hence innovative instructional materials are essential. This
project is producing: (a) student materials composed of challenging and coherent
task sequences that facilitate an inquiry-oriented approach to the teaching and
learning of linear algebra; (b) instructional support materials for implementing
the student materials; and (c) a prototype assessment instrument to measure
student understanding of key linear algebra concepts. The project is making a
needed contribution to the field by developing instructional materials that
allow for active student engagement in the guided exploration of key
mathematical ideas. It is also developing instructional support materials that
convey the instructional designers' intention without being overly prescriptive
and that provide information about how students think and learn within the task
sequences. The production of a prototype assessment instrument is of value
because it furthers what is known about student thinking in linear algebra and
provides a measure of comparison across pedagogical approaches. The study
partners mathematics education researchers and mathematicians to incorporate
research on teaching and learning into effective pedagogical approaches at the
undergraduate level. Project results are being disseminated through journal
publications, presentations, and workshops. Sharing the instructional tasks and
support materials is facilitated through the project website.