* 1245812
* Participant Support for the Third Fundamental Neutron Physics Summer School will be held at TRIUMF, Vancouver, Canada
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Timothy Chupp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 7,500.00

"Fundamental Neutron Physics'' is an experimental subfield of "Fundamental
Symmetries," which addresses core problems of particle physics through the use
of precision measurements, often involving polarized atoms and nuclei. These
experiments generally use low-energy facilities and techniques including neutron
beams, ultra-cold neutrons, polarized sources and and laser-physics tools. The
Fundamental Neutron Physics Summer School has the aim of bringing together
graduate students and young post docs entering the field with professionals who
provide lectures that give a comprehensive overview of the theoretical
foundations and motivations, the basic principles and physics that underlie our
understanding of the neutron sources and neutron beams, and specific topics
represented by the suite of experiments ongoing and planned.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fundamental Neutron Physics Summer School will take
place as part of the TRIUMF Summer Institute (TSI 2012), August 6-16, 2012, at
TRIUMF in Vancouver, BC. The curriculum of TSI 2012 will include a broad
introduction to the particle theory of the Standard Model and Beyond Standard
Model Physics that motivates research in fundamental neutron physics, muon
physics and neutron physics. The fundamental neutron physics curriculum will
include introductory material on neutron sources, neutron optics and
polarization techniques. From there, experiments including electric dipole
moment (EDM), interferometry, gravitational interaction and hadronic parity
violation will present the breadth of research currently underway as well as
prospects for the future. The capstone lecture will challenge the lecturer and
students to consider where these fields will be a decade from now. Thirty-one
lectures will be presented by 24 lecturers. In addition, homework and breakout
discussion sections will round out the school.