* 1245205
* Positioning Engineers for Urban Sustainability Transition Strategy Development
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Mikhail Chester, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2017
* USD 196,619.00

Civil and construction engineering students must learn to deploy sustainable
systems that balance economic, social, political, and community considerations,
in addition to technical considerations in order to address America's declining
infrastructure. A sustainable urban infrastructure-focused project-based
learning (PBL) course framework for upper-division undergraduates is being
developed that: (i) incorporates lower-division undergraduates through cross-
course consultation to link sustainability concepts across multiple engineering
undergraduate core courses; (ii) trains graduate students to lead teams of
undergraduates in their research efforts, (iii) incorporates regional/city
policy and decision makers to ground students in the economic, social,
political, and technical considerations they will face; and (iv) creates a
knowledge hub for other educators and researchers to access information about
the project to implement the framework at their own universities, and to
contribute to community building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
evaluating whether integrating sustainability concepts through PBL into existing
undergraduate civil and construction engineering courses results in improvements
in team-based problem-solving skills and whether collaborations between upper
and lower division undergraduates in multiple courses improve students' ability
to apply concepts taught in introductory courses to future
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using authentic urban sustainability problems
reinforces the links among courses and levels within the undergraduate civil and
construction engineering curriculum so that students have a stronger grasp of
the competing constraints in sustainability problem solving. Students who have
assessed sustainable engineering problems become aware of the multifaceted
constraints when deploying sustainable infrastructure and are better equipped to
balance the future needs of the country. Ultimately, this framework can be
implemented in undergraduate engineering curriculum at other universities and
has the potential to provide a template course structure for sustainable
engineering education.