* 1245312
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Implementation of a Science DMZ at San Diego State University to Facilitate High-Performance Data Transfer for Scientific Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Jose Castillo, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2016
* USD 498,597.00

The CC-NIE Network Infrastructure project at San Diego State
University&lt;br/&gt;(SDSU) is constructing and deploying a Science DMZ to
support data&lt;br/&gt;intensive science and accommodate specific end-to-end
dataflow scenarios&lt;br/&gt;between SDSU and other universities and national
laboratories. The&lt;br/&gt;design of the Science DMZ follows the vision and
architecture laid out&lt;br/&gt;by the Energy Sciences Network (ESnet). Cisco
Nexus 7000 and 2000&lt;br/&gt;series switches are deployed, along with a 10Gbps
connection to the&lt;br/&gt;CalREN-HP network with exclusive use by the Science
DMZ. Researchers at&lt;br/&gt;SDSU are hosting delay-sensitive applications and
datasets on Lustre&lt;br/&gt;parallel file systems directly attached to the
Nexus switches. These&lt;br/&gt;applications and datasets support research
projects in the numerical&lt;br/&gt;simulation of earthquake rupture and wave
propagation, coastal ocean&lt;br/&gt;modeling, pulse detonation engines, vortex
rings in Bose-Einstein&lt;br/&gt;condensates, and large-scale data for
proteomics, gene promoter&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics, and microbial metagenomics.
The project will directly&lt;br/&gt;impact the faculty and students who
encompass the Computational Science&lt;br/&gt;Research Center which draws
participation from all science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering departments at SDSU.
The Science DMZ provides researchers&lt;br/&gt;with the capability to rapidly
exchange large datasets and deploy&lt;br/&gt;Web-based science applications that
are accessible through a dedicated&lt;br/&gt;network that is separate from, and
therefore not impacted by, general&lt;br/&gt;Internet traffic generated by the
campus population. The DMZ will&lt;br/&gt;promote remote usage of computing
resources at SDSU, cultivate&lt;br/&gt;development of collaborative tools for
sharing data with the broader&lt;br/&gt;scientific community, establish new
research partnerships, and foster&lt;br/&gt;new mentorship opportunities between
faculty and students engaged in&lt;br/&gt;computational science.