* 1245356
* Collaborative Research: Constructive Chemistry: Problem-based Learning Through Molecular Modeling
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Charles Xie, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 01/31/2015
* USD 88,768.00

This collaborative project between Bowling Green State University (a doctoral
granting research university), Dakota County Technical College (an Associates
degree granting 2-year school), and The Concord Consortium (a nonprofit
educational research and development organization) is developing and examining a
technology-based pedagogy that is challenging students to create their own
molecular simulations covering a wide variety of basic concepts in general
chemistry, physical chemistry, biochemistry, and nanotechnology. The curriculum
materials, called "Constructive Chemistry" are based on The Concord Consortium's
Molecular Workbench which provides the graphical user interfaces for authoring
visually compelling and scientifically accurate, interactive simulations. Each
instructional unit is posing one or more problems that can be solved using
molecular simulations and their analytic tools. For example, students are
investigating why average kinetic energy, rather than average speed, of
molecules provides a microscopic interpretation of temperature. They are
discovering deviations from the Ideal Gas Law as a function of the properties of
the constituent gas molecules. They are designing a molecular sieve, a fuel
cell, or a nanofabrication procedure. The students are achieving these
accomplishments through a scaffolded process that is enabling them to both learn
science content and modeling skills, while also building their understanding of
the basic chemistry concepts.

This project is allowing science to be taught as a verb, rather than a noun
since 'doing science' is a compelling and effective way to learn. Enabling the
process of exploration, creation, and invention, the students are applying
theories, testing ideas, and synthesizing knowledge. By constructing molecular
simulations, students are learning abstract concepts and reshaping their
intuition.

The project is utilizing computational chemistry to support student design and
problem solving and is transforming how state-of-the-art computational tools are
used to support student learning at all levels. The approach being developed is
readily implemented by any course worldwide and is taking advantage of the
widely used, freely available, Molecular Workbench resource.