* 1245084
* INSPIRE: Atom-Mediated Optomechanical System for Macroscopic Quantum Control and Sensing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Sunil Bhave, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Atomic, Molecular and Optical
(AMO) Physics Program in the Physics Division of the Mathematical and Physical
Science Directorate and the Electronics, Photonics and Magnetic Devices Program
of the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the
Directorate for Engineering.

The objective of this project is the realization of a novel hybrid
optomechanical system for quantum control and sensing. This system consists of
an ultracold quantum gas strongly coupled to the optical and mechanical modes of
a microtoroidal resonator. The project brings together concepts of micro-
electromechanical systems engineering, nanofabrication and atomic physics to
forge a hybrid quantum system for the quantum-limited control, manipulation and
readout of an innovative optomechanical device. The transformative nature of
this device includes pushing the frontier of ultra-cold atom trapping and
manipulation at sub-microKelvin temperatures, exploiting the nature of
optomechanical systems by providing a new tool for the measurement, manipulation
and study of quantum properties of macroscopic mechanical modes and, ultimately,
developing an important new technology for sensors that could lead to
unprecedented precision for a rotation sensor that would, for example,
significantly improve gyroscopes.

The intellectual merit of this program is the realization of a strongly coupled
quantum system that combines the coherence and sensitivity of ultracold atomic
gases with the robustness of a micromechanical device. The successful
demonstration of such hybrid systems is one of the most significant open
challenges in quantum information science and sensor technology. The
architecture under study paves the way for a systematic study of key scientific
issues including the ability of a quantum gas to control and enhance the
sensitivity of micro-electromechanical force sensors.

The broader impact of this program is the unification of powerful concepts from
the intellectually distinct domains of Electromechanical device engineering and
ultracold atomic physics. In addition to answering fundamental questions
regarding the interaction of quantum systems with macroscopic mechanical
systems, the proposed system is an enabling technology for applications
including inertial navigation systems, compact integrated frequency standards,
ultrasensitive force sensors and quantum information science.