* 1245428
* CC-NIE Data-Driven Network Infrastructure Upgrade for Colorado State University
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Howard Siegel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 486,937.00

This project provides a significant upgrade to the campus Local and Wide Area
Networks at Colorado State University to support large data flows for research.
Specifically, a research infrastructure component is added to the campus
network, encompassing 40 gigabit per second connections to research projects on
campus with large data transport needs. Dynamic routing is implemented over the
Internet2 network to allow network capacity to be reserved for specific large
data flows. Additional network capacity is provided to the Front Range GigaPoP
where Internet2, National Lambda Rail, and commodity internet access are
provided, to accommodate the dynamic traffic as well as all other research
traffic requiring large data transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific projects
with large data transport needs that benefit from the project are: 1) innovative
engineering and scientific design of Extreme Ultraviolet Lasers at nanoscale
(huge data sets, frequently produced and shared with external collaborators), 2)
world-class ultra-high resolution, multi-physics climate modeling (huge data
sets, transported regularly to and from HPC centers), 3) innovative data
collection and dissemination of Internet traffic exhibiting malware patterns
(huge, shared data sets, shared internationally), 4) two complementary next-
generation climate modeling projects involving comprehensive, regional ecosystem
analysis (huge, multi-faceted data sets, shared regionally and worldwide), and
5) state-of-the-art genomic analysis for pre-clinical drug design (huge and
numerous data sets). However, the entire community of users benefits from added
network capacity for dynamic and other research traffic that frees up capacity
on the generic network.