* 1245894
* Surface-Based Inversions over Antarctica from Concordiasi Driftsonde Data: Characteristics and Comparisons with ERA-Interim and Satellite Data
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Stephen Cohn, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 01/31/2016
* USD 253,359.00

Surface based inversions (SBI), situations where atmospheric temperatures
increase with height above a surface, are common in Antarctica. SBI play an
important role in high latitude climate, influencing the vertical mixing of
energy, moisture and chemical constituents and also climate feed back and
sensitivity through changes in albedo for surfaces such as sea-ice. SBI
occurrence, persistence and depth over the continental Antarctic is poorly known
because so few vertical measurements, elsewhere obtained from routine sonde
programs, are made there. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the CONCORDIASI (2010)
campaign some 650 high quality (frequency, time) and vertical resolution NCAR
driftsondes were released from within the polar vortex above the continent and
surrounding ocean. This resulted in a unique data set which will be investigated
for what it reveals of SBI properties over the continent. As well as having this
unique dropsonde validation data set, satellite products (from the Advanced
InfraRed Sounder - AIRS; and the Infrared Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer -
IASI) will be combined with ERA-Interim reanalysis data products, to determine
SBI depth and intensity. If the satellite and reanalysis operational products
faithfully reflect observed SBI variability, the extrapolation of SBI to time
periods beyond the CONCORDIASI observations will be made. In this way it is
hoped that underobserved Antarctic boundary layer properties may further be
revealed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International collaboration on the project will
be coordinated with colleagues at Nanjing University.