* 1245415
* EAGER:   Dispersal links local and regional scales: consequences of local conditions for dispersal behavior
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Christopher Kitts, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2015
* USD 158,941.00

The ability of organisms to adjust to shifting environmental conditions through
dispersal is often cited as a general mechanism through which species may cope
with climate change. However, the ability of organisms to disperse is itself
influenced by environmental change. This EAGER project will explore how
temperature, organism development, body size, and dispersal interact to
determine the ability of organisms to respond to environmental change by moving
into newly-suitable areas. The temperatures experienced by an organism during
its development can affect the traits possessed by the adult animal, including
overall body size and the relative sizes of different parts of the body. For
many animals, particularly insects, warmer rearing conditions result in animals
that develop more quickly and are smaller as adults. Since smaller animals often
have more restricted movement abilities, climate warming itself may negatively
influence the movement ability of organisms and increase their extinction risk
more than anticipated from models that use the current dispersal rates to
project future range shifts. This project will use dragonflies as a case study
of the effects of environmental temperature on growth and later dispersal
performance. The rearing temperatures for dragonflies will be manipulated and
the effect on adult wing shape and adult body size documented, both of which are
critical for movement. Dragonfly movements though the landscape will be measured
to quantify how the temperature conditions under which they were reared affect
adult dispersal. Quantifying the link from organism development to dispersal in
response to climate warming is challenging; however, the potential to provide
general insights into how a warming climate will affect species persistence
justifies this as an EAGER award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve
a number of undergraduate students as critical members of the research team,
including students from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM. Students
will receive research training and mentoring that will enhance their educational
and employment prospects in science careers. This project will also enhance a
partnership with the Bohart Entomology Museum in Davis, California to develop
outreach materials on dragonfly ecology that can be used by local school
teachers to spark student interest in science.