* 1245250
* TUES Type 1:  Robots in Business and Society - A Hands-on Learning Experience
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Timothy Burg, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 198,829.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION Robotics is a field of science that is rapidly transforming
our lives. Remotely controlled military aircraft have impacted the country's
approach to foreign policy. The use of robotics has also been proposed as a
solution for taking care of the aging population, compensating for a shortage of
human caretakers.

In response, a new undergraduate course is being developed for non-engineering
majors to address the need for general competencies in ethics, science,
technology, and business - through the application of robotics. The course is
designed to help majors in business, education, marketing, economics, etc., to
think critically about issues created by the complex interactions among these
broad and seemingly disparate topics. Participants in the course are studying
the history, mechanics and software, and applications of robots to analyze the
related ethical, social, and economic issues. The unique feature is the
participants are using hands-on assignments with a Lego Mindstorms kit to
explore non-technical issues. In the main project, each student must develop a
robot solution, make a prototype to demonstrate the solution, and then
synthesize a review of the technology along with the potential societal impact.

The hands-on exercises focus on the fundamentals of robotics involving: robot
motion, robot intelligence, and sensing. They teach the key concepts that
provide students with a better understanding of the underlying capabilities and
limitations of modern robot systems. The course ties the knowledge to the uses
of the technology and highlights the decisions that students are likely to face
as future business, political, or education leaders and as consumers.

The course is being monitored and updated using formative and summative
assessments including a modified "Views on Science-Technology-Society" tool. The
project is following a detailed evaluation plan that is studying explicit and
measurable outcomes. The course materials - including video lectures,
instruction manuals, and assignments - are published on the university website
for open source use.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE The project is creating a best-practices example of how to
use robotics as a tool for general undergraduate education. The developed
courses are providing a broad education that is necessary to understand impact
of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal
contexts. Although delivered in the context of robotics, the tools taught in the
course are general and can be used to impact a broad range of science and
technology. The project is helping produce a cadre of technology savvy citizens
who are prepared to make decisions about future technology. The proposed
robotics thread is generating enthusiasm and fostering participation by
undergraduates, providing them with the knowledge base and confidence to explore
other science or technology topics.