* 1245883
* Integrating virtual 3-D lab modules for flood modeling studies in civil engineering curriculum: An Inter-university implementation and evaluation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Pradeep Behera, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 193,382.00

Flood modeling and management are crucial areas in sustainable infrastructure
planning and disaster mitigation. Thus is it critical that civil engineering
students become familiar with advanced flood visualization and decision-making
tools so that they may adequately design sustainable infrastructure for the
future. In this project, Purdue University Calumet is developing laboratory
modules using three-dimensional (3-D) simulation models to allow students to
interactively explore different flood management scenarios based on real-world
data. The modules are implemented in undergraduate water resources engineering
courses in partnership with the University of the District of Columbia, Florida
Atlantic University, and the University of Kentucky. Through the 3-D laboratory
modules, students are using the simulated flooding scenarios to visualize the
field implications and to evaluate flood mitigation options. The laboratory
modules are being evaluated on their effectiveness in aiding students'
attainment of specific content-based learning objectives and impact on students'
learning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is significant because it
incorporates an immersive virtual 3-D environment for students, as well as
practitioners and decision makers, to interactively explore flood scenarios and
to identify appropriate flood management plans. This approach integrates
traditional flood modeling tools and innovative geospatial approaches, combined
with advanced 3-D computational, animation, and visualization techniques to
enhance student learning. Through workshops, presentations, and publications,
the modules are being shared with faculty at other institutions, community
groups responsible for flood management, and the scientific community more
broadly.