* 1245766
* Cold Corals in Hot Water - Investigating the Physiological Responses of Antarctic Coral Larvae to Climate change Stress
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Rhian Waller, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2020
* USD 381,384.00

The Western Antarctic Peninsula is experiencing climate change at one of the
fastest rates of anywhere around the globe. Accelerated climate change is likely
to affect the many benthic marine invertebrates that live within narrow
temperature windows along the Antarctic Continental Shelf in presently
unidentified ways. At present however, there are few data on the physiological
consequences of climate change on the sensitive larval stages of cold-water
corals, and none on species living in thermal extremes such as polar waters.
This project will collect the larvae of the non-seasonal, brooding scleractinian
Flabellum impensum to be used in a month-long climate change experiment at
Palmer Station. Multidisciplinary techniques will be used to examine larval
development and cellular stress using a combination of electron microscopy, flow
cytometry, and Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectometry. Data from this
project will form the first systematic study of the larval stages of polar cold-
water corals, and how these stages are affected by temperature stress at the
cellular and developmental level.

Cold-water corals have been shown to be important ecosystem engineers, providing
habitat for thousands of associated species, including many that are of
commercial importance. Understanding how the larvae of these corals react to
warming trends seen today in our oceans will allow researchers to predict future
changes in important benthic communities around the globe. Associated education
and outreach include: 1) Increasing student participation in polar research by
involving postdoctoral and undergraduate students in the field and research
program; ii) promotion of K-12 teaching and learning programs by providing
information via a research website, Twitter, and in-school talks in the local
area; iii) making the data collected available to the wider research community
via peer reviewed published literature and iv) reaching a larger public audience
through such venues as interviews in the popular media, You Tube and other
popular media outlets, and local talks to the general public.