* 1245147
* Collaborative Research: Inspiring undergraduate engagement in advanced laboratories through web-based interactive video
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Thomas Reichlmayr, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,527.00

This project is developing web-based activities with interactive videos to
inspire undergraduates in physics and engineering toward work in the advanced
lab, to build confidence in handling the technical aspects encountered in the
lab, and to enhance the teaching of contemporary topics across multiple courses.
Although the role of advanced physics laboratories can vary significantly from
one institution to another, in each environment a successful lab experience
should strive for creative student experiences that are both educational and
inspiring. The activities in this project provide an interactive video
environment where students are introduced to important topic areas in the
advanced lab and empowered to interactively control test parameters. Then
students can begin the experiments in the laboratory having familiarity with
both the physics and the equipment involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities
are designed to provide an interactive lab-like environment that focuses on the
essence of the lab topic, but is stripped of many of the complexities of the
true lab experience. The activities are designed to enrich learning and student
enthusiasm in the advanced lab topics, provide a solid introductory framework to
the physics, and lead to more meaningful experiences inside the actual
laboratory. Results of the project are being measured by instructors and
students, and they depend on (a) deeper student understanding of the physics and
technology involved in the experiments; (b) enhanced student attitudes toward
the lab as a learning environment; and (c) better student facility with the
experiment and the equipment involved in it. The work in this project focuses on
three contemporary and engaging topic areas that have been the foundation to
various student projects in the Bethel University physics department: (1)
compressible fluid mechanics, (2) atomic molecular and optical (AMO) physics,
and (3) plasmonics and nano-optics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Web-based resources are already available for physics education in a variety of
forms including online lectures, applets and online simulations, and web-based
homework. Video vignettes are also being developed which provide an online
environment that combines narration, real-world video, and analysis tools. The
work here differs from these other ongoing projects by emphasizing web-based
simulations in which the user interacts with video from advanced laboratory
experiments. Consequently, user interactions with the web-based video are
designed in a fashion that provide a window into real advanced laboratory
experiments and provide a stimulus for learning, creativity, and further
engagement in the lab. The participating BU faculty have extensive experience
teaching in the advanced laboratory and bring research expertise in the areas of
fluid mechanics, AMO physics, and plasmonics and nano-optics. The collaborators
from Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) have been leaders in the physics
education community with their work in interactive video analysis. The analysis
software is being developed using best practices of software engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Activities produced in this project are
openly available at ComPADRE.org. Additionally, the software is being made
available as open source along with complete documentation, enabling other
institutions to build activities based on their own advanced labs and
undergraduate research and opening the doors of the advanced laboratory
community to a broader audience. The activities from each of the topic areas are
to be accessible to adopters and potential adopters in a workshop at the 2014
AAPT conference, and at other conferences and workshops (such as the ALPhA
Laboratory Immersions).