* 1245450
* Revolution In Physiology Education: RIPE for Change
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Keith Schillo, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2017
* USD 194,129.00

The goal of this project is to change physiology teaching methods not only at
SUNY College at Oneonta but also at institutions to which these methods will be
disseminated. A new instructional strategy emphasizing an active-learning
approach and requiring students to engage in the practice of science is being
utilized. This strategy promotes learning through hypothesis testing and
involves the use of new technology combined with methods of instruction shown to
enhance understanding of fundamental physiological principles. This project
involves student use of physiological instrumentation in experiments that test
hypotheses derived from highly focused case studies, each of which emphasizes a
fundamental physiological concept. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
intellectual merit lies in encouraging the adoption of active-learning
pedagogies as well as skirting limitations of large class sizes and limited
instructional resources. An expected major outcome is a new conceptual framework
for teaching physiology with a set of specific instructional modules that are
aligned with the case-study approach. This conceptual framework includes
presentation of case studies, deep questioning and instructor intervention,
hypothesis testing, and critical analysis/instructor intervention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are being realized in
several ways. First, a website is being constructed to disseminate resources and
to create a learning community dedicated to using and promoting this new
paradigm in physiology instruction. The case studies, videos of the experiments,
and data resulting from the experiments are also being made available to other
institutions through this website. Instructors having appropriate resources can
utilize this case study approach and replicate the experiments and compare their
results; instructors that lack the necessary instructional resources can also
utilize this approach using the website to access virtual exercises and data.
Additional broader impacts are being realized via preparing scientifically-
literate students who are admitted to post-graduate training or direct entry
into critical STEM-related careers.