* 1245464
* TUES Type 1:  A Sustainability Toolbox for Engineers
* EHR,DUE
* 12/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Denise Wilson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2017
* USD 199,681.00

This TUES Type 1 project is creating a sustainability toolbox and evaluating a
combination of traditional and non-traditional teaching pedagogy applied toward
training engineers to be change agents capable of ethically and competently
converting care into action for a sustainable world. This project evaluates six
teaching strategies (interventions) within an ethics of care approach, four at
the sophomore level and two at the senior design level. Key components of
increasingly non-traditional approaches to teaching sustainability are: (a) the
use of dramatized video to emotionally engage and motivate students in problems
of sustainability and (b) the use of online skill building tutorials that
explicitly prepare the student to solve "wicked" problems that require higher
order cognitive skills to formulate and address. The PACT (Promoting,
Accounting, Compensating, and Targeting) approach to designing for
sustainability is incorporated, so that students can transform their awareness
of and responsibility for sustainability into meaningful action, regardless of
the type and purpose of design.

The strategies are oriented around consumer electronics, whose life cycle
remains an unsustainable, widely proliferating beast of consumption that shows
little sign of slowing in the modern world. Unlike many other facets of the
engineering curriculum, evaluating critical thinking or problem solving in the
area of sustainability is not enough to assess whether a student is trained
well. Instead, the student must use these high-level thinking skills in often
unstructured series of complex, interwoven problems that are situated in an
effective transformation of care into action. Through a carefully designed
series of interventions and assessments oriented around teaching sustainability,
this project offers insight into what teaching approaches work best for
improving student learning about the "wicked" problems typically found at the
intersection of technology and sustainability.

The importance of training engineers not simply to be aware but also to be
appropriately responsible and sufficiently competent in caring about (and acting
on) sustainability issues has broad societal impacts. The developed
interventions and strategies have the potential to be adopted/adapted by other
engineering fields. By addressing an important social issue such as
sustainability and showing the important role of engineers in solving this
problem, some students might be more attracted to engineering as a career and be
more likely to remain in the field. In addition, interventions that connect
sustainability to technology can be used to enhance the image of engineering as
a career that directly benefits society, thereby enabling engineering to appeal
more broadly to students at all stages in K-16 pathways.