* 1245815
* Transforming a Freshman Electrical Engineering Lab Course to Improve Access to Rural Students and to be a Model for Future STEM Distance Lab Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Denise Thorsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 176,182.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: &lt;br/&gt;University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF -
main campus)&lt;br/&gt;University of Alaska Southeast (UAS - campus in
Juneau)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;This
project is expanding access to Electrical and Computer Engineering by
transforming an introductory electrical engineering course into an interactive
hybrid-teaching model, using a combination of face-to-face and online
peer/teacher instruction. This course includes both inter-campus collaborative
hands-on laboratory and team project experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is addressing the needs of three very different populations of students:
(i) the traditional engineering students attending the University of Alaska
Fairbanks (UAF) main campus; (ii) students enrolled in the pre-engineering
program at the University of Alaska Southeast (UAS) campus in Juneau; and (iii)
students attending an Alaska Native serving community campus in rural Alaska.
The delivery of an exemplary, financially responsible, engineering education in
each of these communities has unique challenges, including cost and availability
of an instructor, cost and availability of laboratory facilities, diversity of
students' prior knowledge and cultural experiences, and variety of students'
learning styles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three
goals:&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1: Deliver a hands-on electrical engineering lab course to
place-bound pre-engineering and Alaska Native serving community campuses in
Alaska synchronously with the identical course delivered face-to-face on the
main engineering campus at UAF. &lt;br/&gt;Goal 2: Restructure the lab component
of the class to require inter-campus collaboration between the students through
data sharing and discussions in the hands-on laboratories and team projects.
&lt;br/&gt;Goal 3: Develop expertise in Engineering Education through detailed
assessment and evaluation of the engagement and learning of students, both those
participating face-to-face and via distance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team is
studying the effectiveness of inter-campus collaboration to improve both
retention and academic achievement across three Alaska communities. This is the
first hands-on engineering lab course delivered by distance in Alaska;
therefore, it is transforming the way engineering education is delivered in the
state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The
project is directly impacting the availability of engineering curriculum for the
geographically dispersed student population in Alaska, especially the Alaska
Native communities in rural Alaska. The project is creating a successful
"blueprint" for development and assessment of distance-delivered laboratory-
based courses, particularly for inter-campus collaborations. The effort is
transforming the educational experience of the often-isolated, place-bound
students in rural communities - through building their social capital and
connecting them to a larger learning community. This inter-campus collaboration
is generating a deeper discussion of variations and outliers in measurements and
providing experiences that are more reflective of the global work environment.