* 1245980
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Accelerating the Build-Out of a Dedicated Network for Education and Research in Big Data Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Douglas Cowen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 497,178.00

This project, "Accelerating the Build-out of a Dedicated Network for Education
and Research in Big Data Science and Engineering", seeks to significantly expand
and upgrade an existing network at Penn State. The existing network links five
separate data centers over 10 gigabits per second (Gbps) connections and has
enabled virtual co-location of computational and data resources in a way that is
transparent to the research community. However these few private network links
cannot be directly used by the academic community to move data between their
laboratories or local facilities and the distributed data centers. The Penn
State research community at present relies on the integrated enterprise data
backbone to connect to resources at campus data centers or at national centers.
While some of the connections reach a peak rate of 1 Gbps, most operate at peak
rates of less than 100 Mbps, thus significantly limiting the ability of
researchers to move large datasets to locations within or outside the campus.
The significant expansion of the network being undertaken in this project will
make several hundred 10 Gbps ports available in laboratories and offices across
two major campuses of Penn State. This expansion is accomplished by deploying
48-port 10 Gbps Ethernet switches in 12 separate buildings with highest
concentration of faculty who rely on large computational and data resources for
advanced teaching and research. Each of these 12 switches is slated to have two
10 Gbps uplinks, one to each core router for redundancy. Both core routers will
have 10 Gbps and 100 Gbps ports for external connectivity. The overall goal of
the project is to provide at least a ten-fold increase in end-to-end network
connectivity in labs and offices, making sustained 10 Gbps connections
ubiquitous between faculty laboratories, data-generating instruments, select
classrooms, and local and national computational and data
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network expansion seeks to accomplish three
key goals: (i) make it possible to use Big Data in advanced undergraduate and
graduate classes,(ii) support NSF and other federal agency funded research
projects across the university, and (iii) eliminate data related barriers for
independent curiosity-driven research. The network expansion will significantly
accelerate discovery processes for the research community spread across a large
number of academic departments and multidisciplinary
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network expansion project will impact education
and research training of graduate and undergraduate students. It will have a
discovery accelerating impact on a large number of federally-funded projects at
Penn State. It will not only support rapidly growing needs in existing research
projects but entirely new research projects involving Big Data and large-scale
computations will likely be spawned in several multidisciplinary areas. It will
lead to broadening of participation by women and minorities in STEM discipline
as well as social sciences related research projects at Penn State and beyond.
It will help extend the national CI and advance NSF-wide CIF21 goals since the
proposed network will be very tightly integrated with national
cyberinfrastructure, making large-scale collaborative research and sharing of
computational and data resources far more frequent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
will be focused effort through publications and several meeting presentations
targeted at the national academic and research communities to disseminate the
results obtained and implementation lessons learned under this project.
Utilization and performance data will be made available to assist with similar
research cyberinfrastructure related projects at peer institutions. The design
and implementation of the network will be documented and made available as a
publicly accessible report.