* 1245013
* Changing Student Misconceptions about Evolution through an Innovative Laboratory Curriculum in Biological Anthropology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Susan Johnston, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 02/28/2018
* USD 199,998.00

There is a solid body of evidence documenting significant misconceptions about
evolution among college students before and even after instruction in the life
sciences. Researchers have attempted to evaluate and address such misconceptions
in evolution-based courses at the college level, but only with mixed success.
There is still a need to develop and test tools and methods to help students
gain an accurate understanding of evolution. This project is creating, using,
and evaluating an innovative laboratory curriculum for an introductory
biological anthropology course to address and correct misconceptions about
evolution. It is using a student-centered and inquiry-based approach that
challenges students to apply the core theory and concepts of evolution and
biological anthropology specifically, and to engage actively in solving problems
using scientific methods. The project is teaching evolution as an active
process. This approach is designed to help students understand how evolution
occurs in a human context. The project is engaging students actively with DNA
/molecular and other laboratory evidence that are integrated with other course
materials. This approach embeds evolutionary challenges fully and explicitly
throughout the semester and focuses almost entirely on human examples as
appropriate to biological anthropology.