* 1245876
* Courseware for Improving Undergraduate Students' Debugging Skill in GPU Programming
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Scott Owen, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 02/28/2018
* USD 174,021.00

This project is developing educational materials to help undergraduate computer
science students improve their debugging skill in GPU (Graphics Processing Unit)
programming. As multi-core processor architecture becomes the norm,
undergraduate computer science students need to shift their focus to multi-core
parallel programming. GPU programming is an important part of multi-core
parallel programming, especially in heterogeneous computing environments that
use a mixture of CPUs, GPUs, and other specialty cores. To write GPU programs,
students need to learn special programming languages and new debugging skills.
Debugging is particularly challenging for GPU programming because of the
complexity of parallel processing in multi-core environments. However, there is
a shortage of educational materials for teaching how to debug GPU programs. The
project goals are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Software defect pattern
analysis: Collect and analyze common mistakes made by novice programmers in GPU
programming. &lt;br/&gt;2. Teaching materials: Based on the analysis of the
software defects, develop teaching materials such as debugging checklists;
create tutorials to teach debugging techniques in GPU programming; develop
debugging exercises for students to practice their debugging
skills.&lt;br/&gt;3. Evaluation: Apply the educational materials to parallel and
distributed computing courses and computer graphics courses, and measure the
efficacy of this approach.&lt;br/&gt;4. Dissemination: Share the educational
materials online with students and instructors and publicize their existence
through other online venues such as the ACM SIGGRAPH Education Committee site
and print venues such as the IEEE Computer Graphics &amp; Applications Education
Department.