* 1245699
* Collaborative Research:  Developing Metacognitive Activities and Assessments for Introductory and Upper-Division Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Sara Julin, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2016
* USD 45,773.00

This project develops methods to assess and promote student metacognition in
physics. In particular, the project is: (1) developing and validating a suite of
assessment tasks to probe the ability of students to monitor their own learning
during physics instruction, (2) developing and testing a suite of activities to
foster this self - monitoring, and (3) documenting specific strategies,
practices, and deficits that students exhibit as they review and direct the
development of their own physics understanding. The project is motivated by a
variety of common student behaviors, many of which have been documented through
research and are familiar to experienced instructors. These include the tendency
of students to: (1) focus on memorized algorithms without developing an
awareness of how they know what they know, (2) apply concepts inconsistently in
different but related contexts, and (3) struggle in identifying appropriate
reasoning approaches when confronted with novel situations. These findings and
others suggest that student learning of the content and practice of physics may
be improved through systematic efforts to enhance the ability of students to
think methodically and productively about their own thinking (i.e.,
metacognition). The activities and assessments are being developed concurrently
and tested at four different institutions, in labs (both introductory and upper
- division) and interactive lecture environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual merit: The project is developing a suite of research - validated
activities to evoke and improve students' metacognitive skills and investigate
the resources that students utilize and the specific difficulties they face when
engaged in metacognition. Furthermore, the project is examining the connections
between specific lines of metacognitive thinking and gains in conceptual
understanding and reasoning ability in physics. Despite substantial prior
research and widespread agreement on its crucial role in learning, metacognition
remains a "fuzzy" concept that is difficult to integrate into instruction. A
major contribution of this project is to develop instructional strategies to
support different forms of student metacognition; from "backward - looking"
reflection, in which the learner articulates what she knows about a concept and
how she came to know it, to "forward - looking" strategies that support the
learner in selecting approaches best suited to new situations. A novel aspect of
the activities is systematic student reflection on and evaluation of the role of
specific instructional tasks and exercises in promoting learning. &lt;br/&gt;
Broader impact: The metacognitive activities differ substantively from existing
materials. They do not require the wholesale adoption of entirely new curricula
or pedagogies, and may therefore be flexibly incorporated into physics courses
as a supplement to existing instruction. The flexibility of the approach allows
instructors to adopt teaching innovations incrementally. In addition, as the
quality of student metacognition is linked to academic success, the activities
may not only increase student learning in physics courses, but may also
strengthen ongoing efforts to: (1) promote equity in the classroom by closing
the gap between higher - and lower - achieving students, and (2) retain at risk
students in STEM disciplines.