* 1245471
* Conference:   Enhancing Biological Science Research Opportunities at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions;  July 26-28, 2012;  Fullerton, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Christopher Meyer, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2013
* USD 127,782.00

Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Authentic research experiences for
biochemistry and biological science majors are essential for student growth and
development of technical, critical thinking, and communication skills, providing
the stimulus for better student retention, graduation rates, applications to
graduate school, and high quality careers. A large percentage of students
receive their undergraduate training at diverse Predominantly Undergraduate
Institutions (PUI); from small private liberal arts colleges to large public
comprehensive universities. Therefore it is vital that we maintain and improve
student research training at PUIs. While there are many successful research
programs at PUIs, there are also numerous challenges in establishing and
maintaining undergraduate research, including higher teaching loads for faculty
at PUIs and deficiencies in personnel, infrastructure and resources. This
conference will bring together, for the first time at a national level, diverse
PIs to meet and discuss ideas and best practices and future prospects in
building and sustaining research, crafting competitive grant proposals,
integrating research into the curriculum, forging research partnerships and
collaborations, and accurately assessing student research training outcomes. One
product of the workshop will be a report that will inform NSF BIO and the
greater scientific community of successes, needs, and future prospects for
PUIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is planned for seventy, which includes
invited participants, administrators, program directors, industrial and academic
partners, students, and facilitators. A unique feature of the workshop is the
inclusion of the company Knowinnovation to assist in the design, development,
and facilitation of the workshop using deliberate Creative Problem Solving (CPS)
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
diverse mix of PIs will be invited from a variety of institution types,
including many Assistant Professors as well as faculty from minority serving
institutions, which will provide the variety of outlooks and perspective
essential for exploring the problem space and finding solutions. The format will
allow for early career faculty to link with mentors for advice and potential
collaborations. This workshop and website will provide a continuing opportunity
for PUI PIs to network with each other as well as NSF staff and other
stakeholders in a way that enhances efforts in undergraduate research.