* 1245756
* TUES:Type1:Collaborative: An Integrative Hands-on Approach to Security Education for Undergraduate Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Swarup Bhunia, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 11/30/2015
* USD 80,000.00

Security of information, software, and hardware has emerged as a paramount
concern. Existing undergraduate curricula often do not provide students with
adequate insight into the full spectrum of security threats and respective
protection approaches. To fill this gap in the curriculum, this project is
developing an interdisciplinary undergraduate course incorporating hands-on
learning of computer security. The course provides a comprehensive system-level
view of computer security to students, so they can become more aware of diverse
security issues and countermeasures as future developers and users of computer
systems. A distinctive aspect of the project is the inclusion of a set of well-
crafted experiments that would allow students to hack into software and hardware
in many creative ways. These experiments can be highly effective in
demonstrating the complex nature of system security and creating an
understanding of the defense mechanisms. The exposure to security issues early
in their career can provide undergraduate students with a competitive edge in
the market place and stimulate their interests in security research. The course
modules can also benefit graduate students pursuing research in the area of
computer security, as well as the K-12 students attending summer camps each
year. The project provides a unique opportunity for exposing minority and female
students in Cleveland State University to the critical issues of security and
attracting them to higher education and research. The project uses the trust-hub
web portal for disseminating the course modules to other academic institutions
in a timely manner.