* 1245684
* Enhancing a Learner-centered Environment for Algebra-based Physics (LEAP) Curriculum for Diverse Student Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Paula Engelhardt, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 181,159.00

Researchers at Tennessee Technological University are expanding and improving
the Learner-centered Environment for Algebra-based Physics (LEAP) effort, which
has shown success in improving student understanding of important ideas in
conceptual physics. The work will include an investigation into students'
problem solving ability, and the production of a workbook, interactive
electronic learning aids called "Viewlets" and new units on topics including
modern physics. These materials are suitable for medium enrollment classes with
a diverse student population, and serve to help scaffold students' math and
scientific reasoning skills, especially those students who are relatively under-
prepared. The research into students' problem solving ability contributes to the
understanding of how the reasoning skills involved are developed, and guides the
development of a problem solving rubric to measure students' progress toward
expert-like skills and a survey to compare students' beliefs with what they
actually do when problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One unusual aspect of
this proposal is the focus on collaborative/cooperative group learning in the
algebra-based setting---a setting that typically serves more women and other
students from underrepresented groups than the calculus-based sequences usually
do. For secondary education majors, these courses are seen as especially
important, likely to be a rare instance of learning content in a guided-inquiry
setting. In addition, the focus on improving students' scientific reasoning
abilities helps all students to become more scientifically literate citizens.
The materials are suitable for low-cost implementation at many small regional
universities and colleges with similar audiences, and the investigators are
presenting workshops for other faculty on their use in multiple settings.