* 1245536
* Electronic Delivery of Scaffolded Visualization Tutorials and Assessment in Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas Holme, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 172,759.00

While detailed molecular visualization is ubiquitous within chemistry and
biochemistry teaching and learning, preliminary evidence collected by the
Principal Investigator suggests that many instructors assume students have
extracted the appropriate visual information but do not assess the accuracy of
that assumption. To enhance student learning in the increasingly important on-
line delivery of instruction, and particularly with respect to three-dimensional
aspects of complicated molecular structures, this project is scaffolding content
for visualization of chemical and biochemical systems. Concepts that are
important for understanding activity or reactions are set within progressive
learning methods that explicitly address the visual components of the
representation and the cognitive components of the chemistry content. Using
design principles from scholarship in Human-Computer Interaction, tools are
being designed to enhance student interaction with these visualizations that
focus on large molecular systems. How the students interact with web-based
materials is being captured and distilled in order to better understand the
nature of student self-directed exploration within the scaffolded learning
environment. The project is also developing enhanced visualization methods in
testing and is incorporating them with electronically delivered tests from the
Examinations Institute of the American Chemical Society (ACS-EI). Findings are
providing insight into the nature of measurement of student learning as a
function of cognitive environments and which thereby is defining the
relationship between visualization and measured student learning in molecular
systems of varying visual and content complexity. Utilizing the established user
base of the ACS-EI is allowing for extensive feedback of test items among a
diverse population of students.