* 1245314
* A Multi-tiered Approach to Undergraduate Science Learning in an Urban Public College
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Yi He, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,101.00

To engage undergraduate students in problem-based learning relevant to
environmental issues in their own urban communities, this project is creating,
implementing, and evaluating new curricular materials focused on student
investigations of water pollution at three EPA Superfund sites in New York City.
The project involves students enrolled in three courses at different levels
(science majors studying instrumental analysis, non-science majors studying
environmental science, and senior students participating in research
internships) at John Jay College of the City University of New York, which is
the largest four-year, Hispanic-serving institution in the Northeast. These
students work together to collect, analyze, interpret, and report out on data
that have been collected from the Superfund sites. Student learning objectives
that are being evaluated as part of the project include: development of
collaborative learning skills that help students understand how to communicate
their ideas and how shared responsibilities play important roles in science; and
student understanding of the process of science, including how scientists reason
with data. The curriculum and instruction being developed is a working model for
colleges and universities, including five current partner community colleges in
the NY City area, who are interested in bridging the gap between research
scientists and science-informed citizens.