* 1245725
* EAGER:   Application of high precision isotope tracer measurements to resolve rates of aquatic denitrification
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Nathaniel Ostrom, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 82,876.00

Denitrification is the natural process by which nitrate is reduced to harmless
N2 gas. Denitrification reduces loading of nitrate to the biosphere, thereby
minimizing coastal eutrophication and hypoxia and emissions of the greenhouse
gas, nitrous oxide. Watersheds represent the greatest sink for natural and
anthropogenic nitrate; however, rates of denitrification, particularly at
ecosystem scales, are poorly understood. Denitrification in streams can be
evaluated at ecosystem scales by addition of nitrate enriched in the stable
nitrogen isotope 15N and measurement of the accumulation of 15N in N2. This
study will develop novel analytical methodology for vastly improving the
accuracy and precision of the N2 stable isotope ratio, which will enable
application of 15N-nitrate tracer studies in environments where it is currently
impractical to do so. EAGER funding is appropriate as this method development is
exploratory; nonetheless the project has great potential to transform the
approach for and knowledge of the denitrification process.

Excessive nitrate loading and its role in eutrophication is one of the most
significant impacts of a large and growing human population. Thus, the broader
significance and potential impacts of this research are that the methodology
proposed will provide ecosystem managers information to understand natural rates
of nitrate removal as well as a foundation to manage natural and man-made
environments to foster denitrification.