* 1245655
* Infograms for Undergraduate Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Vasiliy Kolchenko, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 156,668.00

The goals of this project are to develop and adapt an instructional system based
on innovative curricular materials (Infograms, or graphic symbolic summaries),
to implement this instructional system in undergraduate Biology classes, and to
determine its learning outcomes. This project is based on a preliminary study
that led to improved student comprehension of complex material, boosted
conceptual understanding, enhanced retention of knowledge and metacognition,
increased student confidence, and created more positive attitudes towards
learning. Performance of students utilizing infograms is being compared in a
quasi-experimental design to a control group that is not using infograms but
otherwise is using the same curricular materials and is taking the same tests.
This Infogram approach is being tested with a large number of students, and its
efficacy is being assessed and documented.

This project has Intellectual Merit because it employs existing knowledge of
STEM education and is expanding this knowledge by integrating education and
education research. This project is enhancing the understanding of learning by
exploring how students encode and retrieve information using graphic symbolic
representations. This project is producing a new model for student learning
improvement and exemplary materials that can be easily adapted in other
disciplines and by other sites at college and K-12 levels.

The Broader Impacts are being realized through the improved instruction at CUNY
New York City College of Technology, which has a large population of under-
represented students in STEM, and by the dissemination mechanisms. These
dissemination mechanisms include peer-reviewed publications, presentations at
workshops and STEM education conferences, college and K-12 faculty workshops,
and web-based media.