* 1245802
* The Math You Need, When You Need It: Modular Student Resources to Promote Successful Integration of Quantitative Concepts in Introductory Economics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Scott Simkins, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 247,901.00

This project addresses previously-identified widespread student difficulties
within mathematics and related quantitative skills preventing successful
completion of introductory economics courses by large numbers of students. The
approach taken is adaptation for economics of proven web-based student
quantitative skills tutorials and assessment framework developed for the
Geosciences: The Math You Need (TMYN), When You Need It, developed by Wenner,
Baer, &amp; Burn in a succession of three NSF (DUE) awards. Deployment of this
framework has led to improved student learning in a variety of instructional
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The importance of learning
in context is particularly applicable to students in introductory economics
courses, where research has shown that many students are not able to transfer
previously-studied general mathematics concepts to their application in
economics. The focus is on ten core math concepts highlighted in the economics
education literature as frequent obstacles to student learning. For each of
these concepts, an online TMYN-Economics module is being developed using the
research-based TMYN design that has succeeded in the Geosciences. Each module
includes: (1) a Foundation page for students that includes information on the
mathematics concept and why and how it is used in the discipline; (2) a Sample
Problems page that gives students the opportunity to practice the math concept
in the context of economics before taking an embedded online quiz to assess
their learning; and (3) an Instructor Page that explains why that module's
mathematics concept is difficult for students to apply in the discipline and
provides additional resources for teaching the module's mathematics concept in
context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: After initial testing at twelve
varied institutions (including an HBCU and six community colleges), ten learning
modules will be available through Starting Point: Teaching and Learning
Economics, co-located with sixteen pedagogical modules already developed and
used extensively by economics instructors. Adoption at community colleges is an
important focus of this project. This will be promoted through resources
developed by adapting Effective Outreach and Workshop Practices to Improve
Community College Economics Instruction. Recommendations from twelve field-
testers and the advisory board will be used to improve TMYN-Economics modules
before they are publicly disseminated. The embedded online module quizzes will
generate a new, large dataset on student learning based on students' module quiz
performance. These data will facilitate further investigation of student
learning of math skills in economic contexts. An international leader on
improvement of student learning through innovation and knowledge sharing has
agreed to provide external review of these assessments and overall project
impact. Both the assessment data and the modules will become a permanent
resource at the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) within the Starting
Point: Teaching and Learning Economics web site, with ongoing maintenance and
oversight by SERC staff.