* 1245069
* Collaborative Research: Studies of Waves and Circulation Features in the Antarctic Stratosphere Using Super-Pressure Balloon Data
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Carlos Mechoso, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2017
* USD 296,590.00

This project conducts research on the circulation of the Antarctic stratospheric
polar vortex based on data from super pressure balloons (SPBs). SPBs have a
semi-rigid envelope which, under pressure from the gas inside, maintains
constant volume and hence constant effective density regardless of heating and
cooling, so that they move with the wind along a nearly horizontal surface of
constant density. Data for this project comes from two field campaigns,VORCORE
(27 SPBs in 2005) and CONCORDIASI (18 SPBs in 2010), both of which launched
balloons from Antarctica which rose to levels between 70 and 50mb and circulated
within the polar vortex for several months. Instruments carried by the SPBs
included miniaturized dropsondes, GPS receivers for occultation soundings, ozone
sensors, and cloud ice particle counters. Research conducted under this award
studies inertia-gravity waves and large-scale transport across and within the
polar vortex, with four specific objectives: 1) The accurate statistical
descriptions of the inertial and gravity wave fields over the Antarctic in the
spatial and spectral domains, 2) The formulation of constraints for gravity wave
parameterizations based on calculation of gravity wave momentum flux, 3) The
influence of gravity waves on the formation of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs,
which play an important role in ozone depletion), and 4) The fundamental
dynamical process at work in air exchanges and transports in relation to the
polar vortex, with an emphasis on the role of Rossby wave breaking. The work
uses a combination of observational analysis and modeling, and uses novel
methods motivated by dynamical systems theory to address air exchange and
transport across and within the polar vortex.

The problems addressed in the proposal are of societal as well as scientific
interest for two reasons. First, the processes examined here are all relevant to
the formation of the ozone hole, as ozone depletion depends on transport and
mixing of stratospheric air across and within the polar vortex, and gravity wave
motions may play a role in the formation of PSCs. Second, gravity wave momentum
fluxes are thought to play an important role in determining the strength of
atmospheric circulation, and the effects of gravity waves are paremeterized in
weather and climate models. Thus, observational analysis of gravity wave
properties may be beneficial for weather and climate modeling and prediction. In
addition, the work will support and train a graduate student, thereby providing
for the next generation of scientists in this field.