* 1245847
* CUTE: Instructional Laboratories for Cloud Computing Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Prabhaker Mateti, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Compared to the fast development of cloud-based applications and technology,
higher education on cloud computing is seriously lagging behind. Built upon the
project team's experience on cloud computing education in the past three years,
a set of laboratories for cloud computing education, referred to as the CUTE
labs, are developed and evaluated by this project. The CUTE labs cover four
major areas: the platform exploration labs, the data intensive scalable
computing labs, the cloud economics labs and the security and privacy labs. They
are designed to use publicly available free cloud resources and open source
software with no special requirement on computing infrastructures, so that they
can be easily adopted and adapted at low cost. An advisory committee oversees
the development and evaluation. This project results in an open source library
that fosters a community of cloud computing educational labs. This project helps
educate a workforce that understands the principles and masters engineering
skills of cloud computing. The labs are disseminated to local collaborating
universities and promoted to institutions nationwide for adoption and adaption.
The project introduces the cloud computing principles to students from
underrepresented groups such as minority and female students via Wright State's
GREEN and Wright STEPP programs, and via the collaboration with Central State
University, the only public HBCU in Ohio.