* 1245717
* Broadband Seismological Investigations of Earth Structure and Earthquake Sources
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Thorne Lay, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 593,367.00

The UCSC seismological research program supervised by Professor Thorne Lay uses
global broadband digital seismic data (as well as high-rate GPS data and tsunami
recordings) to address fundamental questions about earth structure and
earthquake rupture processes. Quantitative analysis of recorded wave-fields
generated by earthquakes will be used to address the following fundamental
questions: (1) joint inversions of high-rate GPS data, broadband seismic body
waves and surface waves, and tsunami observations will be undertaken for recent
huge earthquakes in Chile, Mentawai, and off-Sumatra, for the purpose of
understanding how the ruptures grew and how the faults slipped in each case; (2)
spectral analysis of earthquakes on and near plate boundary megathrust faults
will be conducted using strong-motion and teleseismic recordings of seismic wave
vibrations to further develop and test a recently introduced model of depth-
dependent variations in seismic radiation from megathrust faults; (3) stacking
and migration of seismograms from deep focus earthquakes will be performed to
develop images of upper mantle reflectivity and heterogeneity spectrum in the
vicinity of subduction zones; and (4) new stacking and migration approaches will
be applied to imaging of deep mantle scattering from structures near the core-
mantle boundary and near mantle down-wellings and up-wellings to better
characterize the thermal and dynamical nature of these planetary features.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This overall research effort will engage the PI and two
graduate students in both earthquake source and earth structure research
problems using quantitative analysis of various wave types generated by
earthquake sources. We hope to fully characterize the depth-dependence of
seismic radiation from earthquakes, and to evaluate the implications for
earthquake shaking hazard. We anticipate sustaining progress in characterizing
important dynamical processes associated with the Earth's major boundary layers
near the surface and near the core-mantle boundary, drawing upon this
information to understand the heat flow in the Earth and the dynamical processes
that drive earthquakes and volcanoes at the surface.