* 1245590
* Forging identity and community in physics: Evaluation and dissemination of Compass
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 03/31/2017
* USD 97,500.00

Researchers at the University of Maryland and Berkeley are studying the
implementation of the Compass program to determine to what extent and how it
increases retention of physics majors, especially women and under-represented
students. Compass includes a two-week summer experience, follow-up fall and
spring courses, a lecture series and a mentorship program all focused on
building community, stoking students' interest in physics, and developing
students' disciplinary identities and ways of thinking, partly by involving them
in research. The project entails quantitative research focusing on retention in
physics, especially looking at women and underrepresented minority students, and
qualitative research investigating the idea that Compass works by helping
students forge an identity as a member of a physics community, defined by both
social and intellectual norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compass was originally
developed by Berkeley graduate students, and won the American Physical Society's
2012 Award for Improving Undergraduate Education. This research probes a
possible solution to one of the most pressing problems in physics education,
that of disturbingly and persistently small numbers of women and
underrepresented minorities among physics majors. The research has the potential
to shed light not only about whether these programs increase retention for all
groups and for underrepresented groups, but also about how they work (or not),
via analysis of classroom video and clinical interviews. It evaluates not only
the effectiveness of a promising model for retaining underrepresented students
in physics, possibly applicable to other STEM disciplines, but also a
dissemination strategy wherein a participant/leader in a program at one
institution helps to develop or sustain a similar program as a graduate student
or faculty member at another university. Since physics departments often
financially support their 1st- and 2nd-year graduate students anyway, leveraging
those students' experiences and expertise by funding one or more graduate
students to lead Compass-like programs may be a powerful way to disseminate.