* 1245124
* RDE-BPR1 - Collaborative Research: Modeling IT Career Choices of Persons with Disabilities: The Case of Military Personnel and Veterans
* EDU,EES
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Eileen Trauth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2018
* USD 277,794.00

The "Modeling IT Career Choices of Persons with Disabilities: The Case of
Military Personnel and Veterans" award is a Broadening Participation Research
project designed to advance understanding of the factors that influence the
entrance into, and persistence in, postsecondary information technology (IT)
degree programs by disabled military personnel and veterans with disabilities.
Researchers at The Pennsylvania State University and Washington State University
are working together to explores interest in choosing a career in the IT field
as a function of: perceptions about the skills and knowledge needed to be
successful as an IT professional; gender stereotypes about IT skills and
knowledge; perceptions about occupational roles of persons with disabilities;
relative importance placed on various aspects of one's own identity regarding
gender, race, ethnicity, socio-economic class and disability; one's feeling of
self-confidence regarding the ability to possess the skills and knowledge needed
in the IT profession; and role congruity between perceived gender and
occupational roles, and IT roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research
questions that are being examined in the study are the following:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Is there congruity between perceived IT roles and gender roles for military
personnel and veterans with disability?&lt;br/&gt;2. Is there congruity between
perceived IT roles and occupational roles for military personnel and veterans
with disability?&lt;br/&gt;3. How do gender roles, IT roles and occupational
roles combined with individual identity and self-efficacy affect IT career
choices for disabled military personnel and veterans with
disability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive survey data instrument was
designed and developed by the research team and has undergone rigorous validity
and reliability testing; it includes new scales for disability identity and for
the occupational role of persons with disabilities. Data are being collected
from participants recruited from The Pennsylvania State University, Washington
State University, San Diego State University and Columbia College, in Columbia
Missouri. Data are being collected from subjects using web-surveys and is being
analyzed using a variety of statistical techniques corresponding to the use of
latent variable modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be evaluated
by an independent evaluator, Dr. Jennifer LeBeau, and the evaluation will
include formative and summative assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results are
expected to advance the STEM education field's knowledge about the factors
influencing the selection of IT fields by students with disabilities. More
specifically the work will provide a better understanding of those psycho-social
variables affecting disabled military personnel and veterans with disabilities
choice of IT fields. Additionally, findings from this work will inform role
congruity and "individual differences" theories as they relate to disability and
gender. There is strong potential for findings from this research to advance
STEM education practices and policies for students with disabilities.