* 1245176
* Collaborative Research: Transformting the Organic Chemestry Experience: Development, Implementation and Evaluation of Studio-Based Modules
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Brian Edelbach, Monroe Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,999.00

Project Abstract - Collison - 1245160&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon a pilot
project that produced successful outcomes, this project entails developing and
implementing a collection of 12 topic-focused studio-laboratory modules for
incorporation throughout the undergraduate organic chemistry laboratory
curriculum. The modules combine a guided-inquiry model with a studio-laboratory
methodology. These efforts comprise a collaboration between four-year and two-
year institutions, in order to demonstrate the transportability and effective
implementation of the modules and improvement of student learning in various
academic settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project
lies in the development of a fully integrated studio-organic chemistry
curriculum that demonstrates enhancement of student learning gains through
improved critical thinking skills and confidence in the laboratory, along with
more efficient transfer of course material between the lecture and laboratory.
Furthermore, the development of these modules with inherent portability and
flexibility of delivery makes for customized incorporation into any
undergraduate organic chemistry laboratory
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include the ease
of adoption and implementation of the modules by a wide variety of types of
institutions and departments. Evaluation activities include the use of teaching
observational protocols (TDOP and RTOP), summative grade comparisons of students
taught via the studio-lab approach versus historical student grade data, and
student interviews and surveys, including the Colorado Learning Attitudes about
Science Survey (CLASS) instrument. Results and outcomes are disseminated through
a faculty development workshop for potential adopters of the curriculum, peer-
reviewed publications, conference presentations, and a textbook partnership.