* 1245452
* Use of multimedia, social media and gaming to teach neuroscience via mobile devices
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* John Walsh, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 199,076.00

The Use of Multimedia, Social Media and Gaming to Teach Neuroscience Via Mobile
Devices project creates an innovative online STEM educational platform for
delivering undergraduate neuroscience curriculum that optimizes the use of
multimedia, game psychology and social networking. The expected outcome of this
novel approach to neuroscience education is an increase in student engagement,
an expansion of the instructive reach of the professor beyond the classroom, and
an improvement in student retention of course material. The web platform is all-
inclusive and equipped to handle an entire semester's curriculum and promotes a
classroom experience that enhances student engagement, affinity and knowledge in
neuroscience beyond that achieved by traditional instructional methods. The use
of HTML5 web design is key to use and dissemination of this project, since it
ensures access from any computer or mobile device, regardless of its operating
system. This extends the learning experience outside the classroom and it
optimizes the use of open access educational multimedia that is available online
by enhancing coordinated delivery. Professors are able to customize the
integration of open access materials within the framework of their own course
design. HTML design also guards against changes in web standards through its
backwards compatibility. Social networking technologies used in the platform
improve the learning process by fostering student collaboration and co-learning
through familiar communication technologies. The game-mechanics in the platform
immerse students in the course through reward and engagement mechanisms built
into the game design. Ultimately, the neuroscience instructional platform
creates a site for faculty and student development which illustrates best-
practices for both instructors and students on how to effectively use it,
including a blog for discussing success and failure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact on teachers and students is tested directly in a
large general education (GE) course using proper statistical methods to evaluate
the online platform's merit to science instruction. The principal investigator
operates a neurophysiology research laboratory at USC, and is the professor in
charge of implementing the proposed neuroscience education platform into his
large GE course in neuroscience. Worldwide access by students, as well as
professors who are seeking ways to modernize their own science courses, is
enhanced by the immediate accessibility online offered by the platform employed
in this project. Moreover, the project platform advances the potential for
networking with developers of online science education tools, thus increasing
collaboration and utilization of online educational resources developed through
support by government grants and private foundations. The neuroscience course
developed and the platform it is constructed into serves as a test case for
easy-to-use platforms designed for instructors to create their own mobile-based
learning environment for their field of STEM education.