* 1245112
* Workshop: UIST 2012 Doctoral Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Steven Feiner, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 8 promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad
(no more than one, to broaden the horizons of the U.S. participants), along with
about 4 distinguished research faculty. The event will take place in conjunction
with and immediately preceding the 25th ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology (UIST 2012), to be held October 6-10 in Cambridge, MA, and
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on
Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). The annual UIST conference is the premier
international forum for presenting innovative research results as well as
implementation experiences in the software and technology of human computer
interaction. It brings together researchers and practitioners from diverse areas
that include traditional graphical and web user interfaces, tangible and
ubiquitous computing, virtual and augmented reality, multimedia, new input and
output devices, and computer-supported cooperative work. More information about
the conference may be found at http://www.acm.org/uist.

This year's doctoral research symposium will be just the 10th such workshop
associated with the UIST conferences (NSF has offered support for these events
from their inception). The three goals of this full-day event are to increase
the exposure and visibility of the participants' work within the community, to
help establish a sense of community among this next generation of researchers,
and to help foster their research efforts by providing substantive feedback and
guidance from a group of senior researchers in a supportive and interactive
environment. To these ends, student participants will each make formal 20-minute
presentations of their work to the group, to be followed by an extensive
discussion lasting approximately 30 minutes during which they will receive
feedback from a faculty panel; the feedback is geared to helping students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The students will also
present their research to a wider audience through posters at the conference
poster reception, brief overviews during the conference overview session, and
short papers in the UIST Adjunct Proceedings.

Broader Impacts: The doctoral symposium will help expand the participation of
young researchers pursuing graduate studies in the vital field of user interface
software and technology, by providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure
in the community for their innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance
from senior members of the research community. It will also foster a sense of
community among these young researchers, by allowing them to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. Because the students and faculty constitute a
diverse group across a variety of dimensions, the students' horizons are
broadened to the future benefit of the field. The organizers of the event will
make special efforts to attract students from institutions not historically
heavily represented at UIST and to foster diversity across under-represented
groups. To further increase participant diversity, the organizers will use NSF
funds to support no more than one student from any single institution.