* 1245360
* An Integrated Leadership and Innovation Curriculum for Undergraduate Mechanical Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Jonathan Cagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,975.00

This project is implementing a unique curriculum that teaches leadership and
innovation in an integrated, non-obtrusive way to mechanical engineering
undergraduate students. Such skills are critical for the nation to remain
competitive in a world market. The project's research component is helping
identify effective ways of integrating these skills into an engineering
curriculum without sacrificing technical content. The project team is well
qualified and diverse, consisting of engineering faculty working with business
faculty together with the University's Center for Teaching Excellence. This
synergistic team is providing the engineering and leadership content knowledge
with proper educational pedagogy and evaluation methods to make the project
successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment and evaluation activities consist of
quantitative and qualitative approaches that address both student learning and
attitudes. Qualitative assessment also includes focus group interviews of
students. What researchers intend to explore is whether or not integrating
leadership and innovation materials into a traditional technical engineering
program provides sufficient depth to improve student skills. Results are also
helping the education community better understand how to teach these important
skills in a cost effective manner, by integrating them into existing curricula.