* 1245609
* Collaborative Research: Using Tree Rings to Develop Critical Scientific and Mathematical Thinking Skills in Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,02/28/2014
* Ida Greidanus, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 02/28/2014
* USD 235,777.00

The project is a collaborative effort among Columbia University, U.S. Military
Academy at West Point, Passaic County Community College, and Centralia College
to develop, evaluate and refine undergraduate science and mathematical modules
based on applications of tree rings to age dating, climate and environmental
change, volcanic hazards, statistical modeling, and forensic science.
Interactive multi-media modules are being made available through a website and
are accompanied by background material and guidelines for flexible use to
instructor adoption. Students can measure tree-ring widths virtually and/or use
datasets to conduct inquiry-based investigations and quantitative analyses, with
an emphasis on learning the process of science. The project is also conducting
faculty-development workshops at the partnering institutions, and undertaking
rigorous evaluation of learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the project lies in its innovative approach to leveraging the readily
grasped basic premise and wide range of applicability of tree-ring science to
engage students in learning scientific methods and quantitative reasoning.
Broader impacts include infusion of tree-ring science in the undergraduate
curriculum at the diverse partnering institutions and beyond. Skills and
attitudes imparted by the modules both benefit students who go on in STEM and
bolster scientific literacy among the general population.