* 1245825
* Workshop Organization Supplement: A Series of Workshops on Security in Emerging Areas at the 2012 ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Apu Kapadia, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,284.00

This award is to support student participation in workshops that are affiliated
with the annual ACM symposium on Computer and Communication Security conference
(CCS), which are to be during October 15-19th 2012, in Raleigh NC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual ACM Computer and Communications Security
Conference is a leading international forum for information security
researchers, practitioners, developers, and users to explore cutting-edge ideas
and results, and to exchange techniques, tools and experiences. Since 2001, CCS
started accommodating affiliated workshops to explore security issues in a
variety of emerging areas. The CCS workshops have become active forums for
researchers to form focus groups, discuss and collaborate on emerging and
critical security problems, and disseminate fresh, revolutionary (and sometimes
even controversial) ideas. These workshops also serve as natural venues to bring
together researchers from multiple disciplines to address security issues in
specific domains, such as health care, cloud computing and national critical
infrastructures. The workshop selection process is rigorous and well
coordinated. All workshop proposals are carefully reviewed by the CCS steering
committee and evaluated based on their topic, intellectual merits, and relevance
to academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;