* 1245810
* CC-NIE Integration: Bringing SDN based Private Cloud to University Research
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Tsachy Weissman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 900,000.00

Scientific computing groups on university campuses are often limited by
insufficient access to computing cycles, storage capacity, and network bandwidth
in a flexible and cost effective way. This prevents them from scaling their
applications and taking on grand-challenge problems. Moreover, the current
network infrastructure is built with proprietary switches, routers and with
proliferating appliances such as firewalls and load balancers. As a result, the
IT operation group faces increasing complexity, cost, and lack of control of the
existing infrastructure. This closed infrastructure also prevents network
researchers from exploring new ideas at scale in a production
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages two disruptive technologies
that the Web infrastructure and "a cloud" are exploiting: multi-tenancy
virtualized clusters and Software Defined Networks (SDN). Multi-tenancy
virtualized clusters enable scale-out designs with very flexible resource use
and the best cost performance. SDN makes it possible to customize infrastructure
and to eliminate unnecessary complexity and costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds an SDN-based Private Cloud to bring these two disruptive
technologies to the campus and with them the scale, flexibility, and cost
performance. With this private cloud, scientific computing groups are able to
share the physical infrastructure while simultaneously customizing computing and
networking for their applications. Radar remote sensing and biological computing
applications are used as example scientific computing applications to
demonstrate value of this infrastructure. The SDN based Private Cloud will
impact various communities on a campus and will become a showcase for other
campuses and thus help them exploit the latest trends in networking and
computing.