* 1245871
* Laboratory Study of Ice Deformation under Tidal Loading Conditions with Application to Antarctic Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Meredith Nettles, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2017
* USD 296,664.00

1245871/McCarthy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project
to conduct laboratory experiments with a new, custom-fabricated cryo-friction
apparatus to explore ice deformation oscillatory stresses like those experienced
by tidewater glaciers in nature. The experimental design will explore the
dynamic frictional properties of periodically loaded ice sliding on rock.
Although the frictional strength of ice has been studied in the past these
studies have all focused on constant rates of loading and sliding. The results
of this work will advance understanding of ice stream dynamics by improving
constraints on key material and frictional properties and allowing physics-based
predictions of the amplitude and phase of glacier strain due to tidally induced
stress variations. The intellectual merit of this work is that it will result in
a better understanding of dynamic rheological parameters and will provide better
predictive tools for dynamic glacier flow. The proposed experiments will provide
dynamic material properties of ice and rock deformation at realistic frequencies
experienced by Antarctic glaciers. The PIs will measure the full spectrum of
material response from elastic to anelastic to viscous. The study will provide
better constraints to improve predictive capability for glacier and ice-stream
response to external forcing. The broader impacts of the work include providing
estimates of material properties that can be used to broaden our understanding
of glacier flow and that will ultimately be used for models of sea level rise
and ice sheet stability. The ability to predict sea level in the near future is
contingent on understanding of the processes responsible for flow of Antarctic
ice streams and glaciers. Modulation of glacier flow by ocean tides represents a
natural experiment that can be used to improve knowledge of ice and bed
properties, and of the way in which these properties depend on time-varying
forcings. Presently, the influence of tidal forcing on glacier movement is
poorly understood, and knowledge of ice properties under tidal loading
conditions is limited. The study will generate results of interest beyond polar
science by examining phenomena that are of interest to seismology, glaciology
and general materials science. The project will provide valuable research and
laboratory experience for two undergraduate interns and will provide experience
for the PI (currently a postdoc) in leading a scientific project. The three PIs
are early career scientists. This proposal does not require fieldwork in the
Antarctic.