* 1245998
* TUES: Information Literacy Skill Development & Assessment in Engineering (ILSDAE)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Kerrie Douglas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This project is developing useful assessment tools that will provide a better
understanding of engineering students' self-directed learning skills and a valid
measure of how these skills improve. While there are assessment instruments that
address these skills, most of them focus on information search skills rather
than information literacy. Prior efforts to measure information literacy skills
of engineering majors have employed self-report measures rather than direct
measures of student skills. This project is developing direct measures. It is a
partnership between the engineering and library science faculties. The project
has developed promising pilot data, supported by a seed grant from the Purdue
Engineer of 2020 program. Two assessment instruments have been pilot tested,
psychometrically evaluated, and compared to a more authentic (direct) measure of
information literacy. The resulting initial measures of validity and reliability
for these instruments are promising. Further evaluation is necessary to test the
instruments more robustly. The continued development of these two instruments
and resources is being conducted at Purdue University, Arizona State University,
the University of Arkansas, and other collaborating institutions, with the
purpose that the polished instruments will be disseminated to the wider higher
education community. It is anticipated that the research findings will guide the
design of instructional modules aligned with student needs in developing
improved information literacy skills.