* 1245730
* Windows on the Inquiry Classroom: Full Course, Instructor-and-Apprentice Annotated Video for Professional Development in STEM Inquiry Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Christopher Bauer, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2020
* USD 199,999.00

In their teaching practices, STEM faculty find it difficult to break out of the
mode of straight lecture presentation, even though many of them are aware of
modern research on teaching and learning. One reason is that they hardly ever
visit each other's classrooms. They do not have good examples of how the
classroom could look different, and they do not have opportunities to talk with
other instructors about why they do what they do. Courses and workshops that
train new faculty members also lack concrete models of actual classroom
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is creating a full, professionally
produced video record of an existing course called "Fire and Ice," which is an
example of inquiry-based instruction, in which students build their
understanding of scientific concepts through group discussions and hands-on
scientific explorations. The teaching approaches are derived from current
research on human learning and motivation. The classroom here is not a scripted,
perfect classroom; it is a real classroom, in which instructors and students
face real learning challenges. The video is being tagged with video commentary
from interviews with course participants, including the instructor (a chemistry
professor), students (non-science majors), and several science Ph.D. students
who are novice co-teachers for the course. The annotated video provides a
science classroom with an open door. Instructors, both experienced and novice,
explain their goals, decisions, and attitudes. The viewer therefore experiences
a story line (the course as it happens) as well as a backstory (the motivations,
attitudes, and responses of participants). Hence the word "windows" in the
project title -- there are multiple views into this classroom. An individual
user of the video can "visit" the course to see what is going on and can "talk"
with the instructor about his thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The video product
is expected to be downloadable on the Web, for use by people who want to improve
their teaching or explore inquiry-based approaches, and for use in classes and
workshops for training teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About the course: "Fire
and Ice" is a course for non-science majors, focusing on the perception,
movement, creation, understanding, and use of heat. It incorporates scientific
principles from chemistry, physics, biology, physiology, and history of science.
Topics include, for example, how the body senses heat and regulates temperature;
how heat is used in cooking via baking, broiling, and microwaving; how heat
moves through atomic/molecular motion; and how to make ice in warm climates.
Historical literature from the 18th century is often used for readings. Each
class session is structured on a learning cycle format, beginning with hands-on
explorations, which move to abstract models and then to applications that have
personal or societal relevance. Students work throughout the course in
cooperative groups.