* 1245744
* Development of engaging and readily transferable laboratory experiences for the introductory programming course
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Rafael Arce, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2018
* USD 193,997.00

The main goals of the project are to: (1) enhance the delivery of the
introductory level computer science programming course through a set of well-
structured laboratory online lab experiences that are engaging, applied, and
meaningful, (2) facilitate the adoption of the developed materials by other
instructors, and (3) make the results and materials of this project available
both in Spanish and English and accessible online as a turnkey solution. This
will make the laboratory resources attractive and easy to adopt by other
Hispanic serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides a
turnkey solution that significantly eases an instructor's change in classroom
techniques toward more hands-on, active and engaging courses. In essence, the
turnkey solution consists of a set of well-structured online laboratory
experiences that are applied, meaningful, easily accessible and transferable,
all packaged into a virtual appliance preconfigured with all the necessary
software (compilers, libraries, and data files). The laboratory experiences
contain a strong continuous assessment component to establish students' skills,
concept mastery and attitudes towards the concepts and theme of the lab
experiences. The experiences are designed following Merrill's five principles of
instruction, i.e. be task-centered, and have processes of activation,
demonstration, application and integration. Product development follows the
ADDIE model (analysis, design, development, implementation, evaluation). Student
learning assessment is done before, during and after each laboratory experience.
Promotion and dissemination of the project is achieved through exhibitions and
publications in major CS Education conferences, as well as supported by a
dedicated website.