* 1245566
* Planning the Role of High-Power, High Frequency-Band Transmitters in Advancing Ionospheric/ Thermospheric Research Workshop; Gakona, Alaska; August 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Michael Moloney, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 03/31/2014
* USD 45,000.00

This is to organize a workshop to assess potential future roles of high-power HF
(high frequency)-band transmitters in support of ionospheric and thermospheric
research. It will focus, in particular, on the Alaskan HAARP (High Frequency
Active Auroral Research Program) facility. HAARP is an ionospheric research
program jointly funded by the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy, the University of
Alaska, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The key
instrument at the HAARP station in Gakona, Alaska is a high-power radio
frequency transmitter operating in the HF band, which is used to temporarily
excite a limited area of the ionosphere. Historically, the "heater" communities
that operate facilities like HAARP have been somewhat distinct from the research
communities that study the ionosphere and thermosphere. The ionosphere and
thermosphere constitute an important part of the near-Earth space environment
where low-Earth orbiting satellites operate and through which communication and
navigation signals are being transmitted. The ionosphere-thermosphere (IT)
system is, however, subject to several geophysical forcings originating from the
Sun. The interaction between the solar wind and the Earth's magnetosphere
results in a fraction of the solar wind energy and plasma being transmitted into
the magnetosphere, and subsequently into the ionosphere and thermosphere to
produce auroras and other geomagnetic phenomena. Solar energetic particles
penetrate into the upper and middle atmosphere to cause significant ionization
and chemical effects. Solar ultraviolet and extreme ultraviolet radiation is the
main source of energy for heating, ionization, and photochemical reactions in
the thermosphere and ionosphere. The workshop will provide a useful venue for
these communities to meet and to assess the utility and cost/benefits of HAARP
in future IT research. Specifically, the workshop will have a major impact on
the future of the HAARP facility as the Air Force has announced its intent to
step back from its historical commitment to the facility and HAARP users look
towards other sources of support, including the NSF. Absent these additional
sources of funding, the facility would be closed and the land reclaimed in
accordance with agreements dating back to the 1970s when the facility was an
military radar site.