* 1245758
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: NoleNet Express Lane -- A Private Network Path for Research Data Transmission at Florida State University and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Henry Bass, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 230,248.00

The Florida State University is building a dedicated campus research network to
significantly accelerate both local and national transmission rates of "big
data" among collaborators participating in NSF funded research. The campus
network improvements form the foundation of the newly created NoleNet Express-
lane. Our work leverages the availability of unused or "dark fiber" to cost
effectively connect campus network switches with core instrumentation and data
storage facilities. The new network supports leading edge instrumentation used
to better understand the structure and function of complex biological molecules,
the organization of agriculturally important genomes, and the processes and
patterns of evolution and population dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To share
results and instrumentation with a broad audience, the project improves by a
factor of 40 the connectivity to research partners beyond FSU's campus boarder
by upgrading the switching infrastructure between FSU's campus "Express-lane"
network and Florida's statewide optical network Point-of-Presence. These
improvements, coupled with the newly created Sunshine State Education &amp;
Research Computing Alliance (SSERCA), are helping to enhance FSU's ability to
support collaborative activities across the state of Florida. SSERCA works to
bring together Florida's geographically distributed educational institutions and
to create a Cyberinfrastructure that can be used by FSU faculty as bridge to
national computing and data storage resources. Routing local and regional
network traffic related to research onto an advanced dedicated network lowers
the barriers to scientific discovery by removing bottlenecks related to sharing
data and instrumentation and supporting leading edge data analysis workflows.