* 1245780
* IDEA-Pen: Interactive Design and Analysis through a Pen-Based Interface
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The IDEA-Pen project is using tablet technology to provide a means of helping
students perform engineering analysis problems in a classroom environment. Using
an electronic pen, students will be able to sketch structural analysis problems.
Image analysis software previously written by the investigators is used to pass
the sketch to a Finite Element Analysis (FEA) program. The FEA program will then
provide analysis of the sketch made by the students. Student learning is
expected to increase because they will be able to explore several options for
design (increase the design space) since the analysis can be done quickly. By
increasing the design space, students will be able to observe the effects that
design changes have on the performance of their design. This will increase
intuition about system performance and will result in better design skill. This
outcome is being monitored by analyzing student performance on exams. It is also
expected that the technology will help shift the classroom from a teacher
centered to a student centered environment. This expectation is being monitored
by analyzing the number and variety of problems attempted that are not assigned
by the instructor. Classrooms are expected to become more interactive and
certainly more engaging for the students. This expectation is monitored by
directly measuring the numbers of problems attempted by students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread dissemination of the project results are
expected to occur because the software will be provided in an open source format
and could be distributed through popular application downloads centers.