* 1245490
* Physics Education Research User's Guide: A Web Resource for Physics Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Bruce Mason, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Physics education research (PER) is widely recognized as a leader in discipline-
based science education research. PER has developed many results and teaching
methods that vastly improve student learning of physics in the US and around the
world. These results have also been adopted and adapted for education in other
science, engineering, and mathematics fields. However, research on faculty
change has found that even educators who know about PER and are highly motivated
to improve their teaching have trouble finding the information they need to
implement PER-based teaching methods effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PER
User's Guide (http://perusersguide.org) is a project designed to address these
problems by translating and summarizing the results of PER in an accessible and
useful way for busy educators. This project builds on the results of a previous
NSF-funded project, which supported preliminary research and the creation of a
pilot site, to expand development of this site to make it a more comprehensive
resource, and to continue user testing and research into faculty adoption and
adaption of PER-based teaching methods. There are nine key components:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Editorial Board Review - Support an Editorial Board to
review content and ensure that the site contains high quality material that
accurately reflects the views of the PER community.&lt;br/&gt;2. Expansion and
Refinement of Detailed Implementation Guides and FAQs - Expand and refine
detailed implementation guides and FAQs to incorporate the results of user
testing, Editorial Board reviews, and continuing interviews with developers and
adopters.&lt;br/&gt;3. Reviews of Research for PER-based Teaching Methods -
Create comprehensive guides to the research behind half of the 50+ PER-based
teaching methods on the site, and a synthesis of these reviews to be published
in a peer-reviewed journal.&lt;br/&gt;4. Assessment Instrument Guide Feasibility
Study and Design - Conduct a feasibility study to determine the requirements for
an assessment instrument guide that includes overviews of research-based
assessment instruments and a national database of scores. Produce initial design
plan.&lt;br/&gt;5. Video Demonstrations of Popular Teaching Methods - Create
high quality, engaging videos demonstrating some of the more popular PER-based
teaching methods: PhET Interactive Science Simulations and Tutorials in
Introductory Physics (in collaboration with Stephanie Chasteen and the
University of Colorado Science Education Initiative).&lt;br/&gt;6. Virtual New
Faculty Workshop Library - Create videos of the successful Workshop for New
Faculty in Physics and Astronomy (in collaboration with Stephanie Chasteen and
Robert Hilborn).&lt;br/&gt;7. Redesign of the Site based on User Testing -
Incorporate the results of user testing to expand and restructure the site,
maximizing its effectiveness and impact.&lt;br/&gt;8. User Testing of New
Features - Conduct user testing interviews to assess the effectiveness of the
redesigned site, detailed implementation guides, and reviews of
research.&lt;br/&gt;9. Dissemination and Publicity - Launch a national publicity
campaign to increase awareness and interest in the
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
continued research on faculty use of the PER User's Guide and PER-based teaching
methods, and a comprehensive synthesis of the research behind these methods,
which contributes to the research base on faculty change. The PI is the creator
of the PER User's Guide and has extensive experience in PER, curriculum
development, and design and research of web-based educational resources. The co-
PIs are the editor and creator of the ComPADRE digital library and the executive
director of the AAPT. The external evaluators are leading researchers on faculty
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this
project is to improve physics education throughout the world by making the
results of PER more accessible to educators, and thus improve learning for their
students. It also improves work in PER by increasing communication between
educators and researchers.