* 1245680
* Modular Nanoengineering for the Future of Bits and Bytes
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Michael Thompson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 10/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This project is bringing the excitement of fabricating devices and addressing
grand challenges in nano-electronics and microsystems to undergraduates, with a
particular focus on students at the lower-division. Its intellectual merit lies
in the way it addresses the challenge of marrying the limitations of micro/nano
fabrication and device performance with hands-on learning approaches, such that
when the students take upper-division courses, the material they learn is
related to real information processing devices and concepts that the students
interact with. The hands-on experience is conveyed through a series of modules
that enable the students to design and create a collage of information
processing devices, thus strengthening the link between classroom and laboratory
work in microsystems. A particularly interesting component of the project is the
development of portable fabrication equipment that is relatively low cost, and
can be sent to classes at multiple locations. The adaptable modules consist of
course material and experimental labs in energy generation and storage, light
generation and detection, mechanical sensors and actuators, bio-electrical
interfaces, and information processing devices. The modules integrate relevant
concepts of material science, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering
so that students are able to understand the wider scope of future grand
challenge technology developments. Two key factors contribute to the project's
potential for broader impact. Firstly, the underlying mix of science and
engineering concepts that come together in the processes of nano-fabrication
make for compelling study because they are connected to real information
processing devices that are familiar to students. Secondly, the low-cost nature
of the equipment makes replicability of the project's infrastructure realistic,
which in turn increases the potential adoptability (and/or adaptability) of the
project by other institutions.