* 1245421
* Collaborative Research: Bridging Math and Science - Authentic Laboratory Experiences in Mathematical Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Miroslav Kummel, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2016
* USD 99,693.00

There is no precedent for math instruction using "wet" labs to engage students
in mathematics through data-driven inquiry experiences. In this project, we
construct Laboratory Experiences in Mathematical Biology (LEMBs) for
undergraduate math classrooms. LEMBs are developed collaboratively at Utah State
University and Colorado College, aimed at sophomore classrooms including both
STEM and non-STEM majors. Students manipulate and interact with real-world
biological mechanisms, construct their own mathematical descriptions and gain
deeper understanding of underlying mathematical relationships. LEMBs are open-
ended, inviting student participation and creativity. Student acquisition of
modeling and problem-solving skills and the effect of LEMBs on other skills are
evaluated using pre/post-tests, think-aloud exercises, and instructor/student
interviews. We expect to create new knowledge about learners' construction of
modeling and problem-solving skills. LEMBs invite student-centered mathematics
instruction and expose faculty to alternative pedagogy. We assemble pedagogical
materials to facilitate lab-based instruction, including alternate mathematical
pathways rooted in the labs, multiple assessment items, and educational
vignettes based on classroom observations to illustrate key pedagogical
techniques. LEMBs and instructor support materials are made available to faculty
nationwide via Open Access publication through USU?s Digital Commons.
Presentations about LEMBs are made at conferences, and articles are also
submitted to research and education journals.