* 1245134
* Design-based and Interdisciplinary Strategies for Learning in Laboratory Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Jamie Fornsaglio, Seton Hill University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2016
* USD 165,951.00

This project establishes a design-based inquiry approach to teaching advanced
laboratory courses that is interdisciplinary in nature, fosters student and
instructor collaboration, and incorporates technology into the learning process.
Students in three courses, Cell Biology, Advanced Instrumental Analysis, and
Introductory Statistics, collaborate on semester-long research projects
investigating questions related to air pollution and lung cell toxicity. This is
a relevant topic for southwestern Pennsylvania, where pollution exposure has
been correlated with an increase in mortality rates. The students use virtual
laboratories and online video tutorials to supplement technical skills and
enhance science learning and Web 2.0 interactive collaborative technologies to
collaborate throughout the semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Project activities are based on research published in the literature about how
students best learn science and the process of scientific investigation, and how
supplemental technology can positively impact learning. The project builds on
prior work by the Principal Investigators and is supported by university-wide
commitments. The primary pedagogical goals are to: 1. Develop, adapt, and refine
design-based inquiry approaches to laboratory experiences that use real-world
data and student-developed research studies. 2. Incorporate learning
technologies, such as interactive virtual labs and video tutorials into the
curriculum. 3. Assess the effect of this approach on student understanding of
scientific concepts and processes, higher order skills, and attitudes toward
science and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project directly
impacts approximately 150-200 STEM students per year (three-fourths of whom are
enrolled in laboratory science courses). The interdisciplinary framework for
teaching scientific investigation can be adapted within other disciplines and at
other institutions. Project findings and the curricular framework are being
disseminated at Seton Hill through a series of teaching and learning forums, to
other STEM faculty through conferences at professional society national meetings
and publication in peer-reviewed journals, and freely to the general public via
the Seton Hill website. The virtual laboratories and video tutorials are being
disseminated broadly through cataloging with the National STEM Distributed
Learning (NSDL) services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts toward support of Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education.