* 1245769
* A Multidisciplinary Platform for Wave Energy Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Gene Hou, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 05/31/2016
* USD 199,131.00

This project aims to promote undergraduate education in wave energy for science,
engineering, technology, and education majors. It is designed to produce a next-
generation workforce that can meet the ever-increasing energy needs of this
nation. A multi-disciplinary team of six faculty members is assembled to
undertake this educational effort. It is serving the needs of a large number of
students in three colleges (Sciences, Engineering, and Education) at Old
Dominion University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon their on-going research
on wave energy, the faculty members on this team are incorporating their
expertise and research findings into the development of five innovative and
self-sufficient course modules related to wave energy. Students are gaining
knowledge, mathematical and computational skills, and hands-on experiences of
wave energy through the learning activities inside and outside the classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the
establishment of a pilot educational platform on wave energy that integrates
curriculum development, computer simulation, educational design, field
observation, and community outreach. The success of this project provides a
model for multidisciplinary collaboration on renewable energy education that can
effectively contribute to the national needs in STEM education and that can be
widely adopted or implemented in other higher educational institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are represented by the
strong STEM education community that involves nearby HBCUs, Virginia community
colleges, local military bases and industries, and high school young scholars.
Special efforts are made to attract a large and diverse body of students into
this education program, especially those from underrepresented groups.