* 1245461
* CAREER: Neural Mechanisms of Visual Crowding
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2013
* David Whitney, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 12/31/2013
* USD 388,739.00

Every time we open our eyes, our visual system is overloaded with information.
This is especially true in the peripheral visual field: Although we feel that we
are aware of the details of individual objects in our periphery, the number and
density of objects in natural scenes means that we are unable to perceive
detailed information such as identity or quantity. This inability to scrutinize
objects in the periphery when other objects are present is called visual
crowding. Counterintuitively, crowding may be beneficial. A number of models
have emphasized that crowding can improve processing efficiency or allow us to
detect statistical regularities in natural scenes--tasks that are fundamental to
all aspects of visual perception. Despite the existence of a unique
psychophysical definition for crowding, and its clear importance in visual
processing, there are major gaps in our understanding of where in the visual
hierarchy crowding occurs, the sorts of objects on which it operates, and the
underlying neural mechanism that causes crowding. With funding from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. David Whitney and his colleagues at the University of
California, Davis, are pursuing two major research goals. First, by measuring
behavioral performance, Dr. Whitney will test the hypothesis that crowding
operates independently at multiple levels of visual analysis, for low-level
visual features such as contours or gratings, and also for high-level objects
such as faces. Second, Dr. Whitney's team will isolate and identify the neural
mechanisms that mediate both low and high-level crowding using a non-invasive
brain imaging method known as fMRI-adaptation.

Understanding visual crowding is fundamental to understanding most other aspects
of visual perception. Every natural scene we look at is densely filled with
objects, but only a very few of these can be simultaneously scrutinized, largely
because visual crowding prevents the visual system from having access to all the
details at once. Perception, therefore, is subject to the costs (and benefits)
of crowding. Because human vision is perhaps the most thoroughly examined
operational visual system, investigating the impact of crowding on human
perception will be important in developing a realistic artificial visual system
in the future. More broadly, understanding the limits of human spatial vision,
including crowding, has the power to improve a range of applications including
data visualization (e.g., crowding interferes with visualizing abnormalities on
an x-ray), advertising (e.g., too many words or images on a billboard causes car
accidents), computer graphics (e.g., too many flashing icons on a website
becomes ineffective), visual art and movies (e.g., do not crowd the star actor
with too many other nearby faces), and a host of other applications. In addition
to the broader impacts noted above, this proposal will support the training of a
graduate student. Moreover, Dr. Whitney will establish a unique outreach program
in local high schools, with predominantly Hispanic populations, that will use
art as a way to introduce visual neuroscience research questions and methods.
The educational outreach program is specifically aimed at stimulating interest
and increasing the participation of under-represented groups in basic science
research.