* 1245383
* Project Intro Astro:  Transforming Undergraduate Education in Introductory Astronomy
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Daniel Reichart, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 249,981.00

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH) has built PROMPT, which
consists of six 16-inch diameter fully automated, or robotic, telescopes at
Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile, and Skynet -- telescope
control and web-based, dynamic queue scheduling software. In partnership with
other institutions, Skynet has enabled PROMPT to grow into a network of 16
small, robotic optical telescopes currently spanning South America, North
America, and Europe. Over the past three years, the PI and members of the Skynet
team have been spearheading an expansion and modernization of UNC-CH's
introductory astronomy curriculum, capitalizing on new facilities, and on Skynet
and PROMPT in particular. This project expands the effort into a joint program
between UNC-CH and Wake Technical Community College (WTCC).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goals of the UNC-CH-WTCC
partnership are three-fold: (1) To modernize those components of WTCC's
introductory astronomy curriculum that UNC-CH has already transformed,
specifically its first introductory astronomy laboratory course, ASTR 101L, and
a unique fieldwork experience called Education Research in Radio Astronomy
(ERIRA), and to provide WTCC's astronomy faculty with the training and the tools
to teach ASTR 101L; (2) To work together to complete the transformation of UNC-
CH's first introductory lecture course, ASTR 101, to a "flipped," active-
learning experience, to work together to develop a second introductory astronomy
laboratory course, ASTR 102L, and to implement these courses at both
institutions; and (3) To assess the effectiveness of the new curriculum along
three axes: (1) traditional lectures/labs vs. flipped lectures/Skynet-based
labs, (2) research university vs. community college, and (3) on campus vs.
online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is partnering with the professional
evaluators at UNC-CH's Center for Faculty Excellence and WTCC's Institutional
Research and Planning office to evaluate the new curriculum. They are measuring
improvement in student learning and engagement. Additionally, the project is
tracking the number of students who progress from ASTR 101 to ASTR 102, from
there to ERIRA or ASTR102L, and at UNC-CH from there to a major or minor in
astrophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The PI is uploading his
ASTR 101 lectures to a YouTube channel called Project Intro Astro. The current
project is also developing a website that fully describes and facilitates
Project Intro Astro, the goal of which is for anyone to be able to take any of
four introductory astronomy courses, including two Skynet-based laboratory
courses, either (1) self-paced for free (i.e., the MIT model), or for the cost
of their text, or (2) for credit/transfer credit though UNC- CH's Friday Center
for Continuing Education's Carolina Courses Online (including WTCC students).
The expanded website is also a repository for the active learning materials that
are being developed (including access to a novel, and expanded, e-polling
interface), for other educators who might want to adopt the videos and materials
to flip their own classrooms.