* 1245400
* Changing how physics students approach learning with simulations: Research and development of PhET-based tutorials
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2018
* USD 199,983.00

Researchers at the University of Maryland are developing tutorials to complement
the popular University of Colorado PhET simulations. These simulations are some
of the most widely used in physics and beyond (more than 25 million downloads
every year), partly because they are crafted to balance two competing design
goals---selecting controls and representations that draw attention to particular
causal relations vs. providing enough freedom so that students can authentically
explore. By contrast, the curricula currently included with the simulations were
not created through the design cycle of iterative testing and revision typically
used to create materials that help students achieve large conceptual gains. This
project remedies that situation by engaging in a research-intensive design cycle
to create effective tutorials and associated instructors' guides. Moreover, it
is also providing crucial insights about how to trigger and sustain students'
productive modes of interaction with simulations, and how to disrupt
unproductive modes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The tutorials have the potential to
reach tens of thousands of high school and undergraduate students, likely many
more, as the materials are to be promoted on the PhET site itself. In addition,
the research on how students frame their interactions with simulations will be
useful for instructors who want to write or revise activities associated with
simulations or to use them more effectively in the classroom.