* 1245277
* TUES 1: Enhancing an Open Laboratory-Based Circuits Experience with a Virtual Laboratory Assistant
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Joseph Picone, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,999.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION In an age of ubiquitous mobile computing devices, students
demand instant access to information. The project is creating an open-source,
on-line laboratory in which students can engage in experiential learning of
electrical engineering content in an on-demand setting. It is developing an open
laboratory, which uses a virtual laboratory assistant (VLA) with voice input and
output capabilities to provide personalized instruction for students
participating in a self-paced undergraduate engineering laboratory. The
intelligent agent is customizing the learning process by providing each student
with personalized tutoring.

The components of the system include: pre-lab testing and instruction,
engineering design exercises, short topic explanation videos, instrumentation
instruction (including safety), and a corresponding post-lab test module. In the
pre-lab, students are introduced to basic theory and simulation tools. If a
student needs clarification on a topic, a short instructional video will provide
guidance. These videos utilize a Khan Academy style format and explain many
basic electrical engineering concepts. The lab instruction module assists
students in executing an open-ended design problem using the VLA.

The project's pilot electrical engineering lab is studying the development of an
extensible framework and evaluating the efficacy of open laboratory pedagogical
approach. The effort is exploring: (1) to what extent is individual, self-paced
learning possible, (2) what benefit comes with 24/7 accessibility, (3) how more
timid students can receive personalized instruction in a non-threatening
environment, and (4) how the level of engagement can be increased by allowing
students to freely explore the subject matter. The evaluation activities involve
both formative and summative efforts that will be supported by Temple
University's Teaching and Learning Center. The instructional diagnosis and
surveys will provide interested educators with data necessary to foster adoption
of the project resources at other institutions.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE Temple University's open laboratory is being used as a
recruiting tool during more than a dozen recruiting events per year, which are
focused on high school and middle school students. These events are attended by
hundreds of potential engineers from underrepresented groups. Through these
events, the team is recruiting members of underrepresented groups to
engineering. They are also integrating education and research through the open
laboratories - in which undergraduate research students are performing
simulations and prototyping. A successful development of the open laboratory
environment is expected to more efficiently utilize lab space and
student/faculty time. Moreover, the pilot is producing an open lab model that
can be leveraged by other courses, along with a scalable architecture that can
be used by other colleges and universities.