* 1245455
* Facilitating Problem-Based Learning with an Inverted Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Gregory Mason, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2016
* USD 171,306.00

The objective of this TUES Type 1 project is to develop an instructional
framework that promotes self-directed learning and enhances problem-solving
skills in undergraduate engineering students. The instructional framework uses
an Inverted Classroom (IC) to facilitate Problem-Based Learning (PBL) and is
implemented in a Heat Transfer course at Seattle University. Material
traditionally covered in a lecture format is moved outside of class time and
made available in an online repository of learning resources. During class time,
students solve authentic engineering problems presented in a PBL format. These
real engineering problems are co-developed by the project team, academic
partners from Montana State University and the University of Washington, and
industrial partners. The instructional framework is being created through
collaboration between faculty in mechanical engineering and psychology at
Seattle University and evaluated by academic partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The development of the IC-PBL pairing
has the potential to be a transformative pedagogy that capitalizes on the
growing interest in inverted (flipped) classrooms. A model for academic and
industrial partnerships in learning is created that allows faculty to teach
students using real world engineering problems while providing an avenue for
industrial partners to help prepare better engineers for the workplace. To
evaluate the effects of this IC-PBL framework on student learning, control-
treatment experiments are conducted on (1) student problem-solving performance,
(2) self-directed learning performance, (3) retention and understanding of
fundamental engineering principles, and (4) student motivation and attitude
towards engineering studies and degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The proposed instructional framework could fundamentally change how
undergraduate engineering students are taught, creating engineering graduates
who are better self- directed learners and problem-solvers. The engineering
education community have access to an adaptable educational framework, including
curriculum materials, online resources, and authentic engineering problems,
facilitating future wide-scale adoption.