* 1245912
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Multidisciplinary, Multi-campus Undergraduate Minor to Enhance STEM Learning in Energy Science, Technology and Policy
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gary Halada, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 129,972.00

The project is developing a multidisciplinary, multi-campus program minor in
'energy science, technology, and policy', through a unique regional partnership
consisting of public and private four-year and two-year colleges. Project
objectives include: 1) successful design and implementation of a multi-
institution energy education program that is leveraging institutional academic
strengths and access to student populations at the different campuses; 2) design
of a program valuable for students in both technical (i.e. architecture,
engineering, and science) and non-technical (i.e. business, accounting, and
general studies) majors, at both two-year and four-year colleges; 3) enhancement
of STEM learning through multidisciplinary curricula, experiential learning
through internships and research, and incorporation of stakeholder input in
course and program development; and 4) recruitment and retention of students
from underrepresented and underserved populations. Third party evaluation
involving peer review and an outside evaluator are used for evaluation and
assessment of the project outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
enhancing collaboration with STEM education community and is helping to promote
the two- to four-year college transition and beyond. By coordinating the program
across multiple campuses, the project is facilitating articulation among
institutions. Several of the schools involved have large populations of students
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields, and all have significant programs
aimed at recruitment and retention. The project is working to increase
participation from those groups significantly.