* 1245215
* Concept, Competency, and Community-Driven Curriculum Reform in Undergraduate Biology Education (C3UBE)
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Nathan Sanders, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2017
* USD 181,951.00

Intellectual merit: This project integrates recommendations by the Vision and
Change initiative to revise and revitalize the first year biology sequence at
the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK). A community-based approach is
being used to monitor and document the integration of Vision and Change
concepts, competencies, and research by UTK biologists into three courses.
Faculty and graduate students are developing new instructional strategies and
assessing the impacts on student learning. In part, the effort involves 1)
developing and implementing a new curriculum, 2) providing professional
development for the UTK biology community, 3) assessing and evaluating student
learning in light of the curricular changes, and 4) disseminating the student
learning and curriculum change results. The project is providing one model of
how an outcomes-based and community-based reform at a large state university can
integrate Vision and Change into introductory biology courses. The creation and
use of open-ended assessments based on Vision and Change concepts is also
building capacity in assessment of undergraduate biology
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: By engaging dozens of UTK
faculty, graduate students, and staff in best practices for teaching and
learning, the project is providing thousands of undergraduates the tools to
become more biologically literate. It prepares students for open-ended
questioning, and encourages them to think like biologists. Moreover, the project
functions as a model of reform whose deliverables are freely available for use
by other institutions. UTK community members are also visiting selected
institutions to encourage them to enact similar curricular reforms within their
introductory biology courses.