* 1245268
* Video Bridge:  Using short direct-measurement videos to bridge the gap between abstracted physics concepts and their applications
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Matthew Vonk, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,813.00

Researchers at University of Wisconsin-River Falls and at Henry Sibley High
School in Mendota Heights, MN, are creating new high-quality and resource-rich
videos for physics instruction, substantially adding to an existing library, so
that the entire introductory mechanics curriculum is covered. The team is also
creating detailed and ready-to-use curricular materials to support the videos so
that other instructors will be able to easily incorporate our videos into their
classes, expanding a web resource that hosts the video library, curricular
materials and pedagogical support, and rigorously measuring the extent to which
students who use these sets of abstracted and applied videos are able to apply
their knowledge to new situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One particularly
compelling aspect of these videos is the pairing between two types of videos:
abstract and applied, the former referring to videos that show physics concepts
at their most elemental level using traditional physics lab equipment, while the
latter show real-world phenomena exhibiting in a similar concept but in a more
complicated setting. This pairing allows the instructor and the students to
spiral back over material for better retention and learning transfer. The
project has strong potential for broader impact in the physics community and
beyond because of the ease of dissemination via vetted and oft-used digital
library collections such as SERC and ComPADRE, which have millions of visitors
each year.