* 1245657
* Hands-on MADE 4 ME (Hands-on Machining, Analysis and Design Experiences for Mechanical Engineering)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Sammy Shina, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,959.00

This project is transforming the way students acquire engineering design and
manufacturing knowledge by integrating the use of three axis desktop CNC
(Computer Numerical Control) equipment into an undergraduate engineering
curriculum. The initial focus of the project is on the first two years of the
undergraduate engineering curriculum. The program is creating a new hands-on
integrated design and manufacturing curriculum that uses CNC machines both as a
design task and as a tool for product manufacture. Computer programming,
mathematics, and physics are also being integrated into the curriculum.
Specifically, students are required to write computer programs to control the
machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students at the junior and senior years are also
involved because they use their design skills to help develop the inexpensive
easily manufactured CNC machine tool. Because the tool development is part of
the project, maintenance and upgrades are handled as part of the undergraduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inquiry-based curriculum creates a hands-on
experiential education for the students. As a result of this experience students
have an increased knowledge of engineering design, an increased analysis
capability, and much more self-confidence. The evaluation of these outcomes is
performed an external evaluator. Motivation is being studied using the
"Situational Motivation Scale". Self-efficacy and higher cognitive achievement
is being studied using the "Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire" and
the "Metacognitive Awareness Inventory".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
disseminating results by providing machine designs and curriculum to all
interested universities, two-year colleges, and high schools.