* 1245635
* Infusing Creative Thinking in STEM Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Clare Congdon, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 02/28/2018
* USD 192,226.00

An implicit objective of most college and university programs is to develop
student capacity for creativity. However, creativity itself is not typically
taught or included as a topic in most undergraduate curricula or as an
independent discipline. Teaching creativity is a dimension of higher education
found primarily in Fine Arts and Design, and within specific areas of the
Humanities, such as Creative Writing. Within STEM it is embedded in some
engineering programs. This project is expanding understanding of creative
thinking as a dimension of undergraduate coursework in STEM. It is creating
opportunities for developing student creative thinking and increasing the
effectiveness of faculty in delivering a curriculum that has been infused with
exercises that reinforce creative thinking as an integral part of undergraduate
STEM education at the University of Southern Maine. The major step in achieving
this goal is engaging STEM faculty in workshops to introduce them to techniques
for infusing creativity into courses. The principal goal is to engage faculty in
STEM disciplines and to help them develop modules for incorporation into
existing courses. Five day summer institutes bring together a cohort of 8
faculty members from the Departments of Applied Medical Sciences; Environmental
Science; Exercise, Health and Sports Sciences; Biology; Computer Science;
Mechanical Engineering, and Technology. During the workshops faculty learn
strategies for how to create modules that combine creative thinking with STEM
course materials. These modules will be incorporated into existing curricula.
Faculty will join in a second summer institute the second year and will both
develop and refine their modules and also incorporate them into one of their
scheduled upper level classes for the academic year.

Intellectual Merit: Few studies for teaching creativity in the area of STEM
education at the K-12 and undergraduate levels have been done. To this end, an
underlying intellectual principle of the proposal is the evaluation of the
impact of this approach on both faculty and students.

Broader Impacts: This project has the potential for serving as a model for
incorporating creative thinking processes into education in STEM instructions.