* 1245919
* Collaborative Research: Biological production of reactive oxygen species in freshwaters
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Colleen Hansel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,209.00

Intellectual merit: The reactive oxygen species (ROS), superoxide, hydrogen
peroxide, and hydroxyl, can have significant effects on the cycling of metals
and organic compounds in aquatic systems. Although it is known that fungi, algae
and bacteria are all capable of extracellular ROS production, it has generally
been assumed that biological ROS production is negligible in freshwater systems,
compared to photo-oxidation of natural organic matter. However, recent results
from the Voelker lab indicate that dark biological production of H2O2 is more
important than photochemical production. The overall goal of this research is to
elucidate the biological role in ROS production in freshwater systems. The
specific objectives are to determine which types of organisms are significant
sources of reactive oxygen species to freshwater systems, which environmental
variables affect ROS production rates, and which biogeochemical processes are
likely to be affected by biological ROS production. The PIs will focus on three
hypotheses: (i) Biological production of ROS is widespread, and specific
microbial groups (which may be bacterial, algal or fungal) are responsible. (ii)
Biological production rates by a specific organism can change as a result of
changes in the environmental conditions such as available nutrients and light
intensity. (iii) Superoxide and Fenton products are generated as a result of
biological ROS production, at rates sufficient to affect the cycling of organic
compounds and metals. The PIs will cultivate and isolate organisms responsible
for ROS production at selected field sites, targeting algal, bacterial, and/or
fungal groups. The PIs will then use their work on the cultivated organisms to
design molecular techniques to examine the relationship between ROS production
rates by natural assemblages of organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The proposed work will provide an educational opportunity for several
graduate students and undergraduates. The PIs have a strong track record in
advising minorities and women, and student recruitment efforts for this proposal
will continue to be focused on underrepresented groups in science and
engineering. In addition, the PIs will draw on the results of this research to
develop a series of lectures on the role of microorganisms in the production of
reactive oxygen species and their impact on the health of microbial ecosystems
and aquatic biogeochemistry. The PIs will present the lectures at the annual
Professional Development Workshop for Science Educators entitled ?Windows on the
Invisible World? coordinated by the Microbial Sciences Initiative at Harvard
University.