* 1245436
* Development of a Validated Self-Report Instrument for Measuring the Classroom Impact of Student-Centered Professional Development for College Instructors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Timothy Weston, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2018
* USD 239,974.00

Efforts to broaden the reach of college instructor professional development will
be more successful if the design of professional development services is
informed by good evaluation evidence about whether and how it is working. While
improving student learning is the ultimate goal of college level instructor
professional development, measuring student outcomes directly is difficult and
expensive as a means of evaluation. Moreover, there is often a long time lag
between instructor participation and when a discernible impact on student
outcomes can be detected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a
more efficient and rapid way to evaluate the effectiveness of professional
development and in particular to determine whether and how the instructors are
changing their instruction as a result of participation. It is engaged in
constructing and validating a self-report survey instrument that can be used to
probe the initial classroom impact of professional development of college
mathematics instructors, especially shifts in their use of class time and choice
of instructional activities. The PI team is aware of sources of potential bias
in self-reported survey responses and is focused on developing an instrument
that is as free as possible from incentives to provide biased responses.
Classroom observations are being compared with survey data from multiple sites
to determine the conditions under which self-report accurately probes shifts in
instructional practice that result from professional development. The goal is a
validated survey instrument that will offer a general and inexpensive tool for
measuring the impact of professional development in mathematics and, eventually,
in science as well.