* 1245813
* RI: Small: RUI:  Shark Tracking with Multiple Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 05/25/2012,01/31/2014
* Christopher Clark, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Satyandra Gupta
* 01/31/2014
* USD 176,242.00

This project is developing underwater acoustic tracking strategies for locating
and tracking particular species of tagged sharks that have long distance
migratory paths. A unique aspect of this project is that receivers will be
onboard a team of Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV), enabling them to
cooperatively estimate the shark position, thereby allowing the AUVs to track
and follow the shark for sustained periods of time. The AUV team's mobility and
ability to modify its own path in response to shark movement allows it to obtain
in-situ measurements that cannot be obtained from static receiver systems
typically used for monitoring shark behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Due to its
interdisciplinary nature, this project will make contributions in both
Engineering (AUV autonomy and control) and Biological Sciences (shark behavior
characterization, life history, and habitat utilization). New approaches to
state estimation are being developed. A key to creating a successful estimator
for this application will be incorporating kinematic and dynamic models of shark
locomotion. Novel control strategies are also necessary given the difficulty of
tracking sharks that can travel at high speed. Tracking controllers don't
typically consider the additional constraint of maintaining a separation
distance to ensure the AUV doesn't affect shark behavior. The end goal of
conducting shark tracking experiments will be the first of its kind.
Additionally, much merit will be derived from the actual data the experiments
yield. Specifically, the engineering within this project is driven by the goal
of determining the relationships between local ocean environment variables (e.g.
temperatures, current velocities) and shark behavior (e.g. migration path
choices, habitat use). While there is considerable knowledge of shark physiology
and behavior, there are no fine scale time studies of shark motion and its
associated energy use within different behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
includes developing new AUV sampling technologies that can be generalized and
applied to studying various forms of marine life, and in addition to the
ecological contributions, the research is applicable to other tasks associated
with safe marine navigation, homeland security, and the military.