* 1245630
* TUES Type 1: Incorporation of Research Skills into the Undergraduate Biochemistry Curriculum to Create Extraordinary Scientists for the Modern Research Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2017
* James Dyer, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2017
* USD 166,475.00

This project is establishing a two semester series of biochemistry laboratory
courses, Biochemistry I and II, in which students carry out class research
projects that are an outgrowth of the research projects of on-campus faculty.
Students present their work at the end of each semester. A unique feature of the
project is an advisory board composed of industry representatives and faculty
from nearby institutions. The board helps critique student presentations and the
design and implementation of the project itself. Approximately 130 students/year
will benefit from this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
rigorous evaluation plan includes comparison of the knowledge, skills, and
scientific insights gained by students in the research centered courses to those
gained by students taking the more traditional standard lab modules centered
courses. The research topics are current and challenging but appropriate for the
students. Examples include: structure-function relationships for dihydrofolate
reductase and indole-2-glycerol phosphate synthase, screening of kinase
inhibitors against new targets, and experiments in soil enzymology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: if successful this approach is one that
could be adapted by many urban universities close to centers of appropriate
industries and research centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part
of their efforts toward support of Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education.