* 1245335
* Collaborative Research:   LTREB Renewal:   Yellowstone wolves: their ecology and community consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* John Vucetich, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 148,786.00

The reintroduction of large apex predators is an increasingly popular but
controversial conservation practice worldwide. This project continues a 17-year
study following wolves since their reintroduction to Yellowstone National Park.
Long-term goals of the project are to identify the impacts that wolves have on
their main prey, elk; document evolutionary responses of wolves and elk
following wolf reintroduction; and quantify the effects of wolves on community-
level interactions in the park. In the final five years of a planned ten-year
study, the investigators will follow individually marked wolves and elk to
determine how and why wolf-elk interactions fluctuate over time, the effects of
these fluctuations on wolf traits and vital rates, and how wolves, grizzly
bears, and cougars interact either synergistically or antagonistically to
influence elk mortality rates. By examining changes in predator-prey dynamics
continuously since wolf reintroduction, the project is assembling data that are
unique in the history of large predator restoration.

The broader impacts of this ongoing project have been, and will continue to be,
extraordinary in large part because apex predators readily capture the public's
attention. Results of the project are routinely covered by international media.
Films, books for popular audiences, professional art exhibits, and museum
exhibits have all been developed on the Yellowstone wolves and their impacts.
Results of the project will continue to be critical to effective management of
large predators as well as of endangered or threatened species. Results have
also been incorporated into the Yellowstone National Park's interpretive
programs, which annually reach over 250,000 park visitors. Finally, the project
serves as the basis for graduate dissertation projects, has engaged over 70
aspiring scientists in field research, and supports undergraduate training
through direct involvement in an exciting, high-profile project.