* 1245527
* Transforming Undergraduate STEM Education Through Development of Novel Cyberinfrastructure for General Chemistry eLearning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* John Brennan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This 24-month, TUES-Type1 project at Rutgers University New Brunswick is
developing a novel cyberinfrastructure resource that provides General Chemistry
1 and 2 students an on-line environment for interactive, self-guided development
of analytic problem solving skills. Known as GCeLS, for General Chemistry
eLearning System, the project is organizing relational databases around a
'critical skills network' that serves as a central web connecting all elemental
problem-solving steps. GCeLS is being developed to deliver custom exercises with
tunable levels of difficulty and breadth of required skills. The interactive
environment is incorporating deep feedback mechanisms through hints, guided
solutions, and teaching modules. GCeLS is also providing a mechanism to track
student data that can be used to assess mastery both by an individual student
and by the instructor. The system is being engineered to allow instructors
detailed control over problem delivery for either on-line homework assignments
or to be used as a personalized study tool. By using an anytime, anywhere
electronic resource to enable students to master commonly encountered challenges
in General Chemistry, the project is enabling instructors to use limited face-
to-face time with students to develop more deeply, the engaging concepts and
challenges in chemistry. The enhanced classroom interactions with students is
leading to a better educational experience of students in General Chemistry, and
is leading to increased success, better retention, and more STEM majors. The
transformational resource being developed by the project can be utilized by many
institutions and even adapted to other disciplines. The project's evaluation is
focusing on the impact GCeLS has on both student learning of and attitudes
towards chemistry, and the nature of faculty instruction, and will have up to
120 students in each of the treatment and paired control groups. Pre- and post-
test scores on select content areas and final exams results are being used to
document impact on student learning of course content as well as degree of
knowledge and skills transfer to other areas. SALG (Student Assessment of
Learning Gains) surveys are used to assess changes in students' attitude towards
chemistry. Pre- and post-surveys as well as structured interviews are informing
the project about how faculty use the information provided by GCeLS to inform
their instruction and student office hour visits.