* 1245488
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Expanding Connectivity to Campus-Wide Resources for Computational Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Kenneth Powell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 486,900.00

The University of Michigan has a long history of collaborative computational
resources supporting research and education. Such resources include high-
performance computaitonal clusters, data storage and archival systems, and
visualization resources. This project improves connectivity between these
systems internally and between these systems and the University's collaborators
in the US and around the globe. Resources with improved connectivity include
Nyx, a shared-tenancy high performance cluster; Flux, a University-wide shared
compute cluster; and the UM 3D Visulation Lab, an interdisciplinary service
facility used in part for visual exploration of large scientific data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's support of improved network
connectivity between these assets and the broader Internet supports a broad
swath of computationally-enabled scientific explorations, including the
following examples. Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences faculty at Michigan
are using Flux and the UM3D lab to explore climate change. Chemical Engineering
faculty at Michgian are using Nyx and the UM3D Lab to develop "designer
structures" at the molecular level. Physics faculty at Michigan and elsewhere
will be better able to explore cosmological impacts of dark matter, as well as
delve into the fundamental partical physics with data from the Large Hadron
Collider in Geneva. In addition to these fundamental scientific advances, the
infrastructure improvements also play a role in the training of undergraduate
and graduate students across the University and beyond, through distance
learning efforts, in fields&lt;br/&gt;from planetary weather through
computational science as a discipline unto itself.