* 1245000
* EAGER: Tuning Orbital Order in Nickelate Superlattices with Atomic Layer-by-Layer Growth using Laser Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Xiaoxing Xi, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2015
* USD 140,125.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The mechanism that leads to the high temperature
superconductivity in a family of layered copper oxides has been an active area
of research since its discovery in 1986. Recently, it has been predicted
theoretically that the electronic structure in the high temperature
superconducting cuprates can be realized in lanthanum nickelate when it is
sandwiched between insulating oxide such as lanthanum aluminate in the so-called
superlattices. Both the lanthanum nickelate and lanthanum aluminate layers need
to be very thin, just two atomic layers. Proving or disproving this prediction
can not only help understand the mechanism of high temperature
superconductivity, but potentially lead to discovery of new high temperature
superconductors in cuprates, nickelates, and other material systems. The goal of
this project is to fabricate the nickelate superlattices by atomic layer-by-
layer growth using laser molecular beam epitaxy and measure their electronic
structure properties and superconductivity to test the theoretical prediction.
Success of the project can significantly advance the knowledge in the areas of
strongly correlated transition metal oxides, materials by design, and nanoscale
engineering of oxide heterostructures. The project supports a female graduate
student for her Ph.D. degree, thus directly broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This EAGER
grant focuses on tuning orbital order in nickelate superlattices by atomic
layer-by-layer growth using laser molecular beam epitaxy. Recently, it has been
predicted theoretically that using reduced dimensionality and epitaxial strain
the electronic structure in the high-Tc superconducting cuprates can be realized
in lanthanum nickelate by sandwiching it between insulating oxide such as
lanthanum aluminate in superlattices where each period contains one unit cell of
each materials. Doping could then induce superconductivity. No experimental
proof has been reported despite numerous efforts and the validity of the
theoretical prediction has been questioned. This project uses a new film
deposition technique, laser molecular beam epitaxy from separate oxide targets,
to achieve the atomic layer-by-layer growth of the nickelate superlattices. This
approach is more appropriate than the growth techniques that have been attempted
in tuning the orbital order and inducing superconductivity in the nickelate
superlattices. The success of the project can significantly advance the
knowledge in the areas of strongly correlated transition metal oxides, materials
design, and nanoscale engineering of oxide heterostructures. The project
provides multidisciplinary training for a female graduate student, directly
broadening the participation of an underrepresented group.