* 1245496
* Virtual Online Tensile Strength Testing Simulation
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Steven Wendel, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 02/28/2018
* USD 242,500.00

The project is 1) developing an open source, virtual, online tensile testing
laboratory simulation; 2) conducting research to compare the costs and learning
outcomes for using on-site, hands-on tensile testing equipment versus an online
simulation; 3) creating close industry ties through blended learning
opportunities for students; and 4) disseminating the simulation via faculty
development. The project is testing the hypothesis that online learning improves
outcomes and simultaneously reduces instructional costs. It is bridging a gap
between existing tensile testing software products that are either too simple or
too complex. The project is using a comprehensive assessment of student
learning, along with a quasi-experimental research design, to determine the
impact of the simulator on students and their instructors compared to
traditional learning without the simulator.

Although the proof of concept in the project pertains to a common engineering
learning activity, the research is applicable to other engineering areas and
other disciplines. The project includes activities that can be easily adopted by
other institutions with little cost. The open-source tool being developed will
be disseminated to undergraduate and high school faculty members who teach
strength of materials courses, thus increasing the likelihood of adoption.
Access to a virtual lab will allow groups with limited resources to attain
desired learning outcomes without large capital investments for tensile strength
testing equipment.