* 1245482
* Development and Implementation of Interactive Virtual Laboratories to Help Students Learn Threshold Concepts in Thermodynamics
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Milo Koretsky, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 03/31/2019
* USD 199,995.00

This project is developing, implementing, and evaluating Interactive Virtual
Laboratories in thermodynamics. For each of six threshold concepts that have
been identified, a corresponding Interactive Virtual Laboratory is being
constructed. Each laboratory is providing students a scaffolded set of
activities based on the "predict-observe-explain" technique. The activities are
providing multiple representations that allow students to relate the macroscopic
thermodynamic properties and processes to molecular behavior. These materials
are being piloted in the studio classes of three different courses delivered to
chemical, biological, and environmental engineering students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Threshold concept theory serves as a basis for targeted
content development, and the assessment and evaluation is informing further
development of this learning theory. Identification and validation of threshold
concepts is informing thermodynamics instructors and curricular designers and is
helping them better craft learning materials and instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These Interactive Virtual Laboratories are being made
available to engineering faculty through the American Institute of Chemical
Engineers Concept Warehouse (another NSF-supported project) and as an instructor
resource on the publisher's website of the widely used textbook, Engineering and
Chemical Thermodynamics. Additionally, Interactive Virtual Laboratories are
providing a central component to a variety of web-enabled instruction systems.
This learning environment fits into the broad category of inquiry-based
activities that have been shown to reduce gender-based differences in
performance in STEM.