* 1245832
* e-TALK: Enhanced Teaching Assistance to Aid Learning with Kitlabs
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Michael Paesler, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,998.00

e-TALK: Enhanced Teaching Assistance to aid Learning with Kitlabs

North Carolina State University is developing a new version of "kitlabs" for
physics instruction as a solution to the problem of increasing numbers of
students and decreasing availability of laboratory sections. Kitlabs are course-
complementary educational activities with small collections of equipment and
precise instructions designed to lead students through hands-on laboratory
exercises in remote, and student-selected, settings. The novel and potentially
transformative aspect of these kitlabs is that they are designed to leverage
modern personal electronic technologies such as smart phones and personal
computers to facilitate data acquisition and productive, synchronous teacher-
student interaction, circumventing two well-cited disadvantages of previous
kitlab-type efforts.

Kitlabs and traditional in-lab systems are being studied comparatively with the
goal of transferring and disseminating pedagogically successful laboratory
instruction methods to a wider audience of faculty and students. The study will
include observations and analysis of student-student and student-teaching
assistant (TA) interactions. Observation methods include use of the Physics
Department's Quantitative Education Research Laboratory, which allows for video-
and audio- capture of student interactions as they perform laboratory exercises
while in synchronous electronic contact with a TA. This project, which goes by
the acronym eTALK, documents how students: i) work with the kitlabs; ii)
synchronously interact with TA instructors; iii) collect, analyze, manipulate,
and present data; and iv) collaborate and input their results. Student learning
outcomes are also assessed using a specially developed instrument targeted at
gains in laboratory skills and attitudes.

Objectives of the project include creating a prototype eTALK TA Training Guide,
disseminating preliminary project results, and developing a long-term plan to
foster the adoption of eTALK across a range of STEM educational settings across
the U.S. In addition to the pedagogical advantages to any institution that
incorporates eTALK labs into their STEM efforts, eTALK simultaneously enables
departments to use limited facility resources more cost-effectively and helps to
buffer students from the consequences of austerity measures on campuses that are
struggling the most financially.