* 1245077
* Laboratories Engaging Students in the Application and Process of Science (LEAPS) in College-Level Introductory Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Scott Mateer, ARMSTRONG STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/28/2017
* USD 184,557.00

This project implements discovery-based laboratory modules in a large, multi-
section introductory biology course at two Armstrong campuses, the main
Armstrong Atlantic campus and the satellite Liberty Center Campus. The lab
modules involve students in applying a suite of molecular biology techniques to
screen Wolbachia from insects gathered by the students. It is based on a set of
modules originally developed for high school laboratories and then up-graded and
tested, by the PIs, in an honors introductory biology laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project represents one of the
many approaches being introduced into student laboratories that give students a
taste of being part of the scientific process at the same time it benefits the
scientific community by adding to an important data base. Laboratories are being
used to help reinforce understanding of basic biology principles that are
difficult for students to understand. In addition students are learning to work
in collaborative groups to develop hypotheses, complete literature searches,
make observations, perform cellular/molecular techniques, use laboratory
equipment, collect and analyze data, make conclusions, work on presentation
skills, and formulate future questions. The proposed exercises also provide
opportunities to develop mathematics, chemistry, computer science, and
bioinformatics skills, further engaging students in the interdisciplinary nature
of biology. The work is being coordinated with initiatives started through
existing awards in two other NSF programs, a Noyce and a STEP award, resulting
in much greater efficiency in use of resources. Workshops will be developed and
offered to acquaint faculty (~25) with the laboratory modules and their delivery
to the students. A rigorous evaluation plan will be implemented to assess
student and faculty gains from the LEAPS project and results will be
disseminated through appropriate educational journals. All course and workshop
materials will be available for other institutions to adopt thereby increasing
the impact of the project on the greater STEM teaching and learning
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Successful implementation in 35
lab sections per year at two Armstrong campuses is demonstrating the feasibility
of transference of individual modules or the entire lab sequence to similar
institutions, especially those with urban, open-enrollment student populations.
Novel laboratory exercises and overall project results are being disseminated in
peer-reviewed journals and at educational conferences. Several measurable
outcomes have been incorporated into the evaluation plan and therefore inform
the STEM community about the benefits of engaging large numbers of introductory-
level students in discovery-based activities.