* 1245625
* Validating Proof Comprehension Tests in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Keith Weber, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The primary means for teaching advanced mathematics is
through the presentation of mathematical proofs. However, both in the classroom
and in mathematics education research, students' understanding of these proofs
is rarely assessed. The goal of this project is to develop a student
comprehension assessment model of theoretical proofs. Specifically, the project
is engaged in generating and validating proof comprehension tests for three
proofs in a transition-to-proof course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three phases. The first stage is developing open-ended proof comprehension
assessment questions for three proofs using the Mejia-Ramos model. A small
sample of undergraduate mathematics majors answers these questions in a semi-
structured interview and their responses go into the creation a large repository
of multiple-choice assessment items. In the second stage a large sample of
mathematics majors completes these multiple-choice tests for the three proofs.
Using their responses, items that correlate highly with other items in the tests
are dropped using a form of factor analysis to produce a reduced version of the
multiple-choice tests for these proofs. Finally, a small sample of undergraduate
mathematics majors is interviewed as they complete both the open-ended and the
short multiple-choice versions of the assessment tests. This stage seeks to
verify that the multiple-choice tests are a valid indicator of the test taker's
understanding of the three proofs. The result of this process is expected to be
three short, multiple-choice proof comprehension tests that are valid indicators
of students' understanding of the proofs being
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Better assessments of the extent
to which STEM students comprehend the proofs they read are needed to improve the
teaching and learning of proof at the university level. The failure of some
university students to successfully understand mathematical proofs prevents them
from entering STEM disciplines. In the particular case of prospective teachers
of mathematics, this failure prevents them from gaining the content knowledge
they need to teach mathematics effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation
of proof comprehension tests serves urgent needs for mathematicians, mathematics
majors, and mathematics education researchers. For mathematics faculty,
incomplete assessment of students' comprehension of proofs means they do not
receive feedback both on the general quality of their lectures and on specific
areas of proofs that students may have found confusing. For mathematics majors,
assessment of their comprehension of the proofs they are asked to complete
encourages them to invest time in studying these proofs; and meaningful
assessment items direct their attention to important aspects of the proof that
they may not ordinarily consider. Valid proof comprehension tests are also
useful to researchers in undergraduate mathematics education by allowing them to
measure the effectiveness of different teaching techniques related to proof
presentation and systematically address questions about what aspects of proof
students find confusing.