* 1246050
* Fusing Rapid Manufacturing with 3D-Virtual Facility and Cyber Tutor System into Engineering Education to Cultivate Technical Success
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Ryan Wicker, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 06/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The project is redesigning and developing a set of Cyber Based Rapid
Manufacturing (CBRM) related courses covering the topics of quick response,
additive and advanced manufacturing, and establishing a Cyber Based Rapid
Manufacturing Lab with virtual facilities to serve academic engineering programs
and to support the development of multidisciplinary educational activities. The
project goals include: 1) incorporate applied research themes in rapid
manufacturing and technology into lecture and laboratory classes to engage
students as active participants in web based courses; 2) Implement the most up-
to-date technologies in virtual reality, 3D image and rapid manufacturing
production systems to improve the learning environment; and 3) recruit high
school students, especially minority and women, through web-accessible courses
and laboratories, to increase their awareness and participation in science and
engineering by stimulating their interest from early stages.

The project enhances undergraduate engineering education in advanced
manufacturing technologies by developing a CBRM curriculum with hybrid
instructional approach and by appraising its effectiveness on student learning.
The development of virtual facilities has great potential to resolve the issue
of lacking manufacturing resources, particularly in remote areas. The program
helps to produce well-prepared students with high-tech skills in the areas of
automation, production and rapid manufacturing technologies and can serve as a
national model for teaching network-based manufacturing.