* 1246903
* Collaborative Research: Deep megathrust conditions by comparing seismicity rates and source parameters with tremor, slow slip, and the Mw 7.4 Ometepec, Mexico earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Susan Bilek, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2016
* USD 161,726.00

Recent discoveries that demonstrate the wide spectrum of fault slip along
subduction megathrust faults prompt important questions about the relationships
between large earthquakes, small earthquakes, slow slip, and non-volcanic
tremor. In many areas, the deep portion of the fault that lies at the transition
between the fast and slower slip mechanisms is out of view, sitting offshore,
away from nearby monitoring. However, an existing seismic and geodetic network
along the Oaxacan segment of the Middle America subduction zone provides an
excellent dataset for use to quantify earthquake occurrence and source
parameters in an area that has experienced M &gt; 7 earthquakes, tremor, and
slow slip events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address several
hypotheses related to the spatial and temporal relationships between slow slip,
tremor, and large earthquakes. These include determining 1) if a sharp
transition in seismicity characteristics exists along the megathrust as events
approach the downdip seismicity limit and the area of episodic tremor and slip,
2) if slow slip events produce stress loading in adjacent regions that lead to
increased seismicity rates and changes in source characteristics of small
earthquakes, and 3) if large earthquakes are associated with temporal changes in
earthquake occurrence and source characteristics in adjacent regions due to
stress changes. We will employ several seismological techniques, including the
construction of a uniform event catalog, focal mechanism determination, rupture
duration and stress drop calculations, and investigation of seismicity rates
along specific fault patches, to address these
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the project revolve around
a better understanding of the deep roots of the earthquake-producing region of
the Mexican subduction zone, with applicability to other global subduction
zones. Thus the results of the study will produce societal benefits related to
earthquake hazards, particularly in providing information needed for improving
temporal variations in probabilistic seismic hazard. The outcome of this project
will include data products disseminated to a wide international community
through meeting presentations, publications, and archival in the relevant data
repositories. The project will train 4 US based graduate and undergraduate
students as well as provide capacity-building seismological training for 2
Mexican students. Another outcome of the project will be 2 educational lessons
that will be disseminated through online educational activity portals.