* 1246918
* Resolving Issues of Hydroxyl (OH) Measurements and Oxidation Chemistry in Forest Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 283,473.00

Understanding atmospheric oxidation chemistry is critical for establishing the
links between atmospheric composition, air quality, and climate change. Hydroxyl
(OH) is the atmosphere's primary oxidant. Comparisons of measurements and models
provide evidence that OH and hydroperoxyl (HO2) chemistry is generally
understood in clean, remote environments, but less well understood in cities
when nitrogen oxide (NOx) levels are high. Other evidence indicates that OH is
most poorly understood in low-NOx, high biogenic VOC (BVOC) environments,
particularly forests where measured OH has greatly exceeded modeled OH by a
factor of 2 to 10, well beyond the typical ±30% 2ó
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These forest environments are challenging
the models, for which new oxidation mechanisms are being designed, and the
measurements, which can have interferences and be near their detection limits. A
previously suspected interference was recently confirmed for the combination of
O3, OH, and alkenes in the Principal Investigator's (PI) laser-based Ground-
based Hydrogen Oxides Sensor (GTHOS) by adding the ability to detect OH by
chemical removal of OH (called OHchem) to the usual method wavelength modulation
on and off an OH spectral line (called OHwave). Laboratory tests demonstrate
that OHchem is the real OH for GTHOS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute measurements of OHchem, OHwave, HO2, alkene-based RO2, and OH
reactivity to a multi-investigator study that will provide a consistent picture
of the isoprene oxidation mechanism, demonstrate that OHchem is the real OH, and
determine if the GTHOS OH interference is caused by an atmospherically relevant
intermediate species. The PIs will also find the reason that GTHOS appears to be
much more sensitive to this O3/OH/alkene interference than other OH-measuring
instruments and to reduce that sensitivity if the interference is not
atmospherically relevant. These goals of this two-year study will be
accomplished primarily by participating with other groups who are proposing
separately in a Focused Isoprene-chemistry eXperiment (FIX), which has a field
component as part of the Secondary Organic Aerosol Study and a laboratory
environmental chamber component. The results of this research will lead to
improved oxidation mechanisms in the models that are used for regional and for
global air quality, thus providing better guidance to policy makers.