* 1246038
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: The Future of Research and Collaboration: The Dedicated Science Network
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Andrew Sherman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 496,253.00

This project is developing two new major components for Yale's network
infrastructure: a dedicated, 100-Gigabits-per-second Science Network, and a
Science DMZ. In combination with a high-speed connection to the national
Internet2 network, these components are designed to enable collaborations
involving Yale scientists and researchers throughout the world on computation-
and data-intensive research projects in astronomy, climatology, genomics, and
other scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The on-campus Science Network
provides a 100-fold increase in speed over the networks currently in use. Using
it, Yale scientists, from their desktops, can rapidly access both multi-Petabyte
network-attached data storage facilities, and any of the university's high
performance computing clusters. Such a dramatic increase in network speed is a
game changer for scientists who regularly deal with Terabyte-size and larger
datasets, reducing transfer times from many hours to just a few minutes. The
addition of the Science DMZ enables researchers to share results outside Yale
and to access national data repositories and computational infrastructure such
as XSEDE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on Yale's prior investments
in both the InCommon authentication framework (which allows external
collaborators to use network credentials from their home institutions to access
resources at Yale), and IPv6 technology (which allows broader and more efficient
access to networked devices). The investigators are using perfSONAR appliances
to collect performance data that will allow them to optimize and manage the
topology of the network infrastructure and validate the performance gains it
delivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In essence, this project is
creating a virtual facility for scientific collaboration and data sharing that
will allow new research communities and collaborations to form within its walls.
By leveraging the Science Network and Science DMZ, Yale will be able to pioneer
new modes of research collaboration; host and serve up "big data" scientific
data stores; and work with institutions in its region, across the nation, and
around the world to broaden the opportunities for scientific research, and
support excellent education and training for students at all levels.