* 1246826
* Asymmetries in Geomagnetic Field Structure and Variability
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Catherine Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 270,000.00

The main source of the geomagnetic field is a self-sustaining dynamo produced by
fluid motions in Earth's liquid outer core. This magnetic field provides
protection from the solar wind, helps retain volatile parts of the atmosphere,
and protects Earth's surface from the worst impacts of space weather. Direct
observations of the geomagnetic field back to 1590 AD show significant
geographic variability in its time variations. The southern hemisphere is more
active than the north, and since the mid nineteenth century strong variability
has been particularly focused around the region known as the South Atlantic
Magnetic Anomaly prompting questions about its longevity, relation to long term
geomagnetic field strength, and consequences for space weather and radiation
exposure for low-earth orbiting satellites. This proposal will study spatial and
temporal changes in the internal magnetic field by mapping the time-varying
geomagnetic field over the past 100 thousand years. This will be accomplished
using globally distributed paleomagnetic records drawn from high accumulation
rate sediments and from volcanic rocks. The proposed work is of importance in a
broad range of geophysical disciplines, addressing fundamental assumptions used
in paleomagnetic work, providing results of specific relevance to geodynamo
modeling, and to general seismological, geochemical, and mineral physics studies
of the core-mantle boundary regions and deep interior. The PI has a track record
of training and mentoring junior scientists, and plans to continue significant
service in the area of developing community databases, as well as making
available geomagnetic field models, animations, and related products.

Existing field studies extending back 10 thousand years show greater geomagnetic
variability in the southern hemisphere than in the north, and lower average
field strength. The persistence of this asymmetry on longer time scales has not
been confirmed, although there are hints that it occurs in lava flow records
back to 2 Ma. Persistent asymmetry would have important consequences for the
geocentric axial dipole hypothesis widely used in paleomagnetism and plate
tectonic reconstructions. Current time-varying global field models extending
beyond 10~ka are limited to axial dipole field variations or to short snippets
surrounding the Laschamp excursion (at 40ka) and the most recent reversal (780
ka), and cannot be used to study potential long term spatial asymmetries.
However, dipole variations show an interesting temporal asymmetry in growth and
decay rates for the geomagnetic dipole at periods longer than 25 ky, suggesting
the possibility of episodic periods of subcritical dynamo activity where the
field is dominated by diffusive processes, followed by transient periods of
strong growth of the axial dipole. A time-varying geomagnetic field model for
the period 0-100 ka will be constructed. Data and modeling results will be used
to (1) test whether hemispheric asymmetry in secular variation and the time-
averaged field persists on this time scale; (2) conduct a detailed study of
differences in growth versus decay rates for the axial dipole at better temporal
resolution than currently available from PADM2M; (3) improve knowledge of the
geomagnetic power spectrum at 1-50~ky periods.