* 1246130
* Development and Implementation of a Novel Approach to Teaching Engineering Fundamentals to Engineering Students at CSULA
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Crist Khachikian, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,304.00

The objective of this TUES Type 1 project is to develop, implement, and assess
an outcomes-based integrated core curriculum for sophomore-level engineering
students at California State University Los Angeles (CSULA). This new sophomore
curriculum is comprised of interactive, workshop-style courses and designed to
transform the student learning experience into an engaging student-centered one.
The redesigned core engineering curriculum is aimed at addressing long-term
goals of increasing the retention and improve the academic performance of CSULA
engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional pedagogical format
is replaced by a series of laboratory courses and clinics that provide the
students with practice working through engineering problems collaboratively with
faculty, teaching assistants, and peers. The curriculum design is driven by
outcomes established to help engineering majors acquire a strong foundation in
core competencies in engineering analysis, applications, design and modeling,
communication, and professionalism. The curriculum also is designed to provide
cohesiveness between the different courses so that students can focus on common
topics from the perspective of each of the five competency areas and see the
interconnectedness of the material they are learning in the core courses. This
core engineering curriculum has the potential to serve as a model for other
similar institutions whose students encounter the "sophomore slump." The
curriculum is mapped to ABET outcomes, making it transferable to similar
engineering programs at other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
targets the some of the challenges underrepresented minority (URM) students
encounter in their pathway to graduation in engineering at CSULA, where about
55% of the students are from URM groups. Results and findings are shared with
other institutions in the CSU system, as well as with neighboring community
colleges.