* 1246554
* Hydrological Control of Particle Entrainment and Nitrogen Cycling in Beach Aquifer Mixing and Reaction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* William Ullman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 510,544.00

Sandy beaches are valuable recreational and economic resources in coastal
regions, and also provide important but often underappreciated biogeochemical
and ecological services. Beach aquifers are important hydrological interfaces
between land and sea through which terrestrial contaminants dissolved in
groundwater pass prior to reaching the ocean. Within these aquifers are reactive
zones that can moderate chemical fluxes; understanding of the processes that
control such reactivity is essential for predicting the conditions that promote
biogeochemical and ecological benefits. The objectives of this work are to gain
new understanding of the role that physical processes of fluid flow and organic
particle transport have in maintaining the reactivity of beach aquifers and to
assess the potential impact of anthropogenic and natural changes on contaminant
loads to the ocean. This field, laboratory, and modeling study will (1) assess
the driving mechanisms, patterns, and rates of fluid flow and associated organic
particle incorporation into sandy beaches as a result of tide and wave action,
(2) characterize the amount, nature, and reactivity of organic matter in beach
sediments and porewater, and (3) determine spatial and temporal variations in
the concentrations and fluxes of nutrients to and through the beach resulting
from flow, mixing, and respiration of particulate and dissolved organic
substrates. The proposed work will fill a gap in knowledge that will allow
inference of potential reactivity from the physical characteristics of beach
aquifer systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The predictive capacity developed from
the scientific results can be transferred to other systems and processes (such
as oil spill remediation) and will enable prediction of potential effects of
human influences and longer-term changes in sea level and climate on the
ecological services of beach aquifer reactors. The research will aid beach
managers in assessing the ecological value of sandy beaches and the need for
management activities to maintain ecosystem services. The work may also help
managers concerned with coastal eutrophication make more accurate estimates of
the nutrient loads to estuarine and coastal waters based on easily assessed
physical characteristics of shorelines. The research will have educational
impacts, providing interdisciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate
students interested in increasingly inter- and multi-disciplinary environmental
issues. The field sites will be developed into hands-on training sites for
hydrogeology courses at the University of Delaware (UD) and for the UD TIDE Camp
for high school students.