* 1246395
* GENSIPS'12 Conference: Fostering Interdisciplinary Research and Education in Computational Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Yue Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Computational systems biology is a highly inter-disciplinary research area that
seeks to understand interplays of molecules and cells in time and space to
determine functioning of a complex biological system using sophisticate
mathematical and statistical tools. Fostering a new generation of computational
biologists that possess the interdisciplinary expertise of molecular biology and
computational science will significantly impact future biological and biomedical
research and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IEEE Workshop on Genomic Signal
Processing and Statistics, or GENSIPS, is a workshop sponsored by the IEEE
Signal Processing Society. The goals of GENSIPS 2012 are 1) to address the
systems biology issues in the emerging omics fields, especially the next-
generation sequencing technologies; 2) to significantly increase the
participation of graduate students and post-doctoral researchers, especial woman
and minority students from signal processing, computer science, biostatistics,
and biological science community. This request for fund from NSF will provide
travel awards to qualified graduate students and doctoral researchers to support
them to present their research papers. Particularly, 20-30% of the awards will
be allocated to woman and minority students. Ultimately, GENSIPS 2012 will
contribute to fostering student education on computational systems biology.