* 1246469
* Small Business ERC Collaborative Opportunity to Speed Implementation of CASA Phased Array Ideas to Market
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Philip Kelly, FIRST RF Corporation
* Fixed Amount Award
* Dana L. Denick
* 01/31/2016
* USD 199,975.00

Practical large-scale deployments of networks of dozens or hundreds of weather
radars will require a commercially-available small radar technology that can be
acquired, installed on existing infrastructure and maintained at low cost. FIRST
RF believes that electronically scanned phased array technology is the essential
enabling technology in this context since such radars can be deployed on the
sides of buildings and towers operated with very low recurring maintenance
costs. One of the challenges associated with phased arrays is long term system
calibration. Calibration is imperative to maintain optimum operation because
phased array antennas comprise of many RF electronic components requiring
precise control to yield high gain antenna beam
steering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIRST RF Corporation is partnering with the CASA
Engineering Research Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere
(University of Massachusetts Amherst) to develop and improve technology for
observing, understanding, predicting, and responding to hazardous weather
events. Together, FIRST RF and CASA desire to incorporate built-in-calibration
into the Phase-Tilt weather radar&lt;br/&gt;based on our collaboratively
designed phased array radar platform, and utilize the new capabilities to
collect high-fidelity data to research the effects of weather conditions on
overall system performance and calibration functionality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposal are to: (1) Improve performance
of our existing phased array technology by adding built-in calibration
functionality; (2) Reduce time and cost of repairs by identifying specific
components that have fallen out of specification, and reporting specific repairs
needed, and; (3) Utilize the new built-in-calibration hardware to research the
effects of rainfall conditions on loss and depolarization. Through this work the
vision of the PIs is to provide affordable and high-performance radar platforms
to produce high resolution data for research, education, and ultimately, public
safety. The amount of data produced will provide many years of research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students alike, and the data
products from that research will not only aid in the understanding of the
mechanisms of weather formation and prediction, but also directly aid in making
time-sensitive critical decisions about weather events that impact lives.