* 1246547
* Evaluating Sustainable Disposal Options for Compostable Biopolymers
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Amy Landis, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 308,405.00

1066658 (Landis). The aim of the proposed research is to identify the optimal
disposal options and infrastructure for compostable bio-based polymers based on
each of the three pillars of sustainability. To this end, the research team will
quantify the life cycle environmental impacts of different disposal options
(environment), evaluate organizational (society) and economic barriers
(economy), quantify stakeholders? willingness to pay for infrastructure
(economy), assess consumers? disposal habits (environment) and evaluate methods
to alter disposal habits (society). These factors will be used to quantify the
environmental end of life profile for biopolymers and to contribute to the
development of compostable biopolymer infrastructure. The results of the study
will contribute to the scientific understanding of infrastructure development
for biopolymers, both from the perspective of best management practices,
barriers to infrastructure change, and optimal disposal for compostable
biopolymers. In addition, the study will result in a comprehensive analysis of
consumer disposal habits in the food services industry and will identify optimum
disposal scenarios that result in minimum environmental impact while maximizing
ease of implementation through stakeholder based life cycle assessment (SBLCA).
The research will contribute significantly to advances in methodological
development of novel, integrated approaches to assess the tradeoffs and
sustainability of a set of alternatives. The results of the project are targeted
to aid in the fundamental development and understanding of models that
incorporate aspects of human behavior and survey results into life cycle
assessment. The project will contribute to multiple avenues of broader impacts
from the proposed collaboration with Sustainable Pittsburgh and local businesses
to the PIs? plan for incorporation of the research into curriculum and
undergraduate research. Additionally, the PIs are collaborating with Shaler High
School and the Carnegie Science Center to create modules that address composting
and biopolymers in the environment. The collaboration with Sustainable
Pittsburgh will connect local companies to the proposed research. The
development of educational materials to be employed during waste audits at local
restaurants (e.g. literature and creative methods of sharing information on
composting) as well as the development of a Best Practices report and workshop
for Sustainable Pittsburgh will provide a unique opportunity for the research to
reach a broad range of consumers and business owners