* 1246144
* SBIR Phase I:  Lipogenic Strains for Production of Novel Plastic Monomers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Josh Silverman, Calysta BioSystems, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,968.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is designed to apply
modern bioengineering capabilities to the development of viable alternatives to
petroleum-derived plastics. Recent literature reports have identified a novel
class of bioplastics based on the monomer, ù-hydroxyfatty acids (ù-HFAs). In
addition to a variety of other interesting applications, the ù-HFA monomer can
be readily polymerized into a unique family of biopolyester plastics that
display properties similar to polyethylene, thus overcoming a key limitation
found with other bioplastics. In order for ù-HFAs to become a viable alternative
to current bioplastics, a scalable production process based on low-cost
renewable feedstocks must be developed. THis SBIR project will develop a novel
low-cost biological fermentation process for the large-scale production of
ù-HFAs based on work we recently reported in the Journal of the American
Chemical Society. In particular, our work represented the first demonstration of
the genetic engineering of a yeast strain (in this case, Candida tropicalis) to
allow for the selective and efficient enzymatic conversion of naturally-
occurring fatty acid oils to their corresponding ù-HFAs. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will help to improve availability of
bioplastics for broader commercial applications. Market adoption of current
bioplastics has been limited due to their high production costs and their
undesirable functional properties such as brittleness, high permeability,
rigidity and low melting points relative to petroleum plastics. The U.S. market
size for bioplastics in 2010 was approximately $350M and is currently growing at
17% per year. To date, bioplastics have been limited to niche markets such as
disposable biodegradable consumer items where cost and undesirable functional
properties can be offset by consumer demand for a biodegradable material. A few
examples of these application areas include catering items (crockery, cutlery,
bowls, etc.) and containers (bottles, cups, trays, etc.) particularly in health
food stores and restaurants. New bioplastics such as ù-HFAs with improved
characteristics may enable additional applications within the $106B/yr
polyethylene market. The majority of plastic components we depend upon every day
are comprised of non-biodegradable polyethylene, and many could benefit from
being derived from sustainable, renewable and lower cost resources/feedstocks.
Further, development of scalable biological production of plastics serves to
reduce petroleum dependence as well as providing a flexible platform for
production of next-generation materials.