* 1246935
* Applications of the State-of-the-Art Seismic Analysis Methods to the Island of Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Guoqing Lin, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2016
* USD 191,103.00

Hawaii is one of the most seismically active regions in the world and has been
serving as a natural laboratory for studying the interactions between seismic
and magmatic processes for the past few decades. We propose a two-year program
to apply the state of the art seismic analysis techniques that take advantage of
waveform cross-correlation to the Island of Hawaii to assess the fine-scale
near-source spatial and temporal volcanic structural variations and to improve
earthquake locations. The data to be used in the proposed research are the
digital seismic data from the USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory and temporary
seismic stations for about 150,000 earthquakes. The objective of this
application is to integrate seismic data of Hawaii to better understand the
nature of the near-source seismic parameters. In the proposed research, we will
pursue the following five specific tasks to the entire Island of Hawaii: (1) to
calculate both compressional and shear wave differential times by using waveform
cross-correlation, (2) to image the magmatic system using the most recent
tomography algorithm to a composite event data set, (3) to perform similar event
cluster analysis and cross-correlation relocation, (4) to estimate high-
resolution in situ Poisson's ratio using waveform data, and (5) to examine
temporal variations in seismic parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly
developed velocity models will be used to resolve conduits and magma chambers
and to improve absolute earthquake locations. In situ Poisson's ratios with
high-resolution will be of great help to track magma moving and estimate
fraction of partial melt. These results will better constrain earthquake
locations for a new relocation catalog based on waveform cross-correlation data.
Our results will address the following questions: (1) what will the simultaneous
inversions of the high-resolution three-dimensional (3-D) velocity models reveal
about the magmatic system and possible magma bodies? (2) What will the absolute
location constraints from 3-D velocity models tell us about the fault zones in
Mauna Loa and Kilauea? (3) What will the high-resolution in situ near-source
parameters estimated from waveform cross-correlation data reveal about the
spatial and temporal characteristics in the near-source region? (4) How do the
long-lasting seismic velocity variations in Hawaii compare to other regions? The
results from this study will generate a public database of information suitable
for the geology, tectonics, and volcanology communities.