* 1246376
* Small Business ERC Collaborative Opportunity to Develop a Biomass Conversion to Fatty Acids Platform
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Ka-yiu San, Technology Holding, LLC
* Fixed Amount Award
* Deborah Jackson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 178,720.00

Research and development work at the NSF Engineering Research Center for
biorenewable Chemicals (CBiRC) has identified a bio-process for conversion of
sugars to fatty acids as a platform technology. The fatty acid synthesis pathway
can serve as an extremely versatile platform for the production of a very
diverse class of chemicals. Due to rising demand and constrained supply, fatty
acids are currently produced from palm or coconut oils. Due to rising demand and
constrained supply, fatty acid prices have quadrupled in the last decade and are
projected to rise further. The proposed effort will enable a broad platform for
commercialization of various biomass-derived fatty acids and their derived
products. Such a platform will cater to many industry sectors including consumer
products, nutrition, personal care and polymers based upon carbon chain length
of the fatty acids. The proposed effort will focus upon commercialization of C14
and C16 fatty acids. Technology Holding LLC (small business) and Rice University
(CBiRC) have collaborated to develop and commercialize the patent-protected
biomass conversion to fatty acids and fatty acid derivatives platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed process utilizes patent-pending metabolically
engineered E. Coli culture to convert C6 sugars from biomass to fatty acids. The
metabolically engineered strains have shown to exhibit extremely promising
performance - these strains can produce fatty acids at a fatty acids/glucose
yield close to the maximum theoretical value and at good production rate. The
goal of the proposed collaboration is to translate the existing ERC platform
research into the marketplace by developing a hierarchy of fatty acid and
derivative products synthesis based upon yield and market price. The
commercialization effort will focus upon: (1) Demonstrating the intellectual
property protected fatty acid based platform technology via scale-up; (2)
Rapidly transitioning the fatty acid based platform technology to the
marketplace aligned with the translational goal of CBiRC and (3) Creating an
economically viable product portfolio from the platform.