* 1246001
* CC-NIE Integration: Innovations to Transition a Campus Core Cyberinfrastructure to Serve Diverse and Emerging Researcher Needs
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 987,019.00

The pace of scientific discovery has been rapid in recent years owing to
cyberinfrastructures that enable researchers to: (a) remotely access distributed
computing resources and big data sets, and (b) effectively collaborate with
remote peers, at a global-scale. However, wide-adoption of these advances has
been a challenge to researchers mainly due to limitations in traditional
cyberinfrastructure equipment, policies and engineering practices at campuses.

This project addresses the adoption challenges for researchers within The Ohio
State University (OSU), and for their collaborators at the state, national and
international levels. The project team is integrating advanced technologies
(e.g., 100Gbps connectivity, perfSONAR, OpenFlow, RoCE/iWARP) relevant to the
use cases of diverse OSU researchers in a "Science DMZ" environment. A 100Gbps
border router at OSU will be setup to connect to the state-funded OARnet-
Internet2 peered 100Gbps network in support of the use cases. The project will
investigate the tradeoffs to be balanced between researcher flow performance and
campus security practices. Project activities also involve wide-area network
experimentation to seamlessly integrate OSU's cyberinfrastructure and Science
DMZ with a remote campus (at University of Missouri) cyberinfrastructure. This
project will create and document the role of a "Performance Engineer on campus",
who will be the primary "keeper" and "help-desk" of the Science DMZ equipment,
and will function as a liaison with researchers and their collaborators to
configure wide-area cyberinfrastructures. Best-practices are to be published,
and open-source software applications will be developed for handling researcher
application flows in production networks across diverse science/engineering
disciplines and multiple university campuses.