* 1246173
* EAGER: Cyberinfrastructure for Atomistic Materials Science (CAMS)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Simon Phillpot, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

SUMMARY This award made on an EAGER proposal supports a novel pilot project to
develop a center that is responsive to the cyberinfrastructure needs of the
materials research community. The Center for Atomistic Materials Science will
focus on classical atomistic scale modeling. It will benefit the materials
science community by serving as a hub for the dissemination of information about
atomistic scale and related modeling methods. This two-year pilot project will
shape the center, generate interest within the community, and solicit input on
how the center should evolve from expert stakeholders.

The center will serve several stakeholders, including code developers, frequent
simulators, occasional simulators, and consumers of simulation results. In this
pilot stage, the focus will be on code developer and frequent simulators. The
PIs will hold town hall meetings at two technical society meetings each year to
generate interest in the center and solicit input that will shape its
development into a focal point of the community for cyberinfrastructure. The PIs
will also organize one focused workshop per year to enable the coordination of
activities among members of the atomistic materials simulation community. A set
of "Consumer Guides" for non-expert will be developed and disseminated to help
evaluate atomistic simulation methods, implementation, analysis methods and
results. Additionally, the center will work towards developing accepted
standards for community-wide codes and will develop and disseminate
methodologies for transforming codes currently used only locally into robust
codes with community-wide user bases. The evolving center will develop a
collection of "virtual samples" that will accelerate future atomistic
simulations of material microstructures by allowing users to by-pass the common,
though often difficult, step associated with building these structures by hand.
It will likewise develop a library of simulation tools for the preparation and
analysis of materials structures. The PIs will develop a long-term plan for a
community-driven, sustainable Cyberinfrastructure. The PIs will organize two
Schools through the emerging center - one in Winter at the University of Florida
and one in Summer at a location to be determined in consultation with the
advisory board.

The Schools will feature lectures by experts in the field and modules that will
illustrate strengths and weaknesses of approaches. Additionally, downloadable
mini-lectures will be created that will be available for viewing on the center
website and on YouTube. The center website will also include downloadable mini-
lectures aimed at a wide range of expertise, links to freely available codes,
moderated forums aimed at practicing atomistic simulators with frequently asked
questions.