* 1246170
* Collaborative Research:   Assessing the Antarctic Contribution to Sea-level Changes during the Last Deglaciation: Constraints from Darwin Glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Brenda Hall, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 185,068.00

Hall/1246170&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to reconstruct
past ice-surface elevations from detailed glacial mapping and dating of moraines
(using 14C dates of algae from former ice-marginal ponds and 10Be surface
exposure ages) in the region of the Darwin-Hatherton Glaciers in Antarctica in
order to try and resolve very different interpretations that currently exist
about the glacial history in the region. The results will be integrated with
existing climate and geophysical data into a flow-line model to gain insight
into glacier response to climate and ice-dynamics perturbations during the Late
Glacial Maximum (LGM) in Antarctica. The work will contribute to a better
understanding of both LGM ice thickness and whether or not there is any evidence
that Antarctica contributed to Meltwater Pulse (MWP)-1A a very controversial
topic in Antarctic glacial geology. The intellectual merit of the work relates
to the fact that reconstructing past fluctuations of the Antarctic Ice Sheet
(AIS) is critical for understanding the sensitivity of ice volume to sea-level
and climatic change. Constraints on past behavior help put ongoing changes into
context and provide a basis for predicting future sea-level rise. Broader
impacts include the support of two graduate and two undergraduate students, as
well as a female early-career investigator. Graduate students will be involved
in all stages of the project from planning and field mapping to geochronological
analyses, interpretation, synthesis and reporting. Two undergraduates will work
on lab-based research from the project. The project also will include visits to
K-12 classrooms to talk about glaciers and climate change, correspondence with
teachers and students from the field, and web-based outreach. This award has
field work in Antarctica.