* 1246920
* INSPIRE: Asynchronous communication, self-organization, and differentiation in human and insect networks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Whitney Tabor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,006,170.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition
Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, the Animal Behavior Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biology, and
the Dynamical Systems Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical &
Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate for Engineering.

The project explores the question of how the activities of individuals become
integrated into a smoothly functioning society: What are the dominant
mechanisms? How resilient are they? How do they depend on the properties of
individual society members? To this end, investigators from engineering,
biology, psychology and linguistics will work together to study bee colonies and
groups of humans to understand how organization and coordination emerges from
these multi-agent systems and the factors that influence their robustness and
resilience to perturbations. The project relies on quantitative observations of
the dynamic emergence of patterns of interaction and coordination using an
unprecedented, 24/7 monitoring system of a beehive as well as in groups of
humans under controlled conditions designed to distinguish between failed and
successful coordination. The investigators will pursue a combined theoretical,
experimental, and computational framework for characterizing the resultant
parallel and asynchronous communication systems. The work depends crucially on
the interdisciplinary framework and the direct involvement of content expertise
from the disciplines represented by the investigators. For example, the human
transportation network is designed to resemble the coordinated delivery of
nectar through a beehive, but with options for varying the number of different
materials transported, the size of arena, the flow rates of the materials, and
so on.

The investigators are exploring whether a comprehensive computational framework
can be discovered to understand, predict and prevent the collapse of very
different types of communities (bees and human networks). The research results
are expected to provide insight into how to manipulate the behavior of a complex
system, for example to address societal challenges associated with the collapse
of pollinating bee colonies or the destructive behavior that is often associated
with phases of social transition in groups of humans.