* 1246275
* Collaborative Research:  Antarctic ELF/VLF Observations of Q-bursts, Radio Atmospherics, and Energetic Particle Precipitation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Robert Moore, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2017
* USD 220,000.00

The overarching goal of this award is to quantitatively investigate lightning
and energetic particle precipitation from the Earth?s radiation belts using the
extremely and very low frequency (ELF/VLF, ~5 Hz?32 kHz) observations on the
Antarctic continent. A coordinated effort will fully characterize individual
lightning return strokes occurring in the Northern hemisphere while
simultaneously observing the associated ELF/VLF radio atmospheric (sferic) in
the Antarctic (and other global locations). A special effort will focus on a
class of large-amplitude ELF sferics known as Q-bursts in order to quantify
global ionospheric conditions and the characteristics of the causative lightning
flash. Narrowband VLF observations of lightning-induced electron precipitation
(LEP) will be simultaneously conducted in the Northern and Southern hemispheres
in order to validate a new LEP model that accounts for the lightning current
waveform and return stroke speed. Furthermore, this program critically evaluates
whether rocket-triggered lightning may be detected in the Antarctic, allowing
for controlled broadband ELF/VLF propagation studies, and whether it may produce
LEP in the conjugate hemisphere. The broader impacts of this award are in
identifying direct effects of space weather events for the studies by
atmospheric and space electricity research communities. The project introduces a
new platform from which to conduct controlled lightning-related ELF/VLF
experiments using rocket-triggered lightning in Florida, it provides real-time
access to experimental observations via the Internet, and it exposes the program
to youths through the operation of VLF receivers at high schools in the United
States. The dissemination of program results also takes the form of refereed
journal publications and conference presentations. The project will train
graduate students with the development and operation of the deployed
instruments, as well as with space weather science investigations. Use of these
data to validate space weather models can provide benefit to society as a whole.