* 1246482
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Price Elasticity of R&amp;D: Evidence From State Tax Policies
* SBE,NCSE
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2013
* Andrew Chang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 07/31/2013
* USD 0.00

In tax year 2008 the federal research and development (R&amp;D) tax credit paid
out over $8 billion to businesses, which was 7% of total federal expenditures on
research. The intent of the tax credit is to provide an incentive for firms to
raise their private level of R&amp;D funding. This project will investigate how
effective tax incentives are at increasing R&amp;D. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
evaluation is difficult because, while we can observe R&amp;D spending before
and after a tax policy change, we can only speculate on what R&amp;D would have
been without the tax policy change. Because policymakers implement tax
incentives in response to current and/or expected economic conditions, a simple
comparison of R&amp;D before and after a tax incentive is implemented will lead
to inaccurate inferences about the effects of the tax incentive. For example, if
R&amp;D in a given year is low, then policymakers may respond with a tax
incentive. While a rebound in the following year could be due to the tax
incentive, it might also reflect R&amp;D simply returning to its mean value.
Alternatively, policymakers might foresee a decline in R&amp;D and implement a
tax incentive to prevent the decline. Subsequently observing no change in
R&amp;D after the tax incentive takes place would be evidence supporting the
efficacy of the tax incentive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To correct for the
endogeneity of tax incentives, we will use state-level tax variation driven by
changes in the U.S. federal R&amp;D tax credit. While state governments are
attentive to state-level economic conditions when forming their idiosyncratic
state-level tax policies, the federal government sets a uniform national tax
policy and is less attentive to individual state economic conditions. In
addition, changes in the federal R&amp;D tax credit have differential impacts on
state-level tax incentives across states due to the interaction of federal and
state taxes. These two features imply a regression mode that can generate an
unbiased estimate of the effect of tax incentives on
R&amp;D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study will make several
important contributions, in addition to supporting the training of a doctoral
candidate. First, the project will create a dataset on state corporate tax laws
that will be more detailed than any existing dataset on state R&amp;D tax
incentives. These data will allow a descriptive analysis of how the overall tax
burden for R&amp;D has changed over time and across states/regions. Second, the
project will generate an unbiased estimate of how tax incentives affect R&amp;D.
The final contribution will be an estimate of the endogeneity bias driven by
self-selection of tax policies, which will help future economic research on tax
incentives and uncover evidence on mechanisms behind the implementation of tax
policies.