* 1246751
* Cities on Volcanoes 7: Advanced Understanding of Volcanic Hazard Mitigation for Graduate Students
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Sarah Fagents, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2013
* USD 25,785.00

This award will support the travel and participation of 20 US graduate students
in the Cities on Volcanoes (COV) conference to be held in Colima, Mexico during
November 2012. The aim of this conference is to break down the traditional
divisions between volcanologists, social scientists, emergency managers,
planners and engineers. The Cities on Volcanoes conference has a
multidisciplinary focus with themes and sessions planned to throw together
specialists and students in all of these disciplines that are involved in
understanding volcano hazards and their impacts on society. As such it is a
special opportunity for young scientists in disparate, yet related, disciplines
to learn and to build networks as a basis for their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference support award will provide 20
leading graduate students from the USA with an outstanding opportunity to build
and expand their professional networks across disciplines and international
boundaries. This meeting is particularly appropriate for scientists at the early
stages of their professional development. The student participants will meet a
wide set of professionals, including emergency managers, sociologists and
psychologists, planners, medical scientists, and economists. Learning to
surmount cultural and linguistic differences and understanding the need for
clear communication will be a feature of the meeting.