* 1246955
* Assessing the causes of slab seismicity through  dehydration, temperature and strain: A global approach
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Ninfa Bennington, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 106,637.00

The majority of Earth's seismicity is focused at subduction zones, either in the
shallow thrust zone or as intermediate-depth (~50 to 300 km depth) or deep (to
~600 km depth) slab seismicity. Intermediate-depth seismicity is commonly
thought to be caused by dehydration embrittlement, in which the dehydration of
hydrous minerals in the subducted crust or mantle increases the pore fluid
pressure in low-permeability rocks, allowing rocks to behave brittlely; although
recent studies have called this hypothesis into question due to a lack up
supporting laboratory observations. Double seismic zones are obvious in some
subducting slabs (e.g., Honshu), but their presence in other slabs is less clear
due to the relatively large errors in hypocentral locations relative to the
spacing between the two layers of seismicity, which varies among different
slabs. As the lower layer of seismicity is thought to be caused by the
dehydration of serpentine in the slab mantle, having a limited view of the
global prevalence of double seismic zones limits the constraints on slab mantle
serpentinization and dehydration. In this project, we will relocate teleseismic
earthquakes within 54 small arc sections and compare these seismicity
distributions with pre-existing 2D thermal and mineralogical models, with a
focus on the locations of greatest dehydration of slab minerals. The double-
difference relocation technique teletomoDD will be used with nested regional-
global 3D velocity models, which will significantly reduce scatter and improve
the absolute locations of earthquake hypocenters in comparison to existing
global catalogs. By better understanding intermediate-depth seismicity and its
relation to thermal and petrological models, we can gain insight to the
seismogenic processes in slabs and contribute to the understanding of six key
questions pertaining to subduction zones: 1) What phenomenon is responsible for
the majority of intermediate-depth seismicity? 2) Where are double seismic zones
observable? 3) In double seismic zones, what is responsible for the lower layer
of seismicity? 4) What controls the maximum depth of slab seismicity? 5) Is the
distribution of slab seismicity correlated with changes in volcanism? 6) Is
there a relationship between slab seismicity and changes in deep plate coupling?

The majority of Earth's seismicity is focused at subduction zones, where cold,
dense oceanic crust and mantle descend beneath a more buoyant plate, with the
ability of producing large earthquakes and volcanism. Seismicity occurs either
in the shallow thrust zone, or as intermediate-depth (~50 to 300 km depth) or
deep (to ~600 km depth) slab seismicity. The mechanisms that cause shallow
earthquakes are relatively well understood, whereas the cause of intermediate-
depth seismicity is less certain. This is due in part to the expected ductile
behavior of Earth materials at high pressures and temperatures, conditions that
are difficult to reproduce in the laboratory. However, by combining numerical
models of temperature and mineralogical reactions within subducting crust and
mantle to observations of seismicity, we can better understand what slab
conditions are most closely associated with observed seismicity. In this
project, we will relocate intermediate-depth earthquakes using techniques that
more accurately reproduce the paths of seismic wave propagation and reduce
errors in earthquake locations from existing global seismicity catalogs. We will
then comprehensively compare the distributions of slab seismicity with existing
temperature and mineralogical models to identify which particular reactions
contribute most to the creation of potentially large intermediate-depth
earthquakes.