* 1246407
* Linking Foraging Behaviors to Demography to understand Albatrosses Population Responses to Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Stephanie Jenouvrier, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 06/30/2018
* USD 605,543.00

Understanding the ecological consequences - present and future-of climate change
is a central question in conservation biology. The goal of this project is to
identify the effects of climate change on the Black-Browed Albatross, a seabird
breeding in the Southern Ocean. The Black-Browed Albatross exhibits remarkable
flight adaptations, using winds as an energy source to glide for long distances.
This is the basis of their foraging strategy, by which they obtain food for
themselves and their offspring. Climate change, however, is expected to modify
wind patterns over the Southern Ocean. This project will analyze the effect of
winds on life history traits (foraging behaviors, body conditions and
demographic traits), and the effects of these traits on populations. New
demographic models will provide the link between foraging behavior and the
physical environment, and evaluate the persistence of this population in the
face of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and predicting
population responses to climate change is important because the world?s climate
will continue to change throughout the 21st century and beyond. To help guide
conservation strategies and policy decisions in the face of climate change,
reliable assessments of population extinction risks are urgently needed. The
Black-Browed Albatross is considered endangered by the International Union for
Conservation of Nature due to recent drastic reductions in its population size.
This project will improve our understanding of the mechanisms by which climate
affects the life history and populations of Black-Browed Albatross to improve
prediction of extinction risks under future climate change.