* 1246977
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering the Structure and Evolution of North America's Cratonic Core
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Anthony Lowry, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 46,499.00

This project seeks to illuminate the formation, assembly and subsequent
evolution of the US mid-continent. Investigators at two universities and their
graduate and undergraduate students will examine composition of the mid-
continent crust and upper mantle. A novel combination of gravity and magnetic
data with seismic velocity ratios vP/vS estimated from seismic receiver function
data and velocity structure from surface wave and body wave tomography will be
used to establish variations in temperature as well as thickness and bulk
composition of multiple layers within the crust. The novel elements of these
efforts include development of a new approach to receiver function imaging using
parameter-domain cross-correlation and stacking, and coupling of the seismic
images to the potential field data via likelihood filters and velocity-density
relationships. Magnetic studies will focus also on understanding the physical
properties and tectonic implications of magnetically detected boundaries, with
particular emphases on a hidden middle Proterozoic geochemical and magnetic
boundary dividing the cratonic core of North America and also on the Tennessee-
Illinois-Kentucky lineament (or TIKL) and its unusual banded pattern of
magnetization. The geophysical model results will be combined with sparsely
sampled basement isotope geochemistry and age data to interpret the history of
formation and accretion of lithospheric blocks as well as their subsequent
tectonomagmatic modification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge about physical
properties of the crust and its history of tectonism and volcanism is central to
a wide array of solid Earth science topics. Assessments of the likelihood of
future earthquakes and the potential for economic mineral deposits at depth are
just two examples of applications in which such knowledge plays a vital societal
role. In order to evaluate better these risks and economic potential, a multi-
disciplinary project involving professors and graduate and undergraduate
students at two universities will seek to understand key structures, composition
and processes that formed the geologic core of the US mid-continent. In
mountainous regions of the western US, mapping variations in physical properties
and inferring tectonic history are relatively straightforward because
geophysical images of the deep crust and uppermost mantle can be corroborated by
studies of rocks exposed and/or brought to the surface by geologic processes. In
the mid-continent region of the US however, thick sequences of sedimentary rocks
cover the ancient rocks produced by episodes of magmatism. Boreholes reaching
below the sedimentary cover are few and far between and that has made it
challenging to understand the geologic past that may control the locations of
earthquakes and hidden mineral deposits. Consequently, tectonic and seismic
hazard maps of this region rely more heavily on geophysical lineaments: linear
features found in map-views of geophysical data sets signifying geologic
boundaries and weak zones. This study seeks to combine several different types
of geophysical data sets, including gravity and magnetic anomalies as well as
images made possible by EarthScope?s array of seismometers. The previously
unknown characteristics of the mid-continent crust derived from these data will
be used to better characterize implications of the geologic boundaries for
understanding comprehensively the history and properties of the Earth?s outer
layers.