* 1246422
* Small Business-ERC Collaborative Opportunity: In-Situ Information Display for Ultrasound Guided Interventions
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Philipp Stolka, Clear Guide Medical, Inc.
* Fixed Amount Award
* Deborah Jackson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 199,850.00

Image guidance is a key enabling technology for millions of interventional
procedures annually in medicine. Biopsies, ablative procedures, energy-based
therapies, as well as minimally invasive and open procedures all rely on real-
time feedback from imaging in order to be performed safely and effectively. In
current practice, this feedback is predominantly provided by ultrasound (US) as
it offers safe, real-time imaging for low cost. However, ultrasound often has
poor image quality and is difficult to manage, particularly for interventions
requiring high precision. These issues have led many research groups and several
companies to investigate methods for enhanced image guidance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of this proposal is to advance ultrasound-
guided cancer therapy with an innovative, low-cost, and self-contained
navigation device which is being developed by Clear Guide Medical LLC, a small
business spun out of the CISST ERC. The proposed device will enable the system
to perform dynamic registration to a preoperative diagnostic image. The result
will be a "Body GPS" system that is able to localize the probe in "body
coordinates." This platform will then be further developed to provided targeting
information via real-time, on patient targeting
display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle objectives are: 1) to develop
algorithms to calibrate the elements of the system; 2) to provide surface
representations of the patient via structured light stereo; 3) to develop
projection modes for on-patient targeting display; and 4) to evaluate the
resulting projection methods in a simulated biopsy environment. Objectives 1 and
2 will be performed in collaboration with the CISST ERC; while objectives 3 and
4 will be led by Clear Guide Medical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the core
research thrusts of the CISST ERC is the development of new technologies for
percutaneous therapy (that is medical procedures where access to inner organs or
other tissue is done via needle-puncture of the skin, rather than by using an
"open" approach where inner organs or tissue are exposed). To create a viable
device, it will be necessary to combine advanced methods in computer vision and
ultrasound imaging with new methods for on-patient targeting display. The
project team is led by PI Stolka, the head of engineering for Clear Guide
Medical and an expert on ultrasound systems, and ERC PI Etienne-Cummings, and
expert on compact computational imaging system. They are assisted by co-PI
Boctor, an expert in ultrasound imaging and image guidance and co-PI Hager, CEO
of Clear Guide Medical and an expert in computer vision.