* 1246577
* Collaborative Proposal: Postseismic deformation of the Izmit-Duzce, Turkey earthquake sequence: implications for the mechanics of the earthquake cycle and rheology of the continent
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Robert Reilinger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2016
* USD 162,996.00

The Izmit-Duzce earthquake sequence (M=7.4, 17/08/1999; M=7.2, 12/11/1999)
offers a unique opportunity to answer long-standing, fundamental questions about
the nature of the earthquake cycle (mechanics of strain accumulation and
release), and the rheology of the crust and upper mantle. The geodetic data set
we are developing for these earthquakes includes both a well-determined
preearthquake velocity field around the earthquake fault, and a network of GPS
stations within the coseismic deformation zone (near and far field) that
captured the initial, rapid, and ongoing longer-term postseismic deformation.
This is one of the most complete geodetic records of deformation for any major
continental earthquake anywhere in the world. Interpretation of the geodetic
record is facilitated by detailed seismic observations before, during, and
following the earthquake sequence, field mapping of fault offsets, satellite
image (SPOT) and geodetic (InSAR) studies, and geologic studies of the 20th
Century sequence of earthquakes that propagated along the North Anatolian Fault
(NAF) from E to W fracturing almost the full 1200 km length of the fault
(excluding the Marmara segment). Furthermore, the NAF has a long and well
recorded historical seismic record extending back almost 2000 years that, along
with the well-constrained paleoseismic record and recent geodetic observations,
provides an extensive data set for testing earthquake models of continental
faulting. In collaboration with our Turkish partners, we propose to use an
extensive catalogue of available GPS and InSAR data to constrain continuing
deformation following the Izmit-Duzce earthquake sequence, and to extend our
modeling effort to produce a quantitative description of the dynamics of the NAF
system seismic cycle. The proposed research builds on our prior efforts
(Ergintav et al., 2009; Hearn et al., 2009) that included analysis of 6.5 years
of postseismic GPS observations (both continuous [CGPS] and survey [SGPS]) to
characterize the temporal and spatial behavior of initial, and early postseismic
motions, and dynamic modeling for the initial 2.5-year period following the
earthquake sequence. In addition, an important new constraint on postseismic
deformation is provided by recent InSAR analysis (Cakir et al., 2012) that
requires a re-evaluation of the role of afterslip along a substantial segment of
the coseismic fault late in the postseismic period, potentially with major
implications for seismic hazards. The proposed research will provide an
important set of observations on the nature of the earthquake cycle for a major
continental strike-slip fault with direct implications for earthquake mechanics,
estimating earthquake repeat times, crust and upper mantle rheology as a
function of the state of stress, and interaction between earthquake processes
and regional tectonics. This case study provides information on the mechanics of
continental strike-slip faults in general, including the San Andreas Fault,
earthquake and tsunami hazards in the greater Istanbul area, and opportunities
for international scientific collaboration.