* 1246773
* I-Corps:  Roadmap to Commercialization of Electrospun Polymer Adhesives
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Shing-Chung Wong, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed technology holds the promise of delivering an adhesive product and
technology that is self-cleaning, re-usable and re-attachable. It can be used as
toe pads, gloves, tapes or other novel applications. Commercial pressure-
sensitive adhesives consist of a sticky polymeric layer and make intimate
contact with surface asperities. This team demonstrated in their laboratory
fibrous adhesives can exhibit similar adhesion property to commercial adhesives,
but with self-cleaning capability. The proposed tasks aim to catalyze the
establishment of a new business that focuses on developing adhesives using
electrospun polymer micro- and nano-fibers. If successful, this project will
spur commercialization activities for the next-generation adhesives emulating
naturally occurring phenomena with synthetic flexible
equivalents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will prototype products and
investigate a business model for subsequent investment. The proposed activities
in team building, research and wealth creation will forge links among
manufacturing science, materials physics and entomological disciplines and the
team will complement the PI's efforts in materials development. The team has
identified over a dozen potential partners that may be interested in the
proposed products and this I-Corps effort will support the investigation of the
commercial viability with many of these potential partners.