* 1246185
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: FlowSurge: Supporting Science Data Flows Towards Discovery, Innovation and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

The FlowSurge project leverages cyberinfrastructure (CI) resources for Software
Defined Networking (SDN) on the FIU campus network, at the AMPATH International
Exchange Point, regional, national and international multi-organizations to
enhance support for end-to-end Science flows from a researcher's laboratory.
FlowSurge's major research contribution is a science network and Science DMZ at
FIU tailored to support high-performance science applications and data-intensive
flows. The method of installing "FlowSurge Racks" optimized for high-performance
and programmability of science flows, and instrumented for monitoring and
measuring science flows right in the researchers' laboratories achieves that
objective.

FlowSurge is motivated by researchers' requirements to: (1) generate science
flows to shared CI or CI-connected resources on the campus; at other campuses;
or at regional, national or international sites; and (2) Orchestrate and
participate in "at-scale" experiments by using FlowSurge to tailor the end-to-
end path for optimized high-performance science applications and data-intensive
flows. FlowSurge enables IT and network staff at FIU to partition the campus
network infrastructure to support Science flows without causing impact to
general-purpose flows on the campus. The impact of FlowSurge is an environment
that introduces new practices for researchers and their students at FIU (the
largest Hispanic minority serving institution within the continental U.S.), and
motivates the adoption and use of the FlowSurge rack, the Science network and
the Science DMZ collectively as if it were a research instrument for resources
needed for at-scale experimentation.