* 1246702
* Collaborative Research:   Climate Controls on Aerosol Fluxes to Taylor Dome and Taylor Glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Sarah Aciego, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2017
* USD 419,876.00

1246702/Aciego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a collaborative project
to analyze ice from the Taylor Dome core and exposed ice from Taylor Glacier to
measure variations in the isotopic composition of Strontium, Neodymium, and
Hafnium, trace element concentrations, major anions and cations, and dust size
data in order to assign provenance of dust within the ice. The intellectual
merit of the proposed work is to provide provenance information that will be
used to investigate the dust flux response to large, rapid regional and global
(hemispheric) climate changes on a millenia scale. The first part of the work
will focus on ice from the Taylor Dome core and then transition to surface ice
from Taylor Glacier. The PIs will collect large-sized samples of known age based
on the methane and oxygen isotope composition of the trapped gases; samples will
be large enough to carry out measurements on different size fractions. Parallel
work will be done to determine the radiogenic isotope values of southern
hemisphere (New Zealand, Australia, South Africa) and local (Northern and
Southern Victoria Land) dust source material that are potentially entrained and
deposited across the Taylor Dome region. The broader impacts of this research
encompass collaborative, outreach, educational, and diversity initiatives. The
work will be an international collaboration with researchers at the University
of Michigan, Ohio State University, Università Milano-Bicocca, and Università di
Pisa, the latter two in Italy. Dissemination of research findings will include
both scientific forums and public lectures. Funding will provide support for one
PhD student, one MS student, and at least one undergraduate student. The project
participants will be involved in the new UC Irvine American Indian Summer School
in Earth System Science for high school students using this project as a jumping
off point for discussing polar issues and climate change. This award has field
work in Antarctica