* 1246941
* Reckoning with the Risk of Catastrophe-Workshop scheduled for October 2012 in Washington, DC.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* M. Elisabeth Pate-Cornell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 79,995.00

The steering committee of the seventh Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft / National
Science Foundation Research Conference, Reckoning with the Risk of Catastrophe,
scheduled to be held October 3-5, 2012 in Washington, DC, asked Andrew Lo to put
together a proposal to support American involvement in the research conference.
The purpose of the conference is to facilitate true intellectual collaboration
between American and German scholars. The bulk of the funds that Lo is
requesting is to cover participant support costs for American scholars to attend
the workshop. Approximately one-third of the American scholars selected to
attend the workshop are students or early career professionals. The event will
provide these students and junior researchers with an invaluable international
experience. We know a great deal about disasters because disaster research has
existed for more than 60 years. But the scale of recent events - particularly
Hurricane Katrina, the financial meltdown, the Japanese Tsunami, and the
Fukushima nuclear problems that followed - have led scholars to seek new
knowledge to better understand and manage potentially catastrophic risks.
Researchers across countries and disciplines are beginning to investigate the
root causes and common threads of such disasters, reinvigorating the study of
catastrophic risk, and moving us closer to finding practical solutions.