* 1246045
* Anisotropic Ice and Stratigraphic Disturbances
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Edwin Waddington, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2017
* USD 239,999.00

Waddington/1246045 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to
investigate the onset and growth of folds and other disturbances seen in the
stratigraphic layers of polar ice sheets. The intellectual merit of the work is
that it will lead to a better understanding of the grain-scale processes that
control the development of these stratigraphic features in the ice and will help
answer questions such as what processes can initiate such disturbances. Snow is
deposited on polar ice sheets in layers that are generally flat, with
thicknesses that vary slowly along the layers. However, ice cores and ice-
penetrating radar show that in some cases, after conversion to ice, and
following lengthy burial, the layers can become folded, develop pinch-and-swell
structures (boudinage), and be sheared by ice flow, at scales ranging from
centimeters to hundreds of meters. The processes causing these disturbances are
still poorly understood. Disturbances appear to develop first at the ice-crystal
scale, then cascade up to larger scales with continuing ice flow and strain.
Crystal-scale processes causing distortions of cm-scale layers will be modeled
using Elle, a microstructure-modeling package, and constrained by fabric thin-
sections and grain-elongation measurements from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
divide ice-core. A full-stress continuum anisotropic ice-flow model coupled to
an ice-fabric evolution model will be used to study bulk flow of anisotropic
ice, to understand evolution and growth of flow disturbances on the meter and
larger scale. Results from this study will assist in future ice-core site
selection, and interpretation of stratigraphy in ice cores and radar, and will
provide improved descriptions of rheology and stratigraphy for ice-sheet flow
models.The broader impacts are that it will bring greater understanding to ice
dynamics responsible for stratigraphic disturbance. This information is valuable
to constrain depth-age relationships in ice cores for paleoclimate study. This
will allow researchers to put current climate change in a more accurate context.
This project will provide three years of support for a graduate student as well
as support and research experience for an undergraduate research assistant; this
will contribute to development of talent needed to address important future
questions in glaciology and climate change. The research will be communicated to
the public through outreach events and results from the study will be
disseminated through public and professional meetings as well as journal
publications. The project does not require field work in Antarctica.