* 1246387
* Reconstruction of Deep-Water Temperatures in the Drake Passage Over the Last Glacial Cycle: Application of Carbonate Clumped Isotope Thermometer to Absolutely-Dated Deep-Sea Corals
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Weifu Guo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 10/31/2016
* USD 301,759.00

This proposed research aims to produce high resolution, precise and accurate
records of deep water temperatures in the Drake Passage over the past ~40,000
years, by applying the newly developed carbonate clumped isotope thermometer to
a unique collection of modern and fossil deep-sea corals, and thus advance the
understanding of the role of the Southern Ocean in modulating global climate. In
addition, this study will provide further evaluation on the potential of this
new thermometer to derive accurate estimates of past ocean temperatures from
deep-sea coral skeletons. Funding will support an early-career junior scientist
and a graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its crucial role in
modulating global climate, rates and amplitudes of environmental changes in the
Southern Ocean are often difficult to constrain. In particular, the knowledge
about the deep water temperatures in the Southern Ocean during the last glacial
cycle is extremely limited. This results both from the lack of well-dated
climate archives for the deep Southern Ocean and from the fact that most
existing temperature proxies (e.g. del18O and Mg/Ca of foraminifera and corals)
suffer from the biological 'vital effects'. The latter is especially
problematic; it causes substantial challenges in interpreting these geochemical
proxies and can lead to biases equivalent to tens of degrees in temperature
estimates. Recent development of carbonate clumped isotope thermometer, holds
new promises for reconstructing deep water temperatures in the Southern Ocean,
since calibration studies of this thermometer in deep-sea corals suggest it is
largely free of vital effects. This proposed research seeks to refine the
calibration of carbonate clumped isotope thermometer in deep-sea corals at low
temperatures, improve the experimental methods to obtain high precision in
temperature estimates, and then apply this thermometer to a unique collection of
modern and fossil deep-sea corals collected from the Drake Passage during two
recent Office of Polar Programs (OPP)-funded cruises, that have already been
dated by radiocarbon and U-series methods. By combining the reconstructed
temperatures with the radiocarbon and U-Th ages for these deep-sea corals, this
study will explore the relationships between these temperature changes and
global climate changes.