* 1246315
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Modeling of Reactive Transport in Porous and Fractured Media
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Daniel Tartakovsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Subsurface flow and transport take place in complex heterogeneous environments
that exhibit a hierarchy of scales. More often than not, physical and bio-
geochemical phenomena on one scale (e.g., a pore scale) affect, and are coupled
to phenomena on a vastly different scale (e.g., a field scale). Such phenomena
defy coarse-scale continuum descriptions, since they exhibit high localization
(e.g., propagation of reactive fronts and biofilm growth) and/or strong
nonlinear coupling between the processes involved (e.g., dynamic changes in
porosity and permeability due to dissolution or precipitation). Hybrid numerical
algorithms are to be used when coarse-scale continuum models fail to accurately
describe a physical phenomenon in a small part of a computational domain.
Accurate and efficient coupling of two (or more) models operating on vastly
different spatial and/or temporal scales in a hybrid remains a major theoretical
and computational challenge. A key to the success of a hybrid method is an
efficient implementation of coupling conditions on the interface between its
constitutive models. Additionally, uncertainty about pore geometry undermines
the veracity of pore-scale simulations and, hence, of hybrid simulations of
which they are a constitutive part. Overreaching goals of the proposed activity
are to establish a theoretical foundation for hybrid modeling of subsurface flow
and transport, to develop corresponding numerical algorithms, and to provide
computational tools for robust uncertainty quantification in hybrid models. To
achieve these goals, the investigators will develop hybrid algorithms for
reactive flows in fractured and porous media, quantify uncertainty in pore-scale
geometry in hybrid simulations, and experimentally validate hybrid simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact, this proposal will enhance
sustainability of essential water resources. Groundwater is a principal source
of domestic water supply in the United States, and it is a major source of fresh
water for industrial, agricultural and public uses. By establishing a novel
modeling framework, this proposal will provide a scientific basis for reliable
predictions of impacts of land use change and climate change, and more accurate
assessments of groundwater contamination risks. The methods and algorithms
developed in the course of the proposed activity will lay a solid foundation for
improved quantitative understanding of subsurface processes with tightly coupled
pore- and field-scales. The proposal will support the efforts of graduate
students. The investigators will actively promote STEM career paths of
underrepresented groups, and establish an outreach K-12 program dedicated to
providing an intensive college prep education for motivated low-income students.