* 1246854
* SNM: Roll-to-Roll Atomic/Molecular Layer Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,200,000.00

CBET-1246854&lt;br/&gt;PI: Y. C. Lee (Univ. of
Colorado)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic layer deposition (ALD) and molecular layer
deposition (MLD) are important thin film deposition processes based on
sequential, self-limiting surface reactions. ALD and MLD can deposit conformal
and ultrathin inorganic and organic films with atomic/molecular layer control.
ALD was recognized as the transformative technology when ALD was added to the
semiconductor roadmap over ten years ago. ALD and MLD have the potential to make
an even more significant impact if their throughput and cost can be improved
using roll-to-roll (R2R) processes. For example, ALD and MLD could be used to
fabricate high quality gas diffusion barrier on polymers for organic light
emitting diodes and thin film photovoltaics. ALD could also be employed to coat
the electrodes of Li ion batteries to improve their capacity stability and
greatly extend their lifetime. Laboratory results have already confirmed the
excellent performance of ALD barriers and coatings. Transitioning these
laboratory results to the market requires a rapid and cost-effective method to
perform ALD and MLD on polymer or foil webs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will build an R2R ALD/MLD testbed with process control for web speeds of up to
30 m/min. To accomplish this challenging goal, computational fluid dynamics
modeling will be performed to understand ALD/MLD and support the systematic
design of novel gas source heads for ALD/MLD on both flat and porous substrates.
The gas source heads will be integrated with a R2R web handling machine and this
new apparatus will be optimized using studies of in situ monitoring of thickness
versus processing parameters. Reduced order models will be studied and applied
to achieve optimal performance. In addition, new methodologies will be developed
for web handling such as the placement of the gas source head in the region of
web wrap on a roller. The interdisciplinary team will also work with ALD
NanoSolutions, a local startup company. ALD NanoSolutions is currently
developing an R2R ALD testbed to coat flat polymer web substrates. The team will
also collaborate with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Sandia Labs,
Formosa Plastic and Kent Displays for potential scale-up
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R2R ALD/MLD nano-manufacturing will
facilitate the commercialization of ALD/MLD for a large number of applications
and help to restore U.S. manufacturing competitiveness. This research will also
educate and train undergraduate and graduate students to perform original
research in scalable nano-manufacturing. A new section on ALD/MLD-enabled
systems will be introduced into a first-year mechanical engineering projects
course. These projects will develop designs that will be used in the K-12
outreach programs. R2R manufacturing teaching modules will be also introduced
into existing undergraduate and graduate courses. The results of this research
will also be widely disseminated at various scientific meetings and through a
project web site.