* 1246799
* (IRES) International Research Experience for Students: North Carolina State - Aarhus DNA NanoTech Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Thomas LaBean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 116,696.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) activity links expert
nano research groups at North Carolina State University and the University of
Aarhus in Denmark for a program of interdisciplinary mentoring, academic
education, and research-based learning for participating students and junior
researchers from both countries. Principal Investigator (PI), Thomas H. LaBean,
and U.S. colleagues will work with Danish partners, led by Kurt V. Gothelf, to
manage a balanced, team-based approach for research training at the interface
between complex DNA nanostructures and DNA-guided chemistry. This builds on a
program of cooperation in education and research that features the melding of
leading Aarhus conjugation chemistry for coupling diverse compounds to
oligonucleotieds with the U.S. team's expertise in design and implementation of
complex nanostructures. Overall, research efforts promise significant outcomes
in molecular engineering with potential applications in molecular and nano-
electronics, nanochemistry, biosensors, or other biomedical areas.

The educational value of the IRES rests with the students' exposure to the
productive, cooperative research of the two leading institutions and involvement
in their mentors' cutting-edge research. The U.S.-Danish IRES model involves
post-doctoral mentors and diverse, research-ready high school students as well
as U.S. graduate and undergraduate students. The PI's participation in Project
SEED, supported by the American Chemical Society, assists with identification of
appropriate high school students. For balance and heightened interaction, the
program also engages junior Danish researchers, supported independently by the
Danish National Research Foundation. Each of the junior participants will be
assigned projects that are designed to contribute to program-wide research
goals. Through planned cross-disciplinary teamwork, they will acquire knowledge
of techniques in synthetic chemistry, DNA structural engineering, protein
biochemistry, materials science, and molecular biology.

This U.S.-Danish IRES activity in molecular engineering fulfills the program
objective of developing global scientists and engineers by enabling experts in
the United States and Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
and education resources in an area of strong mutual interest and competence.
Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S. junior researchers and students
to international leaders in nanotechnology through involvement in cutting-edge
research. If successful, results will continue to improve our ability to use DNA
self-assembly to organize nanomaterials and to program sophisticated
nanochemistry. The students' early career experiences are expected to increase
the probability of their establishing international collaborations in the
future.