* 1246317
* Collaborative Research:   Pteropod Swimming Behavior as a Bio Assay for Ocean Acidification
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Rajat Mittal, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 244,934.00

Ocean acidification (OA) poses a serious threat, particularly to organisms that
precipitate calcium carbonate from seawater. One organism with an aragonite
shell that is a key to high latitude ecosystems is the pteropod. With OA, the
pteropod shell will thin because the aragonite is highly soluble. As the shell
thins, it changes the mass distribution and buoyancy of the animal, which will
affect locomotion and through it, all locomotion dependent behavior such as
foraging, mating, predator avoidance and migratory patterns. A lower shell
weight will be counterbalanced by a smaller mucus web potentially decreasing
ingestion rates and carbon flux rates. This interdisciplinary research relies on
biological studies of swimming behavior of the pteropod mollusk Limacina
helicina in their natural environments with fluid mechanics analyses of swimming
hydrodynamics via 3D tomographic particle-image velocimetry and computational
fluid dynamics (CFD). This work will: (a) determine how the L. helicina uses its
'wings' (parapodia) to propel itself; (b) examine whether its locomotory
kinematics provide efficient propulsion; (c) identify the factors that influence
swimming trajectory and 'wobble'; and (d) synthesize all data and insights into
guidelines for the potential use of pteropod swimming behavior as a bioassay for
OA.

The loss of these sentinels of anthropogenic increases in CO2 may result in an
ecological shift since thecosome pteropods are responsible for ingesting nearly
half the primary production in the Southern Ocean and also serve as a primary
food resource to upper trophic levels like fish. Since locomotory data can be
gathered immediately, the bioassay being developed in this proposal may serve as
an early warning of the impending onset of OA effects on this important member
of the plankton. Students and researchers will collaborate in a rich
interdisciplinary research environment by working with a biological
oceanographer, a fluid mechanics expert and a CFD expert coupled with the
teamsmanship needed for work in the Antarctic. By setting up a one-of-a-kind 3D
tomography system for visualizing flow around planktonic organisms in Norway and
at Palmer Station, we increase international exchange of state-of-the-art
techniques. The educational impact of the current research will be multiplied by
including in the research team, undergraduate students, high-school students and
underrepresented minorities in addition to graduate students.