* 1246000
* Development of a Year-long, Research-based Laboratory Integrated within Core Genetics and Cellular & Molecular Biology Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Marcy Kelly, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,272.00

This project expands and enriches a semester long research based molecular
biology laboratory course into a novel year-long research based curriculum that
emphasizes experimental design and execution, data interpretation, and written
and oral presentation skills as integral components of the course. The year-long
approach has been piloted and preliminary assessment studies demonstrate
significant learning gains by undergraduate students completing the two semester
series. The year-long program will be completed by all biology majors and will
be spread over two courses: Genetics (BIO231) and Introduction to Cellular and
Molecular Biology (BIO335). In both courses, specific content areas covered in
lab will predominantly reflect the respective parent courses; during BIO231
students will develop and refine experimental methods to conduct and analyze a
microarray experiment to study the effects of osmotic stress on yeast cells.
These data will be used as a roadmap in the following semester in BIO335, where
they will clone candidate genes involved in osmotic stress and ultimately,
design and conduct cell-based functional assays to test hypotheses generated
throughout the term. The project also pilots the addition of a service learning
option, a science outreach program to serve high-need schools in New York City,
as a feature of the course.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Students in these revised courses employ an
interdisciplinary approach, relying upon modern genomic, molecular and cell
biology methodologies, including RNA-Seq technology, to answer a well-defined
biological question. Interdisciplinary approaches are increasingly being
emphasized in all STEM disciplines. In addition the writing component represents
a trend that is beginning to emerge as an effective way to improve student
learning gains. The results of the evaluation of this project should add to what
is known about effective ways to improve undergraduate biology laboratories and
for students and faculty to profit from introduction of research-based student
laboratories. Comparison of student scores on the Educational Testing Service
Major Field Test in Biology are being used to assess effects on student
learning, along with the use of surveys and focus groups, as well as the writing
assignments to assess both learning and attitudinal changes.

BROADER IMPACTS: Piloting of the service learning component adds to the broader
impacts of this project. The project is participating in the CURE survey of Dr.
Lopatto, thus contributing to a national data base concerning the outcomes of
research-based student laboratories. Results are being widely disseminated
through regional and national workshops and disciplinary annual meetings and
publications.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts toward support of Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education