* 1246019
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: High Performance Research Networking (HiPerNet)
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Robert Grossman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2013
* USD 499,282.00

This project, CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: High Performance Research
Networking (HiPerNet), establishes a Science DMZ at the University of Chicago
that is distinct from the general-purpose campus network and that is purpose-
built for data-intensive science. This Science DMZ includes support for virtual
circuits, software defined networking, and 100 gigabit Ethernet. It includes a
targeted renovation of the existing campus networking infrastructure, focusing
on intra-campus networking from labs and buildings which have high data I/O and
networking needs, as well as improving the throughput from these facilities to
high-speed national and international research
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This upgrade supports a range
of projects in Astronomy, Astrophysics, Computer Science, Social Sciences,
Genomics, and Particle Physics. Data-intensive science in these fields requires
an upgrade to support high-performance bulk data movement, data-intensive
experimental needs, and access to high performance national and international
networks in order to foster collaboration and discovery on high-priority
projects. The Science DMZ also benefits computer science projects at that are
developing innovative data-intensive computing infrastructure, including Globus
Online, Open Science Data Cloud, and the UDP-based Data Transfer (UDT) protocol,
providing a testbed for new methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
upgrade enables researchers to share data with a larger community of users by
facilitating collaboration across universities and labs. In addition, UChicago
will take lessons learned from this experience and package them in a form
suitable for consumption by other campuses pursuing similar goals. Enhancing
campus networking abilities also benefits the surrounding community including
schools, community hospitals, and the Adler Planetarium.