* 1246804
* SNM: Scalable Continuous Production of Aligned Carbon Nanotube and Nanoporous Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,198,558.00

Objective: The overall objective of this project is to develop scalable methods
for fabricating vertically aligned carbon nanotube and nanoporous membranes for
applications in analytical separation and water purification. This project will
result in a reliable pilot process for the manufacture of such membranes
utilizing large area mechanically robust films and the systematic
characterization of the performance of these membranes. The potential impact of
this research is transformative - the materials, methods and knowledge developed
can enable a broad spectrum of technologies from water purification to energy
generation and health care, with profound societal
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The intellectual merits stem
from the following: (1) Investigation of materials science and process
engineering to enable the production of vertically aligned nanostructured
membranes; (2) Rigorous experimental studies of nano-confined transport. This
project will accomplish a long sought goal in the reliable production of large-
area membranes with controlled, aligned nanoporosity. Characterization of the
structure-property-processing relationships in these systems will constitute new
and valuable practical manufacturing know-how.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The broader impacts of the project are: (1) Integration of research and
education through new curriculum development for undergraduate and graduate
courses; (2) K-12 outreach activities in Science Fair and Science Pathways
programs; (3) A focus on recruitment of under-represented groups; (4) Summer
research opportunities for undergraduates and industrial internships for
students. Additionally, there will be a strong technical impact due to the close
collaboration with industry and the commitment to the development of an
industrially relevant process.