* 1246097
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Advanced Connectivity for Texas A&M University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Willis Marti, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 499,609.00

Texas A&M University is establishing and exploiting advanced 100-Gb/s
connectivity, focused on accessing Internet2's OS3E network for its researchers.
It is furthering data-intensive discipline research and network research, and is
contributing to national best practices and to advanced connectivity in support
of data-intensive research throughout the LEARN community in Texas.

The chief objective is to enhance the ability of A&M researchers to engage in
data-intensive science, including combined use of campus and national
cyberinfrastructure and large data sets. Similarly, routinely using large VLAN-
based, wide-area data flows will challenge Texas A&M to grow technically. One
example is the integration of these techniques into the LHC "data moving" area.

A second example is exploring federated wide-area file systems as an alternative
to the classic "data moving" paradigm, including performance and federated
identity issues crucial to the success of this approach. This is a contribution
to realizing the evolving Campus Bridging vision. In support of computational
scientists at Texas A&M, the project leverages connectivity with the Immersive
Visualization Center to enable effective forms of local and remote
visualization. Finally, the project enables network researchers to use the
OpenFlow-based services of Internet2's OS3E as it evolves.

The advanced connectivity, combined with Texas A&M's ScienceDMZ, enables
emerging sets of data-intensive scientists in areas that have not yet become
prominent, destroying physical remoteness as a barrier to engaging in
collaborative data-intensive science.