* 1246136
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Bridging Open Networks for Scientific Applications and Innovation (BONSAI)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Allen Malony, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 507,902.00

The availability and growing use of high-performance heterogeneous computing and
storage components by scientists across university campuses has led to
realization that the general-purpose campus network offers neither the capacity
nor the capabilities necessary for data-intensive research project. This project
designs, builds and maintains a new network at the University of Oregon (UO)
campus called Bridging Open Networks for Scientific Applications and Innovation
(BONSAI). BONSAI is designed as a high-performance science network providing
high end-to-end throughput and unique capabilities between five interconnected
UO facilities, as well as computing resources located at other institutions
throughout Internet2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project primarily focuses on the
following five major tasks:(1) Creating a Science DMZ platform among major
computing facilities &lt;br/&gt;across UO; (2) Adding a new 10Gbps network
circuit between the UO and Internet2; (3) Implementing and operating Software-
Defined Networking(SDN) technologies throughout the network; (4) Promoting the
development of IPv6- and service-aware scientific applications, and (5)
Socializing the use of the UO's membership to the InCommon
federation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BONSAI also serves as a testbed for
experimental research on new networking technologies (e.g.,SDN) and facilitates
to support data-intensive applications (e.g., visualization), including their
translation for educational purposes. This project will directly impact teaching
and training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers by providing access to advanced computing
infrastructure and networking capabilities. Finally, the project will
significantly advance the broader access and dissemination of UO research
results for advancing scientific and technological understanding.