* 1246111
* Collaborative Research:   Role of the Central Scotia Sea Floor and North Scotia Ridge in the Onset and Development of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Ian Dalziel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 725,812.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Opening of Drake Passage and the West Scotia Sea
south of Tierra del Fuego broke the final continental barrier to onset of a
complete Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC). Initiation of the ACC has been
associated in time with a major, abrupt, drop in global temperatures and the
rapid expansion of the Antarctic ice sheets at 33-34 Ma. Events leading to the
formation of the Drake Passage gateway are poorly known. Understanding the
tectonic evolution of the floor of the Central Scotia Sea (CSS) and the North
Scotia Ridge is a key to this understanding. Previous work has demonstrated that
superimposed constructs formed a volcanic arc that likely blocked direct
eastward flow from the Pacific to the Atlantic through the opening Drake Passage
gateway as the active South Sandwich arc does today. The PIs propose a cruise to
test, develop and refine, with further targeted mapping and dredging, their
theory of CSS tectonics and the influence it had on the onset and development of
the ACC. In addition they propose an installation of GPS receiver to test their
paleogeographic reconstructions and determine whether South Georgia is moving as
part of the South American plate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student will be involved in all stages of the research.
Undergraduate students will also be involved as watch-standers. A community
college teacher will participate in the cruise. The PIs will have a website on
which there will be images of the actual ocean floor dredging in operation. The
teacher will participate with web and outreach support through PolarTREC.
Results of the cruise are of broad interest to paleoceanographers, paleoclimate
modelers and paleobiogeographers.