* 1246282
* Collaborative Research: CC-NIE Integration: An Open Cloud Infrastructure for Scalable Data Intensive Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 569,522.00

By all accounts, the size of the data flows pulsing out of new instruments,
sensor networks and massive simulations continues to escalate dramatically.
Consequently many researchers in large national and international
collaborations, sitting in different administrative domains, spread across the
wide area network, and using diverse local resources, are likely to find that
the data sets of most current interest are not where they need to be, when they
need to be there, for their work to proceed efficiently. It is clear that an
adequate cyberinfrastructure strategy for campus level bridging must address
such critical problems in the area of data logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project creates a Data Logistics Toolkit (DLT) - an easy to install package of
production quality software for building WAN-enabled storage nodes that
dramatically improve the ability of data intensive research communities to
collaborate in the wide area. DLT-enabled services (e.g. a global "drop box" for
research that supports automatic data positioning) enable the automation and
optimization of the timely placement of data across a wide range of scenarios,
using policy-controlled sharing, replication, caching, control loop optimization
and overlay multicast. Offering familiar user and programming interfaces, and
backed by a solid but scalable security framework, the DLT transforms global
data-intensive collaboration by providing a generic interface to an essential
logistical resource - storage - and by giving campuses with DLT-enabled nodes
the network awareness and adaptivity needed to maximize the productivity of
their wide area links to distributed data and computing resources.