* 1246207
* Collaborative Research:   West Antarctic Ice Sheet stability, Alpine Glaciation, and Climate Variability: a Terrestrial Perspective from Cosmogenic-nuclide Dating in McMurdo Sound
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Joerg Schaefer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 349,997.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to complement the ANDRILL marine
record with a terrestrial project that will provide chronological control for
past fluctuations of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) and alpine glaciers in
McMurdo Sound. The project will develop high-resolution maps of drifts deposited
from grounded marine-based ice and alpine glaciers on islands and peninsulas in
McMurdo Sound. In addition, the PIs will acquire multi-clast/multi-nuclide
cosmogenic analyses of these mapped drift sheets and alpine moraines and use
regional climate modeling to shed light on the range of possible environmental
conditions in the McMurdo region during periods of grounded ice expansion and
recession. The PIs will make use of geological records for ice sheet and alpine
glacier fluctuations preserved on the flanks of Mount Discovery, Black Island,
and Brown Peninsula. Drifts deposited from grounded, marine-based ice will yield
spatial constraints for former advances and retreats of the WAIS. Moraines from
alpine glaciers, hypothesized to be of interglacial origin, could yield a first-
order record of hydrologic change in the region. Synthesizing the field data,
the team proposes to improve the resolution of existing regional-scale climate
models for the Ross Embayment. The overall approach and anticipated results will
provide the first steps towards linking the marine and terrestrial records in
this critical sector of Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Results from the proposed work will be integrated with outreach
programs at Boston University, Columbia University, and Worcester State
University. The team will actively collaborate with the American Museum of
Natural History to feature this project prominently in museum outreach. The team
will also include a PolarTREC teacher as a member of the research team. The
geomorphological results will be presented in 3D at Boston University?s
Antarctic Digital Image Analyses Lab. The research will form the basis of a PhD
dissertation at Boston University.