* 1246073
* AF: EAGER: Bayesian Factor Modeling of Context-Specific Gene Regulation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Yufei Huang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 296,859.00

Response of cells to their changing environment is governed by intricate
regulations of gene expression by regulating molecules in cells including, most
importantly, transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs). Understanding
how TF and miRNA regulations define cellular states such as cell survival, cell
proliferation, and cell death, and eventually phenotypes including various
diseases is a major challenge facing computational systems biologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; This EAGER project will
develop and validate a novel computational model called Semi-parametric Bayesian
FActor Regulatory Model (SB-FARM) for TF and miRNA regulation of gene
expression. The advantages of SB-FARM over other existing models are that it
integrates existing knowledge about gene regulations in the model and enables
the discovery of specific regulations by TFs and miRNAs under unmeasured
conditions or contexts. The investigators will examine the modeling details as
well as algorithms for reconstructing the model from a set of gene expression
data. They will apply SB-FARM to study the context-specific regulations in
E-coli and human cancer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of the
investigators is to develop signal processing and statistical learning methods
for the system-level understanding of gene regulatory networks underlying
different biological processes and apply them to better understand the genomic
basis for diversity in organisms and development of diseases. The SB-FARM has a
general structure that permits integration of additional aspects of gene
regulation. The success of the SB-FARM will have long lasting impact on gene
regulation research and is expected to also significantly advance statistical
signal processing and Bayesian learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;This research is highly interdisciplinary, cross-cutting science and
engineering. It will provide an environment for advanced interdisciplinary
learning and education in the area of genomics signal processing and
computational biology. The PIs will also actively involve graduate and
undergraduate students in research activities. Particularly, they will utilize
the minority institution status of UTSA and UTHSCSA to recruit and involve
minority students in this research. The developed computational methods will be
implemented into publically available software to aid computational biology
researchers to investigate context specific gene regulations. The computational
methods and tools will enhance the signal processing and machine learning
research and ultimately lead to development of new theory and methods.