* 1246850
* Collaborative research: Probing the effects of 3D rheology on postseismic deformation following the 2011 Tohoku-Oki earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2014
* USD 115,468.00

The devastating March 11, 2011 Tohoku-Oki earthquake and its tsunami caused more
than 15,000 fatalities and severe damage in NE Japan. The densest geodetic and
seismic networks in Japan made this earthquake the best-recorded event ever.
Seafloor geodetic stations recorded over 10s of m horizontal displacements
during the earthquake. High-resolution seismic bathymetry data indicate that the
rupture reached the trench. Model inversion studies indicate a slip distribution
of up to ~50 m over a remarkable compact area of 400 km along strike and 200 km
wide. Coseismic and postseismic crustal deformation recorded at unprecedented
high spatial and temporal resolution and precision allow the researchers to
further their understanding of the rheological structure of the Earth and the
subduction zone processes. In particular, the high quality geodetic data provide
a unique opportunity to constrain the three-dimensional (3D) rheology of the
upper mantle and lower crust and the evolution of transient slip on the
megathrust. The scope of the project will be broad enough such that results will
be applicable to other subduction margins (Sumatra, Chile, Alaska and Cascadia)
where deformation is currently at various stages of the subduction earthquake
cycle.

This project will examine the postseismic deformation of the 2011 Tohoku-Oki
earthquake. In previous investigations, it has been a challenge to separate the
contributions of afterslip on the megathrust from viscoelastic relaxation of the
earthquake-induced stresses in the upper mantle. Effects of the complex 3D
rheology of convergent margins on subduction zone earthquake deformation have
yet to be better understood. In the proposed research, we seek to understand:
(a) What is the distribution and evolution of the afterslip on the megathrust
following a giant earthquake? (b) How does the 3D rheology of the Earth control
the postseismic crustal deformation? (c) What are the rheological properties of
the oceanic and continental upper mantle? In this work the researchers will
benefit from access to the wealth of Global Positioning System (GPS) data
recorded by the Japan national network as well as regional stations across East
Asia. They will also constrain afterslip using repeating earthquakes. A 3D
finite element code will incorporate complex subduction slab geometry and
advanced mantle rheology in the Earth.