* 1246473
* Investigation of diurnal land-atmosphere interactions in snow-dominated mountainous terrain
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Steven Margulis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 337,077.00

Mountain regions are hydrologically important given the estimate that over one-
sixth of the world's population derive the majority of their water resources
from basins containing seasonal snowmelt. In fact, in many semi-arid regions,
urban and agricultural areas rely almost exclusively on snowmelt runoff from
regional mountainous areas. Despite their importance, these regions of complex
terrain are often poorly simulated using regional climate models (RCMs).
Improvement in understanding land-atmosphere interactions in complex terrain is
a key step toward improving the predictions of RCMs in montane regions. The
primary objective of this project is to study land-atmosphere interactions in
complex terrain with an emphasis on those areas where snow plays a significant
role. The project will address science questions using the wealth of data from
the Cold Land Processes Field Experiment (CLPX) site that took place in northern
Colorado (2002-2003). The proposed research will use a hierarchical approach to
investigate snow process and coupled land-atmosphere interactions across a range
of physiographic characteristics. Such an approach will allow for explicit
representation of surface heterogeneity in not only topography, but in surface
states (e.g., snow, albedo), radiative fluxes, and turbulent fluxes, as well as
their impacts on 3D boundary layer flow and cloud formation. Several science
questions will be addressed in the areas of process understanding (both snow and
coupled land-atmosphere processes), spatial variability (as a function of
physiography) and how it impacts land-atmosphere interactions, and uncertainty
in surface states/fluxes and how this uncertainty propagates within the coupled
system. This work will move the state of knowledge regarding processes in
mountainous terrain forward with cross-connections to many related disciplines
including snow hydrology, mountain meteorology, boundary-layer processes, and
computational fluid dynamics. The broader impacts of this project derive from
the importance of understanding land-atmosphere interactions in mountainous
terrain in order to yield improved predictions of states and fluxes in large-
scale climate models, both for near-term forecasts and climate change analysis.
It is hypothesized that the insight gained in this project will ultimately prove
useful for improving sub-grid scale parameterizations in large-scale models in
mountainous terrain, which would be useful to a broad group in the research
community.