* 1246584
* I-Corps:  Increasing Range and Data Rate for Next-Generation Wireless
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* David Anderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project will improve the efficiency and performance of wireless systems
that use Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) configurations. MIMO systems use
multiple antennas to multiply the amount of data transmitted over a given
channel using the same spectral footprint as non-MIMO systems. However, there is
a large capability gap in detection techniques for MIMO systems between the
state of the art in research and commercial implementations. While much research
has been focused on reducing complexity for optimal or near-optimal schemes, it
is still common practice in industry to use simple techniques (such as linear
equalization) that are generally significantly less efficient. This situation
sits in stark contrast to the reality that users are demanding increasingly
higher data rates while service providers are struggling to work within the
limited radio spectrum they have available. While theoretical methods exist to
increase data rates without increasing bandwidth, commercialization of these
techniques will require addressing both significant theoretical challenges and
severe practical implementation hurdles. This team plans to leverage promising
preliminary results from research on wireless communication theory and hardware
design towards the development and commercialization of significantly more
efficient commercial-grade detectors for various MIMO systems.

If successful, this project will directly result in the commercialization of
advanced equalization techniques for MIMO systems. As these advances are
compatible with existing systems, the significant gains in range, power, and
spectral efficiency can be realized without changes to existing infrastructure.
This multi-disciplinary project will provide a competent framework to understand
interrelationship among the hardware and software implementations. Such a
framework can be used to focus future theoretical communications research more
effectively on implementable systems that can benefit consumer, government, and
industrial sectors. This project will also establish a conduit for
commercialization of further advances in communications and enhance the research
partnership between the investigators and the researchers in the wireless
communication industry facilitating application of scientific discoveries to the
application domains.