* 1246942
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Recall Aids for Surveys of Personal Networks
* SBE,NCSE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Peter Miller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* NIRMALA KANNANKUTTY
* 09/30/2013
* USD 11,974.00

This study seeks to develop recall aids for the name generator procedure from
the General Social Survey and examine empirically whether these aids can improve
the recall accuracy of the information about who comprises their personal
networks from survey participants. It hypothesizes that researchers can obtain
more comprehensive personal network data by encouraging survey respondents to
consult the actual records that they keep in the contact directories provided by
various ICTs (such as the phone book stored in a mobile phone and the address
book functionality of email applications). Thus far, although the past
literature has suggested a few techniques to reduce respondents? burden in the
survey setting, there is little work addressing the issue of the recall accuracy
for personal network data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study employs a
survey experiment; a Web survey will be administered to college students to
gather information about their personal networks. College students consist of a
homogeneous sample appropriate for this study, given the concern of internal
validity in the expected findings. Students who agree to participate in the
survey will be randomly assigned to three conditions. The control group will
take the questionnaire without any recall aid, while the two experimental groups
will take the survey with two different forms of prompts and probes
respectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The study will provide an
effective technique to collect personal network information from individuals
such as scientists and engineers. The proposed technique can then be used in
surveys to collect information to develop new social capital indicators for the
science and engineering workforce. As a result, researchers can use these
indicators to investigate how various dimensions (e.g. advice, support, etc.) of
personal networks may explain the productivity and career outcomes of scientists
and engineers. More generally, this project will advance the understanding about
individuals' personal networks as well as the data collection technique for
personal network research. It will also offer new insights into the
understanding of the psychology of survey response.