* 1246139
* Instructional Module Development (IMoD) System: Building Faculty Expertise in Outcome-Based Course Design
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Srividya Bansal, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2018
* USD 214,680.00

It is essential that current and future generations of engineering science and
technology faculty understand how to incorporate effective pedagogical practice
and assessment principles in courses they design. Because STEM faculty typically
do not have educational training it can be difficult for them to understand how
to assess pedagogy and even more difficult for them to design course material
that effectively incorporates the best pedagogical practices. This project is
producing modules that will assist faculty in the instructional development of
STEM coursework materials. The instructional module development system being
created in this project will ensure that faculty use effective tools when
designing and delivering research-based pedagogical and assessment strategies in
their courses. In addition the project is conducting research to develop a
framework for outcome-based course design and is translating this into a web-
based software tool. The project is identifying deficiencies in existing course
design tools and is looking for a consensus on the representation of required
knowledge (a taxonomy) for pedagogical and assessment strategies. The
instructional module development is user centered and will assess the
effectiveness and usability of the system in helping faculty create outcome-
based course designs. The project is also assessing the impact that the course
design system has on a user's knowledge of outcome-based course design.