* 1246662
* 2012 CSU-LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Los Angeles
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Juanita Barrena, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2014
* USD 986,999.00

The performance site for this LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is
California State University, Los Angeles, one of the 22 California State
University campuses included in the California State University-Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP). The project provides a Master's
level "bridge" to doctoral-level study for a cohort of 12 graduates of LSAMP
undergraduate programs. The Master's-level experience is designed to increase
participant persistence and competencies in STEM and their advancement to Ph.D.
programs following completion of the Master's degree. In addition to providing
substantial financial support to enable students to focus full time on a two-
year program of Master's-level course work and research, the project provides an
integrated set of activities designed to advance BD students toward completion
of doctoral level studies. Activities include: (1) quarterly meetings with the
Lead Project Director to monitor progress; (2) a workshop series focused on
information needed for adjustment to and success in graduate school; (3) writing
support; (4) weekly professional seminars; (5) community building activities;
(6) "connecting" BD Fellows to doctoral programs; and (7) assistance with
applications to Ph.D. programs, financial aid and
fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to advancing the
NSF's FY 2011-2016 Strategic Plan, which aims to: "Prepare and engage a diverse
STEM workforce motivated to participate at the frontiers." The project will
increase the number of Ph.D. level scientists by identifying and developing the
talent of students who would be unlikely to pursue graduate-level study at
either the Master's or the doctorate level without the project's support. These
include students with deficits in their baccalaureate credentials and others
with competitive credentials for direct entry into Ph.D. programs, but who are
otherwise unable or hesitant to do so. Since the pool of LSAMP baccalaureate
recipients includes a high proportion of individuals from underrepresented
minority groups, the project anticipates that most, if not all of participants
will be students from these groups. Therefore, the project will contribute
significantly to broadening participation in academe and science research.