* 1246497
* Quantum Information Meets Mathematics: the Blessing of High Dimension
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Stanislaw Szarek, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2016
* USD 101,035.00

This project involves research on the interface of quantum information science
and mathematics. Over the last few years it has become clear that quantum
information theory enjoys very close links to geometric functional analysis
(Banach space theory, operator spaces, high-dimensional probability) a.k.a.
asymptotic geometric analysis, which belongs to the expertise of Dr. Szarek. In
a nutshell, asymptotic geometric analysis studies quantitative properties of
convex sets (or other geometric structures) and their "approximate" symmetries
as the dimension goes to infinity. This makes it ideally suited to the study of
quantum systems, where the setting is inherently high-dimensional. While
classically analyzing high-dimensional phenomena often suffers from the curse of
dimensionality (the complexity of the problem exploding with the increase in
dimension, so that the question quickly ceases to be tractable), we may say that
asymptotic geometric analysis exploits the blessing of dimensionality, with the
symmetries mentioned above becoming apparent only when the dimension is large.
Dr. Szarek's goals for this project are centered on acquiring a more thorough
understanding of relevant aspects of computer science and of quantum physics,
which will permit exploring in greater depth the links between asymptotic
geometric analysis and the quantum theory. Subsequent objectives include
identifying mathematical techniques that may be helpful in solving known
problems and, more generally, in developing mathematical framework pertinent to
processes associated with quantum information tasks. Specific problems and
issues to be studied are related to distillability, the PPT property,
probabilistic models for quantum objects/processes, derandomization and the role
of duality.

The quest to build a quantum computer is one of the major scientific and
technological challenges of the 21st century, and quantum information theory
provides the theoretical framework for that quest. A major event in the
development of that field will be a semester-long program Mathematical
Challenges in Quantum Information, to be held at the Isaac Newton Institute for
Mathematical Sciences in Cambridge, England in the fall of 2013. The program
will bring together theoretical physicists, computer scientists and
mathematicians with interests in the subject and will supply an ideal
environment for an interdisciplinary interaction between experts with different
backgrounds. NSF funding will support Dr. Szarek's residency at the Newton
Institute for the duration of the program. While Dr. Szarek is a theoretical
mathematician, the research is expected to contribute to the understanding of
the capabilities and limitations of quantum information systems and thus may
have far reaching direct and indirect impact. Additionally, the project will
ultimately result in involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in
intensive research, thus contributing to the development of scientific base and
infrastructure.