* 1246721
* Workshop on crystal structure prediction with the USPEX code
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Artem Oganov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

Crystal structure prediction and computational materials design present
important challenges in modern science, until recently believed to be plagued
with insurmountable difficulties. The evolutionary methodology developed by
Oganov and colleagues opened new ways for solving this problem. Their USPEX code
is now used by researchers worldwide, from such diverse fields as geosciences,
chemistry, physics and material sciences. Now computational materials design and
crystal structure prediction is a booming field with very rapid developments of
revolutionary nature. This workshop will train a new generation of experts in
this field. The workshop will consist of lectures, given by the developers and
experienced practitioners in the field, and hands-on tutorials. The lectures
will cover the most important methodological discoveries and breakthroughs, made
both by the organizers of this workshop and other groups. The tutorials will
cover the basics, rising to the level of realistic research projects. This will
give the students an opportunity to acquire skills and knowledge, necessary to
pursue their own research projects. During hands-on sessions, and number of
graduate students and postdocs will supervise the students and control their
understanding of the material. The practical calculations will be done on
computational resources of the Oganov lab (currently, over 300 cores), more than
sufficient for these tutorial sessions, even taking into account the large
number of participants. In preparation to this workshop and during it, unique
set of pedagogical materials, which will become available openly on the
Internet, will be created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of this workshop is
to train a new generation of computational materials scientists, giving them
essential skills in one of the most dynamically developing fields of modern
science. This whole field, and the methods that will be taught at the workshop,
are the future of both fundamental science and industry. Currently, there are no
courses or educational programs in this young field of science. Regular
workshops of this kind will help to define the scope, program, and pedagogical
materials for courses on Computational Materials Discovery and Crystal Structure
Prediction. The pedagogical materials will be made generally and openly
available through the Internet, and thus it will be possible to incorporate them
in courses taught by other institutions. Participation of women and minorities
will be encouraged.