* 1246594
* Collaborative Research: Hydrology and Geochemistry of Prairie Pothole Lake Sedimentary Pore Waters: Implications for the Attenuation of Pesticides
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* George Aiken, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 283,785.00

Intellectual Merit: Prairie pothole lakes (PPLs also referred to as wetlands)
are important hydrologic features in the glacial till of the Upper Midwest. The
hydrology and climate of the region coupled with the composition of the till
have developed water chemistries unique to PPLs, including extremely high levels
of sulfate. Results of a pilot project funded by NSF showed that sulfate
undergoes reduction in the sediments to produce reduced sulfur species in the mM
levels. Our data demonstrated that unaltered PPL pore waters sampled from lakes
P1 and P8 in the Cottonwood Lakes Area abiotically and rapidly degraded
chloroacetanilide and nitroaromatic pesticides (which are heavily used in row
crop agriculture in the region). Additionally, we found dissolved organic matter
levels in the 100s of mg/L-C in the pore waters, which are among the highest
measured for lacustrine systems. This proposal expands upon our previous work to
understand the linkages between hydrology, the evolution of the unique
biogeochemical composition of PPL pore waters, and its ability to attenuate
agricultural pesticides. We hypothesize that changes in the local hydrology in
response to drought, evapotranspiration, and precipitation can influence the
composition and abundance of chemical species capable of attenuating pesticides.
Our specific hypotheses are: 1). During periods of drought, evapotranspiration
is an important driver of groundwater flow out of PPLs; 2). Extensive
precipitation creates water table mounds that can reverse hydraulic gradients
and cause groundwater to flow back into wetlands; 3). The biogeochemical
composition of PPLs is influenced by these local and seasonally varying
hydrologic processes; 4). Overland flow is capable of transporting both
pesticides and other chemical constituents to PPLs; and 5). PPL pore water
constituents are capable of attenuating other classes of commonly used
pesticides beyond those studied in the pilot project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prairie pothole lakes are a critical hydrological and
ecological feature of national and international importance (e.g., groundwater
recharge, habitats for waterfowl and other fauna, etc.). Their unique water
chemistry makes them an important means for mitigating the effects of pesticides
used in this extensively farmed region. Our research could influence how these
lakes are managed in the future, especially with respect to the intractable
problem of nonpoint source agricultural pollution. The proposed research will
support three graduate students who will be responsible for conducting the
research and aiding our USGS colleagues. The students will coordinate research
and sampling events between the collaborating universities and the USGS
laboratories. Research results will be broadly disseminated through conferences,
journal publications, and informal town hall meetings with local stakeholders.
Outreach to high school students from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering will occur through activities oriented non-residential summer camps.
Further, we propose to recruit a high school teacher to accompany us on our
sampling trips and share these experiences through electronic journals and in
his/her classroom. This outreach initiative is based upon the NSF funded ARCUS
TREC model.