* 1246715
* SNM:  A Versatile Microplasma-based Patterning Technology for Large-Scale, High Throughput Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,05/31/2019
* Christian Zorman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,228,381.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a microplasma-based, direct-
write fabrication tool to produce sub-100 nm metallic and metal oxide device
structures on rigid and flexible substrates. The patterned structures will be
formed by selective electrochemical reduction of metal ions dispersed in
polymeric films by plasma electrons. Different metals will be explored including
Ag, Au, Pt, Cu, and Ti. To control the pattern dimension, a durable nanostencil
masking technology will be incorporated into the process. Simulations and
experiments will be performed to explore and elucidate the relationship between
the stencil geometry and charged fluid transport that ultimately determines the
pattern transfer and scaling. Concurrently, nanolayered polymer substrates with
moisture barrier properties suitable for durable flexible electronics will be
developed. The two process technologies will be integrated on a roll-to-roll
line to demonstrate process compatibility and scalability. The resulting
metallic nanostructures will be evaluated for such properties as electrical
conductivity, adhesion, density, surface roughness, pattern fidelity, and
responses to applied strains. Accelerated lifetime testing will be performed to
assess the viability of the structures in commercial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will result in a
highly versatile, low-cost, high-throughput method for the fabrication of
nanoscale structures and functional devices on flexible substrates. The
microplasma-based patterning process is operated near room temperature, making
it compatible with a wide variety of substrates ranging from silicon to
polymers, and at atmospheric pressure, making it readily scalable to continuous
production systems. The technology has the potential to complement state-of-the-
art, direct-write nanofabrication systems currently used in silicon CMOS
electronics, as well as creating new opportunities to fabricate nanoscale
devices for flexible electronics and sensors. Additionally, integration of the
microplasma tool with nanolayered polymer substrates could enable the
development of flexible electronic systems for moisture latent environments
including implantable medical microsystems.