* 1246585
* Increasing U.S. Engagement in the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis through the  U.S. National Member Organization for IIASA
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 04/30/2019
* USD 649,791.00

This award provides support to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences to carry
out its responsibilities as the United States National Member Organization (NMO)
of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). These
responsibilities take two forms: participating in governance of the Institute
through participation in the IIASA Council and direct interaction with the
organization; and facilitating and encouraging U.S. interest in IIASA's
activities. The Board on International Organizations (BISO) of the National
Research Council (NRC) executes these responsibilities through the U.S.
Committee for IIASA, chaired by Professor Don Saari of the University of
California, Irvine. IIASA was established in 1972 as a multilateral, non-
governmental research institution devoted to interdisciplinary, policy-oriented
research. At IIASA, multidisciplinary, international teams of researchers
conduct research on issues related to environmental, technological, and economic
aspects of global change, including energy and technology, population, and
natural resources. The Institute thus serves as a neutral forum for sustained
investigation and discussion of global and international issues. It is located
in Laxenburg, Austria, near Vienna. The intellectual merit of the proposal
consists of the work by the U.S. NMO, in collaboration with interested U.S.
researchers and Government agencies, to formulate U.S. views regarding IIASA's
research, budget, and administration. This helps to insure the integrity of the
Institute and guides the IIASA research program in ways that will maintain its
quality and its relevance to U.S. research and policy concerns. The NMO works to
broaden the impact of the Institute and its work by serving as a liaison to the
U.S. science, technology, and policy communities, with the goal of increasing
participation in and awareness of IIASA by Americans in academia, government,
business, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). This includes recruiting
for and funding IIASA's Young Scientists Summer Program for advanced graduate
students; helping to find suitable candidates for IIASA's job vacancies; serving
as the hub of a national network of interested scholars and policymakers; and
helping IIASA to find opportunities to participate in national policy debates.
The chairman of the U.S. Committee represents the U.S. NMO at IIASA's Council
meetings. The Council is composed of representatives from the 16 NMO's; each NMO
country pays an annual membership contribution. The U.S. Council member works
with the Director of IIASA, the IIASA Council Program Committee, and the IIASA
Science Advisory Committee to guide and strengthen the IIASA research program.
The U.S. national committee carries out an annual review of IIASA's research
progress, soliciting comments from academic, government, and other experts in
the U.S. scientific community.