* 1246463
* The Cost of A New Fur Coat:  Interactions between Molt and Reproduction in Weddell Seals
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* James Testa, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,249,867.00

Marine mammals that inhabit high latitude environments have evolved unique
mechanisms to execute a suite of energetically-costly life history events
(CLHEs) within a relatively short timeframe when conditions are most favorable.
Understanding the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that regulate CLHEs is
particularly important in species such as Weddell seals, as both reproduction
and molt are associated with large reductions in foraging effort, and the timing
and outcome of each appears linked with the other. The long-term mark recapture
program on Erebus Bay's Weddell seals provides a unique opportunity to examine
CLHEs in a known-history population. The proposed work will monitor
physiological condition, pregnancy status, and behavior at various times
throughout the year to determine if molt timing is influenced by prior
reproductive outcome, and if it, in turn, influences future reproductive
success. These data will then be used to address the demographic consequences of
trade-offs between CLHEs in Weddell seals. The impact of environmental
conditions and CLHE timing on population health will also be modeled so that
results can be extended to other climates and species.

An improved understanding of the interactions between CLHEs and the environment
is important in predicting the response of organisms from higher trophic levels
to climate change. Results will be widely disseminated through publications as
well as through presentations at national and international meetings. In
addition, raw data will be made available through open-access databases. This
project will support the research and training of graduate students and a post-
doctoral researcher and will further foster an extensive public outreach
collaboration.