* 1246320
* Integrated Evaluation of Mantle Xenoliths from the Fosdick Mountains, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Seth Kruckenberg, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 12/31/2015
* USD 219,645.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes an investigation of mantle
xenoliths entrained within a suite of ~1.4 Ma mafic volcanic centers in the
Fosdick Mountains, Antarctica. These recently entrained mantle xenoliths offer a
unique opportunity to characterize the West Antarctic lithospheric mantle that
has been subject to active modification from Cretaceous to Present by plate-
boundary processes, such as orthogonal to oblique plate convergence,
intracontinental rifting, continental breakup, and Neogene volcanism. These
volcanic centers derive from heterogeneous mantle sources and host a
compositionally diverse suite of mantle xenoliths that have varied mineral
assemblages and microstructures. The proposed research has two complementary
goals: to assess structural and compositional heterogeneity within the upper
mantle and the variability of intrinsic and extrinsic variables at a variety of
lithospheric levels; and to use textural and compositional characterization of
the xenolith suite to elucidate possible causes of heterogeneous seismic
anisotropy within the Marie Byrd Land mantle lithosphere and inform competing
hypotheses explaining the active volcanism, thermal anomaly, and slow seismic
velocities beneath West Antarctica. Furthermore, characterization of samples of
the mantle beneath West Antarctica provides a type of 'ground truth' in support
of contemporary ANET/POLENET seismology research that seeks to determine mantle
composition, temperature, and sources of seismic
anisotropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The PI is in his
first-year as a tenure track faculty member at Boston College. A postdoctoral
researcher will be trained in EBSD techniques, interdisciplinary polar research,
and the mentoring of undergraduate investigators. Two Boston College
undergraduates will participate in the research and a priority will be placed on
selecting underrepresented minorities and first-generation college students. An
existing sample suite assembled over more than 20 years of NSF sponsored field
work, will be used. The PI will create a digital database for microstructural,
textural, and xenolith data for rapid dissemination to the international
Antarctic community.