* 1246221
* (RDE-BPR1) Veterans in STEM:  Critical Analysis of the Factors Affecting Pathways to STEM Careers for Veterans Experiencing Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Alexis Petri, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 442,000.00

This research study "Veterans in STEM: Critical Analysis of the Factors
Affecting Pathways to STEM Careers for Veterans Experiencing Disabilities" is
being conducted in response to the NSF's Research in Disabilities Education
(RDE) program solicitation (NSF 12-542) for the RDE-Broadening Participation
Research in STEM Education Level 1 (RDE-BPR1) track. The RDE-BPR1 track targets
fundamental learning and educational research, early-stage studies, and design
and development research. RDE-BPR1 projects enhance the understanding of the
basic underlying issues affecting differential learning, participation,
persistence and graduation rates of postsecondary students with disabilities in
STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on broadening
participation in STEM of veterans challenged by disabilities acquired due to
experiences of combat trauma. Due to experiences of combat trauma, veterans
often experience an array of challenges associated with post-traumatic stress
and traumatic brain injury such as learning, memory, sensory, or communication
challenges. The target population of this study is veterans and student veterans
experiencing these challenges, which are often "invisible" or unrecognized
during the transition from military to civilian life. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed project is to investigate the critical factors impacting
learning, participation, persistence, and graduation for veterans with
disabilities pursuing undergraduate STEM degrees. The proposal targets one
primary research question: What are the critical factors reported by veterans
with invisible disabilities influencing their decisions to enroll and persist in
STEM post-secondary undergraduate programs? Through a social ecological
framework, this study is designed to investigate veteran-specific variables.
Using fuzzy cognitive mapping (FCM), a methodology that applies fuzzy set theory
making causal cognitive maps computable, the data from the subjects will provide
a clear image of the multiple dimensions (e.g., characteristics, timing, and
intensity) influencing veterans with disabilities succeeding in STEM. The
interdependencies, as well as measures of direct and indirect effects will be
computable, displayed, and validated by the subjects. Data collection involves
interviews with subjects who include (a) veterans with disabilities in STEM, and
(b) veterans transitioning between military service and college. Data is being
sampled from a national population of subjects. In the interview process, causal
cognitive maps are being created and relationships between identified variables
are given quantifiable direction and weight. In the final phase, the maps are
integrated qualitatively and quantitatively to result in a network of the direct
and indirect relationships between influencing variables.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes an independent and external
evaluation, plans to disseminate the results and findings from the study to a
broad research audience and the public, and a plan to expand the subject pool
beyond veterans with disabilities in future studies that will address contextual
variables in which student veterans with disabilities in, and interested in
STEM, operate.