* 1246971
* Constraints on the Rheology of the Lithosphere in Western North America from Observationally Driven Dynamic Models
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* William Holt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 148,994.00

The problem to be studied in this research involves the three dimensional
dynamics of western North America. The objective is to incorporate the effects
of 3-D global mantle circulation, along with detailed lithosphere structure. The
project will incorporate latest results of lithosphere and upper mantle
structure, obtained from EarthScope's USArray data, into the models. The models
will yield predictions of strain rate, surface motion of lithosphere, and upper
mantle structure. Benchmarking with 3-D models indicates that reliable
structural information leads to reliable estimates of the stresses responsible
for the active deformation field, independent of precise knowledge of absolute
values of effective viscosity. Given constraints on the structure, we will
investigate the range of models that satisfy surface observations of velocity,
lithosphere deformation indicators, and World Stress Map stress orientations.
This modeling places a bound on the magnitudes of depth-integrated stresses
acting within the lithosphere and, as such, places bounds on the lithosphere
rheology. We propose to use final model constraints on stress magnitudes and
depth integrated lithosphere effective viscosities, together with heat flow
measurements, strain rates, and crustal thickness estimates to investigate the
bounds on rheological flow parameters for the lower crust and upper mantle
beneath Western North America. Finally, we propose to investigate 3-D regional
lithosphere dynamic models to address the influence of rheologically weak zones
within the middle crust, their impact on depth-dependent horizontal flow, along
with effects on coupling of mantle flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stresses acting
within the Earth's lithosphere are responsible for strain that is ultimately
released in earthquakes along faults. Over geologic time scales, this permanent
strain results in mountain building and basin formation. High-speed computers
now make it possible to investigate the magnitude, scale, and distribution of
processes that lead to these stresses and strains within the lithosphere. These
processes include mantle convection, along with forces associated with
topography and variations in thickness and density of the Earth's crust.
Seismological observations provide constraints on variations of thickness and
density of the crust, along with images of structure within the Earth's
convecting mantle. These images, or velocity variations, yield information on
the density variations that drive mantle convection. This project will use a
vast amount of new constraints (provided by the NSF funded EarthScope project)
on structure beneath western North America to place bounds on the magnitude and
distribution of stresses acting within the lithosphere. Models, which involve
finite-element solutions of force-balance, will incorporate the effects of
three-dimensional mantle flow, along with lithosphere topography and structure.
Models will be further constrained by surface observations of plate motions
(obtained from high precision GPS), and heat flow measurements. This research
will help delineate the magnitude and distribution of the state of stress within
the lithosphere. This result on the state of stress, including its link with the
specific driving mechanisms, will provide a fundamental framework for
investigations of earthquake source physics and the earthquake cycle in general.
This work will also provide important insights into how continental deformation
evolves over longer time scales. Finally, project will provide technical
training to scientists who will enter the work force with improved skills
involving problem solving and communication, applicable in both industrial and
academic settings.