* 1246537
* NEON Initial Operations
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* kirsten Ruiz, National Ecological Observatory Network, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Roland Roberts
* 08/31/2016
* USD 21,000,000.00

Our fundamental understanding of the effects of climate and landuse change, and
invasive species on the biosphere requires an instrument platform that has the
capabilities to measure the structure, composition, processes, and dynamics of
the biosphere from sub-meter to regional scales, regional scales to the
continental scales, and beyond. The National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON) will be the first national experimental facility specifically designed to
enable research on both the causes of and responses to environmental change
across these scales. NEON will provide this capability through in situ sensing
capabilities, biological measurements, manipulative experiments, airborne remote
sensing, analytical facilities, and facilities for data analysis, modeling,
visualization, and forecasting, all networked via a cyberinfrastructure
backbone. NEON will provide a unique facility to support a large and diverse
group of organizations and individuals; foremost are the scientists, educators,
and engineers who will use NEON infrastructure in their research and educational
programs. The NEON data will contribute to an innovative multi-disciplinary
approach to educate undergraduate and graduate students, the public, and policy-
making individuals. Graduate and Post Doctoral training and internships and
undergraduate research opportunities will be implemented based on NEON's
accomplishment based learning. A museum project, workshops, seminars and courses
are planned. The NEON Citizen science products (including Project BudBurst,
http://neoninc.org/budburst/) and all educational components of the NEON web
portal will be operational. The NEON Observatory will continue its collaborative
partnerships and training programs with underserved and minority
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to NEON, Inc. provides
three years support for the initial operations of NEON. Funds will support the
scientific, technical and management staff and operations of central and
distributed facilities including NEON Headquarters and Technical Support
Facilities and 19 Domain Support Facilities. In addition 86 observation sites
will be commissioned including, 47 terrestrial sites and 39 aquatic sites with
co-located 7 stream experimental sites and begin operations to provide data for
basic research, education, and management. The operations scope will scale in
proportion to the site commissioning. The three Airborne Observatories will
begin conducting routine remote sensing campaigns and supporting investigator
driven research. The Data Center will provide data and data products from the
accepted sites, education program, and remote sensing. Funds will support the
Education and Training Program. During the period of initial operations, NEON,
Inc. will evaluate management and cost efficiencies to refine both. The project
can be accessed at http://neoninc.org.