* 1246145
* Small-Business ERC Collaborative Opportunity Package Prototyping of the Environment Resistant Package (ERP) with commercial Inertial Sensor and Oscillator Companies
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Yogesh Gianchandani, ePack, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 199,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small-Business/ ERC Collaborative Opportunity
(SECO) grant will help ePack, Inc., commercialize the Environmental Resistant
Package (ERP), which is a platform technology developed in the Wireless
Integrated Microsystems (WIMS) Engineering Research Center (ERC). Microsensors
(as well as many other electronic components) are fragile and sensitive to
particles moisture, vibration, shock and temperature changes in the environment.
Packaging therefore is a key factor for protecting these device in real world
applications and therefore for their commercialization. In fact, packaging is
one of the biggest limiting factors for the commercialization of new
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is why ePack
was founded and then fully spun out of the WIMS-ERC at the University of
Michigan (U of M) in 2010 and has an exclusive license for the patent on the ERP
technology. The ERP technology enables vacuum packaging, vibration isolation and
low power oven control of devices. The purpose of this SECO grant is to
prototype commercial inertial sensors and oscillators in the ERP in order to
demonstrate 10 / 100 times improved vibration resistance or temperature
stability (and therefore that level of improved performance) in several
different application areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact (Applications
of the Technology)&lt;br/&gt;This will enable a next generation of cost
efficient, high performance and high reliability applications including:
handheld navigation systems for firefighters and troops; navigation of unmanned
air vehicles for police, military and commercial applications; motion control
for industrial robots; and mobile broadband for commercial trucks and small
jets.