* 1246025
* Collaborative Research: CC-NIE Integration: A Data Movement Solution for Next-Generation Campus Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2015
* USD 316,398.00

Research progress often depends critically on the ability to move data over long
distances: for example, from a remote supercomputer, telescope, or genome
sequencing center to a researcher's laboratory or to a university data center.
Yet despite major improvements in wide area and campus networks, data movement
remains often frustratingly difficult and slow, due to obstacles such as
firewalls and inadequate tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome this problem,
this project develops an easy-to-use, high-performance data transfer and
synchronization solution that can operate everywhere researchers need their data
to be: desktops and research labs, campus servers and HPC facilities,
supercomputing centers, scientific instruments, and public and private cloud
providers. This new data movement solution builds on the widely used Globus
implementation of the GridFTP protocol and the newer Globus Transfer hosted data
movement service, plus the Indiana University implementation of the eXtensible
Session Protocol (XSP), which provides for negotiation of end-to-end circuits
via protocols such as OpenFlow. It incorporates numerous new capabilities,
including negotiation of end-to-end circuits; communication between pairs of
nodes that are both behind network address translation (NAT) devices or
firewalls; new data movement capabilities such as efficient verification of
transfers; and HTTP for communication with object
stores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resulting software solutions are delivered to the
NSF community via a combination of Globus Transfer and the GridFTP and XSP open
source software distributions. Partner science and engineering projects in
cosmology, biology, physics, cyberinfrastructure, and other domains are
assisting with evaluation.