* 1246302
* Collaborative Reserach: CO2 Leakages as Cold-Geysers and Diffusive CO2 Transport: Continuous Monitoring of in-situ P,T, Chemistry and CO2 Flux with Numerical Verificaiton
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Brian McPherson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 03/31/2016
* USD 111,052.00

Global climate change due to the rise in anthropogenic CO2 concentrations in the
atmosphere and resulting necessity for the reduction of CO2 emissions is the
general scientific consensus. One method for mitigating CO2 concentrations in
the atmosphere is to capture CO2 from its sources and sequester it into the
subsurface. However, if the stored CO2 reaches highly permeable conduits such as
faults and fractures, CO2 could leak unabated to other formations or to the
surface. The addressed eruptive mechanisms are analogues to natural CO2 eruption
mechanisms, which are found in CO2-driven cold-water geysers around the world.
In this project, phenomenological CO2 leakages from cold-water geysers, springs,
and diffusive CO2 transport will be investigated by collecting continuous
datasets of in-situ P, T, water chemistry (pH, EC, dissolved oxygen, and total
dissolved gas) adjacent to the Little Grand and Salt Wash fault systems in Utah.
Specific project goals include (1) identification of the original CO2 sourcing
and (2) the causes of cyclic patterns observed at cold-water geysers and
diffusive soil CO2 flux. In addition, (3) the role of fault systems on these
cold-water geysers and soil CO2 flux patterns will be investigated. Part I of
the project specifically focuses on understanding the eruption characteristics
of CO2-driven cold-water geysers (Crystal and Tenmile geysers). Part II focuses
on characterizing the short (daily)- and long-term (month) variations of
diffusive soil CO2 flux on the fault systems. In Part III, the numerical
simulations will be conducted to validate the dynamic setting of CO2 eruption at
the geysers and diffusive CO2 flux from soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves societal issues of the importance of CO2 flux, which is considered to
be the most critical component for global climate change and the carbon cycle.
Understanding CO2-driven cold-water geyser eruptions will be important in the
next decade for testing the feasibility of safe storage of the sequestered CO2.
Specifically, the advanced understanding of thermophysical changes in cold-water
geyser eruptions will help design the operational and reservoir conditions
preventing the potential catastrophic CO2 leakage from the storage formation and
develop the in-situ optimum sensors to track the subsurface CO2 plume migration
at the engineered geologic CO2 storage site. Finally, scientific communities who
study hot-water geyser eruption, the well blow-out processes in the petroleum
field, and volcanology eruptions will be interested in finding similarities of
eruption patterns/periods and the role of CO2.