* 1246670
* Integrated Models of Mantle Convection and True Polar Wander, and the Structure of the Earth's Deep Interior
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2016
* USD 214,530.00

The interior of the Earth cools over geological time through the process of
thermal convection. Slow creeping flow allows hot material to rise and cold
material to sink. This large-scale circulation is responsible for building
mountains and driving most of the geological processes we observe at the
surface. The Earth also rotates in space, and the orientation of the spin axis
evolves slowly with time due to a redistribution of mass associated with thermal
convection. Changes in the spin axis, known as true polar wander, are detected
in paleomagnetic observations and are attributed to thermal convection. However,
it is generally assumed that rotation has little influence on thermal
convection. Several new lines of evidence challenge this conventional view.
Plate motions are spatially correlated with the orientation of the rotation
axis. In addition, the Earth's deep interior has peculiar features that reside
on the equator and appear to be affected by rotation. We propose to investigate
the dynamic interaction between thermal convection and true polar wander with
the aim of better understanding these two fundamental
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will integrate thermal
convection and true polar wander into a single, self-consistent description of
planetary dynamics. Numerical models of thermal convection are normally based on
a set of equations that describe conservation of mass, heat and linear momentum,
whereas models of true polar wander are invariably based on conservation of
angular momentum. By expanding and generalizing the usual description of thermal
convection, we have combined these two processes into a single set of equations
that permit full interaction between convection and true polar wander. We plan
to solve these equations numerically by adding new capability to an existing
community software package called ASPECT, which was developed with support from
NSF. All developments undertaken during this project will be made available to
the community through the Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics
(www.geodynamics.org). The software will be useful to other researchers for a
wide range of potential applications, including the thermal and chemical
evolution of continental lithosphere. The proposed research will also contribute
to the training of graduate students and young researchers in advanced
computational methods.