* 1246494
* Race and Gender Variation in STEM Employment and Retention:  A Cohort Analysis Using SESTAT Data
* SBE,NCSE
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Sharon Sassler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 03/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The continuing underrepresentation of women, Blacks and Hispanics in science and
engineering occupations impedes efforts to increase the size of the science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce, a concern for policy
makers who view science and scientists as critical to the future of the U.S.
economy. Existing research shows that one factor contributing to this
underrepresentation is that gains in women's, Blacks' and Hispanics'
representation among STEM college majors do not necessarily translate into equal
gains in STEM employment. Additionally, women, Blacks, and Hispanics remain far
less likely than White or Asian men to be employed in most STEM occupations,
particularly outside the life sciences. But little existing research studies
trends over time in gender and race-ethnic differences in STEM employment or
factors underlying these patterns. The proposed project will use seven waves of
the National Science Foundation's (NSF's) Scientists and Engineers Statistical
Data System (SESTAT) to study gender and race-ethnic differences in employment
in STEM occupations among college graduates who hold a STEM degree.

Broader Impacts: Government spending to educate and train STEM workers is
considerable, reaching nearly 900 million by NSF in 2011 (American Institute of
Physics, 2010). These investments and the need to increase the numbers of women
and underrepresented minority scientists to maintain the future health of the
STEM workforce (Burke, 2007; National Science Board, 2010) make retention of
STEM workers in related occupations a critical policy issue. This project will
enhance the ability of public- and private sector policy makers and program
directors to develop and implement practices that encourage the retention of
women and underrepresented minorities in STEM occupations.