* 1246887
* CAREER:  Stochastic and Robust Variational Inequality Problems:  Analysis, Computation and Applications to Power Markets
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/16/2012,12/31/2017
* Uday Shanbhag, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop an analytical and algorithmic framework for addressing variational
inequality (VI) problems under uncertainty. Variational inequality problems can
accommodate an expansive range of problems, including optimization problems,
Nash games and equilibrium problems. Yet, there is limited understanding of how
to incorporate uncertainty in such problems. The proposed research intends to
fill this gap by considering two extensions: (1) stochastic variational
inequality (SVI) problems, which generalize VIs by replacing the mapping with
its expected-value counterpart; and (2) robust variational inequality (RVI)
problems, where robust solutions to VIs are obtained by parameterizing
uncertainty in the feasible solution set and the mapping. In the context of each
problem, the proposed research will be aggregated around two thrusts: (i)
analysis and (ii) computation. As part of (i), tractable integration-free
characterization statements will be developed, including those pertaining to the
existence, uniqueness and stability of the associated solutions. Additionally,
extensions accommodating nonconvexity will also be investigated. In the context
of (ii), the proposed research will investigate the development of adaptive
step-size stochastic approximation schemes implementable over possibly evolving
networks, as well as globally convergent and scalable decomposition schemes.

If successful, this project will lead to new and enhanced tools for the design
and operation of networked systems, complicated by uncertainty, nonlinearity,
nonsmoothness and competition, as arising in transportation, telecommunications
and energy sectors. More specifically, this research will lead to robust and
reliable power markets, effected through ongoing interactions with the
independent system operator in New England (ISO-NE). The project incorporates a
comprehensive education plan aggregated around high-school discovery courses,
undergraduate research projects and graduate-level seminars and will be
accompanied by efforts toward increasing diversity through student advising and
mentoring.