* 1246308
* I-Corps:  Device for Producing the Non-antibiotic Antimicrobial Hypothiocyanite (HTC) for Use in Food Safety
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Michael Ashby, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project was considered using input from multiple directorates and program
officers. It included verbal input from the I-Corps Cognizant Program Officers
and written input from the Topic-Specific Directorate (included below). The
intellectual merits as well as the broader impacts were considered and the team
was invited to submit this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Directorate
Input:&lt;br/&gt;The PI has developed and patented a novel synthetic process to
make the antimicrobial chemical, hypothiocyanate (HTC). HTC has the potential to
be commercially used in the food safety market if it can be made cheaply.
Currently meat producers in the US use hypochlorite to prevent ecoli
contamination, but this molecule can produce carcinogens and, thus, has been
banned in European markets. The PIs technology, produced under funding from a
NSF grant from the Chemistry Division, should allow HTC to be made at a scale
and price that would make it a safe alternative to
hypochlorite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team consists of the PI, Michael Ashby,
who is a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Oklahoma. The
Entrepreneurial Lead, Robert Free, is a graduate of the University of Oklahoma's
(OU) Engineering Physics program. He is currently a Fellow in OU's Center for
the Creation of Economic Wealth. Robert has experience in commercialization
efforts. J. Boyd Nolan is the Entrepreneurial Mentor. He has experience at
Boeing and has worked for several successful startups. It is my opinion that
this team is excited about the opportunity to actively participate in the I-Corp
Program and will benefit from it. For this reason and the fact that the
discovery is in a commercially significant field, I recommend this proposal for
I-Corp funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognizant Program Director
Recommendation:&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project builds upon previous work
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Previous Grants
were:&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0503984&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0911328&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
a clearly-defined market need and the team possesses the domain knowledge to
justify I-Corps support. If successfully transitioned to a for-profit entity,
there is potential for clear impact. The budget for $50,000 conforms to I-Corps
requirements. The Academic team has discussed this effort with the I-Corps
program directors and it is our unanimous recommendation to support this I-Corps
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will be supported by MPS using the
following codes:&lt;br/&gt;03000000&lt;br/&gt;8023