* 1246861
* Phase III: Development of a Core Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at UCLA
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Jonathan Aurnou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2016
* USD 682,574.00

The Earth's magnetic field creates an electromagnetic cocoon for the planet; it
shields Earth from cosmic rays and limits atmospheric loss by solar wind
erosion.  Present day numerical models can match the gross structure of the
observed geomagnetic field.  However, these models have limited predictive power
because they are not able to simulate the turbulent fluid dynamics that
underlies magnetic field generation in Earth's core. To remedy this, we will
continue our laboratory's unique investigation of fluid turbulence in Earth's
core.  We will make novel measurements of turbulent convection that simulates
Earth's core using the two unique rotating convection devices, both designed and
developed in our laboratory via NSF EAR funding.  Detailed measurements of
extremely turbulent, rapidly rotating convection will be made in our
laboratory's new 2 meter high experimental device. Using our rotating
magnetoconvection device, we will make laboratory measurements of fully
turbulent flows in a new, larger volume tank of liquid gallium. Our results will
be compared with the results of numerical simulations carried out in-house and
by external teams collaborating with us.  This data, providing the first
measurements of extremely turbulent rotating convection and magnetoconvection,
will allow us to better understand the turbulent convection physics that
underpins Earth's core dynamical processes. 

These studies will provide benchmark data describing rotating convection and
magnetoconvection. These results will be especially relevant to numerical
modelers of the Earth's core and other planetary dynamos.  They will also be
relevant to astrophysical and solar dynamo modelers, atmospheric dynamicists,
and fluid physicists and engineers studying turbulence, convection physics and
magnetohydrodynamics. These projects will provide laboratory and computational
training for undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers in the
laboratory. Furthermore, this funding will allow the further development of our
library of geoscience education films that are available online for educators
and students alike (http://spinlab.ess.ucla.edu/ and
www.youtube.com/user/spinlabucla).