* 1246864
* Dynamic Linkages between the Transition Zone &amp; Surface Plate Motions in 3D Models of Subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Magali Billen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 310,855.00

The motion of tectonic plates at the surface of the earth is caused by forces
within the earth's mantle: the push of positive buoyancy at spreading ridges and
the pull of sinking plates (slabs) at subduction zones. At the earth's surface
these forces result in earthquakes where the two plates slide past one another
(plate boundaries). The ability of the force from sinking slabs to effectively
pull tectonic plates behind them depends on how the slab deforms within the
earth's mantle, which in turn depends on how its material properties change as
it deforms. In addition, the total force associated with the sinking slab
depends on changes in the crystal structure of the minerals (phase changes),
which lead to changes in density within the slab. Most of these phase changes
occur between 410 and 660 km beneath the earth's surface, a region known as the
transition zone. Ultimately, the deformation of the sinking slab inside the
mantle is manifest in seismicity occurring within the slab to depths of 660 km
beneath the earth's surface, and observables changes in plate motions at the
earth's surface. The purpose of this study is determine, 1) how surface plate
motions and the state of stress within surface plates react to, and provide
feedbacks for, slab dynamics in the transition, 2) what is the origin of deep
slab seismicity, and 3) if the observed shape of slabs is related to intrinsic
properties of the subducting plate and plate boundary, or is instead a
reflection of the time-dependent evolution of the slab. While the focus of this
study is on deformation within the earth?s mantle, this deformation couples to
the motions of plates at the earth's surface, which can cause destructive
earthquakes and tsunamis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions with
will develop three-dimensional numerical models (simulations) of subduction
dynamics. More specifically we will use the best laboratory and observational
constraints on the mineral composition of the plate (the crust, the residual
harzburgite and the mantle layers), phase transitions (including all major
mineral components) and rheology of the plate and mantle. We will enable
dynamically mobile plates and plate boundaries, which are essential for
understanding the physical connection between slab deformation and surface plate
motions. These models eliminate several simplifying assumptions used in previous
studies allowing us to make connections between slab deformation and surface
plate motions and slab seismicity. Model results will be compared to global data
sets on slab shape, plate characteristics and kinematics, as well as regional
seismic observations on the state of stress within slabs and seismic
discontinuities (which occur at phase transitions) across subducting
lithosphere. The results of this project will provide a much more complete and
realistic understanding of the physical processes that control the deformation
of slabs and their ability to pull tectonic plates, and insight into how slab
seismicity is related to the larger scale deformation slabs. In addition, the
research will support the training of a PhD student, contribute software to the
modeling community, introduce undergraduate students to scientific research, and
contribute to the material used in undergraduate instruction.