* 1246538
* Ensuring the Sustainability of Critical Materials and Alternatives:  Addressing the Fundamental Challenges in Separation Science and Engineering
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Mamadou Diallo, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2013
* USD 28,071.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Chemical and Biological Separations Program in the
Engineering Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems (CBET), Ms Kristin Chin, Dr. Catherine T. Hunt (Dow Chemical Company)
and Prof. Mamadou S. Diallo (Caltech and KAIST) will be co-organizing a 1-day
symposium at the fall ACS annual meeting in 2012. The symposium is titled
"Ensuring the Sustainability of Critical Materials and Alternatives: Addressing
the Fundamental Challenges in Separation Science and Engineering". The aims of
the symposium are to: 1. Discuss the issues related to stresses in the global
market and the key and enabling role of SSE in ensuring a sustainable supply and
utilization of critical materials; 2. Bring into focus crosscutting research
needs and Scientific Grand Challenges in SSE associated with the sustainable
extraction, recovery, recycling and purification of critical materials; and 3.
Communicate these research needs to the SSE and broader science/engineering
community. In addition to the organized talks and panel discussion during the
symposium, the symposium content will be summarized in a comprehensive report
and a dedicated new website will be set up for permanent dissemination of
symposium materials.