* 1246072
* Portable Kit for Experiential Learning in  Programmable Logic Controller Education (PortablePLC)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Sheng-Jen Hsieh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The project is (1) designing and building a low-cost portable Programmable Logic
Controller (PLC) kit with quick-disconnect modules for teaching about basic I/O
devices, sensors, and automated systems; (2) creating instructional support
materials that apply experiential learning strategies to integrate the PLC kit
with lectures, out of class assignments, and lab exercises; (3) developing
faculty expertise in integrating the PLC kit into course curricula; (4)
evaluating the developed PLC kit and instructional support materials; and (5)
disseminating the materials and findings through workshops, web pages, and the
institutionalization of the developed materials. The developed kits and
experiential learning materials are being evaluated in at least four
undergraduate courses at Texas A&amp;M University and in six courses at three
universities with a high enrollment of underrepresented minorities, potentially
impacting at least 280 students at TAMU and at least 120 students at the other
institutions. In addition, the dissemination plan provides for further outreach
to two-year colleges, minority serving institutions, and industry. This ensures
that students from all backgrounds have an opportunity to learn PLC programming
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project evaluation activities expand the body
of knowledge about applications of experiential learning to engineering
education. The results of this research advance knowledge in the area of
automated manufacturing system integration, benefit the manufacturing industry,
system integrators, and consumers and increase US competitiveness in
manufacturing.