* 1246431
* Collaborative Research: Lidar Investigation of Middle and Upper Atmosphere Temperature, Composition, Chemistry, and Dynamics at McMurdo, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Chester Gardner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2019
* USD 247,176.00

The new observations of iron layers, neutral temperatures, and gravity waves up
to 155-km altitudes with the Fe-Boltzmann lidar (deployed at McMurdo in 2010)
have opened a new door to explore the Antarctic neutral thermosphere. These
measurements of neutral-ion coupling and Joule heating, in the critical region
above 100 km, are an objective of highest priority for the upper atmosphere
science community. Development of the neutral atmosphere temperature climatology
is crucial for calibrating satellite observations of the polar mesosphere-lower
thermosphere (MLT) region and validating global climate models; in decades from
now this climatology records will serve as the baseline against which long-term
temperature trends in the changing Antarctic climate are assessed. The studies
of extreme summertime Fe events and solar effects on Fe-layer's bottom side are
improving the understanding of iron chemistry at polar latitudes. The vertical
heat and constituent flux observations with the lidars are enhancing the
knowledge of wave-induced transport in the polar mesopause region and remove the
greatest source of uncertainty in current chemical-dynamical models of the
mesospheric metal layers. This also led to improvements in quantitative
estimates of the cosmic dust input that has implications for a variety of
geophysical processes throughout the Antarctic atmosphere and Southern Ocean.
The characterization and analysis of the gravity wave field in the neutral
atmosphere above McMurdo are advancing the understanding of wave coupling in the
MLT region and provide better constraints on wave parameterization schemes in
climate models. Thus, the McMurdo lidar campaigns provide a new look into the
composition, chemistry, temperature, and dynamics of the polar upper atmosphere
in a critical latitudinal gap region mid-way between the South Pole and
Antarctic Circle. The Fe-Boltzmann lidar has already produced a rich dataset
stored in the CEDAR/Madrigal database, which is readily available to other
scientists to help supporting their own research on polar aeronomy and climate.
This project provides exceptional opportunities to train students and young
researchers by giving them fieldwork experience in Antarctica. The project also
enhances classroom teaching and graduate programs at several prominent
universities around the world.