* 1246587
* RDE-MB1 - Comprehensive Support for STEM Students with Learning Disability (CS3LD)
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Chang-Yu Wu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2018
* USD 846,000.00

Comprehensive Support for STEM Students with Learning Disability (CS3LD) will
use a multi-level approach to broaden participation and achievement of
undergraduate students with LD in the fields of science, technology, engineering
and math (STEM). CS3LD is grounded in Social Cognitive Theory (SCT), which
posits that a student?s knowledge and beliefs, together with the university
environment, influence necessary behaviors for academic success and overall
health/well-being. CS3LD will facilitate development of positive self-efficacy
through activities that will increase knowledge and personal skills, foster
interpersonal relationships, and leverage institutional supports. CS3LD creates
a multi-level (personal, interpersonal and institutional) model for supporting
success of students with LD in STEM. Implementation and evaluation of theCS3LD
model will be rigorously documented and reported so that it can be replicated on
other campuses and potentially applied to other disability groups across the
country. Utilization of a Continuous Improvement Model (CIM) will enable project
responsiveness and ensure that objectives are being met.&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
models address the factors impacting students with learning disabilities in
isolation, while this model integrates personal, interpersonal, and
institutional level factors. Findings have the potential to advance knowledge
and understanding in the fields of STEM, higher education, and disability
studies.&lt;br/&gt;