* 1246396
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: PRISM@UCSD: A Researcher Defined 10 and 40Gbit/s Campus Scale Data Carrier
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Larry Smarr, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 499,995.00

Prism@UCSD creates a campus-wide "Big Data freeway" composed of high-bandwidth
end-to-end optical connections routed by a next-generation Arista switch. This
creates an optical fabric capable of more than 10 Terabit/s of aggregate
bandwidth, has full bisection similar to in-machine room clusters but is
deployed at a campus scale. This researcher-defined network unites users of in-
lab scientific instruments such as genome sequencers and microscopes with remote
compute, visualization, data-storage and analysis systems. Prism bridges to,
augments, and protects the existing campus production network by providing a
complementary, specialized, cost-effective, massive-capacity network to a
targeted group of data-intensive labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prism builds upon
and upgrades the Quartzite "campus-scale network laboratory" NSF MRI (awarded
2006) that was motivated by applications with extreme-scale bandwidth
requirements. Compared to Quartzite, Prism not only adds IPv6 capability and
support for software defined networks via OpenFlow, but also increases port
capacity by 4x, lowers power consumption by 3x, and removes all card-to-switch-
backplane over-subscription at the core switch. In addition, the existing
optical fiber connection to the San Diego Supercomputer Center is being expanded
to 120Gbps as a high-bandwidth bridge to cloud/parallel storage and NSF XSEDE
resources. This fundamentally enables research in multiple disciplines,
including physics, chemistry, biology, climate change, oceanography, and
computer science to address big-data challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops
will be held with regional optical networks and EDUCAUSE to disseminate
experience to research campuses and fully describe this cost-effective,
expandable and replicable infrastructure. In addition, a summer workshop aimed
at minority serving institutions will build on Calit2 / SDSC's tradition of
diversity outreach. Prism will form a model for others to follow in building
their own big-data transportation systems.