* 1246818
* MCTP: Sophomore Transitions:  Bridges into a Statistics Major and Big Data Research Experiences via Learning Communities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Rebecca Doerge, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,500,000.00

This Statistics Living-Learning Community (STAT-LLC) project at Purdue
University addresses two transitions in the training of undergraduate statistics
students: (1.) The bridge from first-year general curriculum into sophomore year
Statistics major courses, and (2.) The bridge into a student's first research
experience in data analysis, especially with Big Data. Each year over a five
year period, 20 sophomore trainees will take part in the STAT-LLC that involve a
new project-based course in big data analysis, new mentored research
collaborations and thrusts, a new seminar series, professional development
initiatives, and living together in a new learning community. The project
leaders will schedule 3 core courses (probability theory, statistical theory,
and data analysis) and the seminar series in blocks, so students take these
courses together as a cohort (and still have plenty of time for individual
electives), live together in a dormitory, and participate in a research
experience that lasts 12 months (start of sophomore year to start of junior
year). The Senior Personnel are 12 faculty from the Department of Statistics at
Purdue University. Additional faculty mentors will hail from Actuarial Science,
Atmospheric/Earth Science, Biology, Biomedical Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Health and Human Sciences, and
the Regenstrief Center for Healthcare Engineering and be supported by
administrators, academic advisors, and recruiters. Beyond Purdue, Rose-Hulman
will host the students for their annual Undergraduate Mathematics Conference.
The Department of Statistical Science at Duke University and the Department of
Statistics at the University of California, Los Angeles will partner with Purdue
on a DataFest student competition. Assessment will be provided by Purdue's
Discovery Learning Research Center, and an External Advisory Board has been
assembled with colleagues from the American Statistical Association, Duke
University, Indiana University, the John N. Gardner Institute for Excellence in
Undergraduate Education, the Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences
Institute, University of Minnesota, University of Wisconsin, University of South
Carolina, and the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, in
Melbourne, Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pairing the academic and residential
life experiences is a known best practice for the first-year experience but is
rarely used at the sophomore level as it is in the present project. Furthermore,
the Statistics Living-Learning Community (STAT-LLC) will pair this model with an
early, team-oriented introduction to big data analysis. We conjecture that the
project will promote retention, instill confidence in the students, help propel
the students through the formative second year of college, and prepare them to
apply for graduate school. This holistic experience should result in more
students pursuing double majors: Statistics and an applied major in a data-
oriented discipline. Our assessment of this comprehensive training experience
should reveal new insights into the way that pairing academic coursework,
research, professional development, and residential life at the sophomore level
can alleviate the sophomore slump within STEM disciplines. The Senior Personnel
will offer faculty training workshops at national meetings to teach colleagues
how to unite the aspects of the sophomore experience in a relevant way for their
campuses. The workshops will be free, to maximize participation by faculty who
would not otherwise have access to such resources, networking, partnerships, and
professional development opportunities. As a result, more campuses will be able
to offer research experiences for sophomores in the context of a learning
community. Students will communicate their experiences each spring at the Rose-
Hulman Undergraduate Math Conference and the Indiana MAA Section meeting.
Diversity initiatives will be supported by Purdue's Disability Resource Center;
Emily Mauzy Vogel Sophomore Leadership Development Conference; HORIZONS Student
Support for 1st generation students; Purdue's chapter of the Society for
Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS); the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Indiana project; and the
Science Diversity Office.