* 1246460
* Collaborative Research:   Boundary Current Control of Upwelling in Southern Drake Passage:  Whither Weddies?
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Andrew Thompson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 427,400.00

Mesoscale processes (~ length scales of up to 100km) are an essential ingredient
of the coupling between the waters of the Antarctic margins and the greater
Southern Ocean, yet there is a paucity of observations at these space and time
scales. The tip of the Antarctic Peninsula is a unique and dynamic environment,
and it is of interest to understand how the interaction of large currents with
local topographic features and the coupling between physical and biogeochemical
processes lead to the transformation of low productivity Antarctic Surface Water
(ASW) to high productivity ASW in this region, following admixture with Weddell
Sea eddies. By combining high resolution in situ ocean glider observations with
remotely-sensed properties of the surface flow, as well as long-term historical
data sets, these investigators will infer long-term changes in the frontal
structure and mixed layer dynamics of the ACC. The project involves monitoring
the fronts in southern Drake Passage over a period of 15 weeks by deploying and
piloting a pair of ocean gliders that will collect approximately 1000 profiles
of temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, fluorescence and optical
backscatter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesoscale variability in southern Drake
Passage influences at least three aspects of Earth?s climate system: the
Southern Ocean?s meridional overturning circulation (MOC), air-sea exchange of
CO2 and the productivity of the Southern Ocean ecosystems. These processes are
of importance to simulating Earth?s climate, and thus to society in general