* 1246651
* I-Corps:  An Ultra Low Power Multi-Constraint Physical Synthesis Tool for Chip Design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Shantanu Dutt, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 9,015.00

Modern digital chips that are used in a myriad of commercial and consumer
electronic products, are very complex and currently consume significant amounts
of power. According to the International Energy Agency, energy consumed by
information and communications technologies as well as consumer electronics will
double by 2022 and triple by 2030 to 1,700 terawatt hours. It is thus imperative
to devise effective new CAD tools based on new algorithmic paradigms to design
digital chips so that they consume as little power as possible (without
degrading performance). The benefits of this will include lowering the power
consumed off the power grid (environmentally friendlier products), smaller
energy costs for cooling high end systems like high-performance servers, and
longer battery lives for portable devices (e.g., smart phones, laptops) and
implantable medical devices. In the crucial physical synthesis (PS) stage, of
the chip design flow (the sequence of stages that the chip design goes through),
certain transformations are applied to the circuit so that the metric of
interest (e.g., power) is optimized subject to constraints on several other
metrics (e.g., speed, yield, chip area/cost, temperature). In conventional
industry design methodology, these transforms are applied sequentially, and each
transform is applied sequentially across circuit components, which result in
sub-optimal designs (e.g., higher power consumption). The team has developed a
novel PS tool called DNF-PS which simultaneously applies any desired set of
transforms accurately and also does so simultaneously across the entire circuit
in order to optimize power, while satisfying multiple constraints. DNF-PS is
thus much more effective than current industry and academic tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore and strengthen
opportunities for commercializing DNF-PS via: 1) Learning about and refining the
commercial aspects of the plan. 2) Further strengthening the performance and
quality of DNF via a few more technological advances, part of which could be
spurred by the customer discovery and interaction aspect of the I-Corps program.
The commercial area of the DNF-PS tool is the well-established market of
Electronic Design Automation (EDA), and the potential customers of the proposed
product are well known: chip design / semiconductor companies. The merit of this
activity will have the following components: a) Design of enhanced algorithms to
improve the near-optimality properties of DNF-PS (thereby resulting in reducing
power consumption even further), thus making it even more attractive for
industry use. b) Developing divide-and-conquer strategies in DNF-PS that can
intelligently partition very large designs into more manageable chunks, and
optimize each separately (thus being more runtime efficient) without
compromising power optimization. c) Getting customer feedback on DNF-PS and
gathering market intelligence on the value of such a tool and its market
requirements. The broader impact of this proposal will include: a) Highly power
optimal chips can be designed efficiently with DNF-PS, with the obvious
attendant improvements in the battery life and/or energy footprint of many
thousands of electronic products. b) Furthermore, due to the significant
efficacy of the underlying DNF optimization technology, DNF-PS can lead to a
significant jump in chip design quality in other metrics besides power, like
speed, reliability and chip yield. This can benefit various applications areas
in which these metrics are paramount (e.g., reliability is very important in
automotive, airplane and space electronics) and also reduce chip cost (due to
increased chip yield).