* 1246102
* Collaborative Research:  Importance of Heterotrophic and Phototrophic N2 Fixation in the McMurdo Dry Valleys on Local, Regional and Landscape Scales
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Douglas Capone, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 393,118.00

The McMurdo Dry Valleys in Antarctica are recognized as being the driest,
coldest and probably one of the harshest environments on Earth. In addition to
the lack of water, the biota in the valleys face a very limited supply of
nutrients such as nitrogen compounds - necessary for protein synthesis. The
glacial streams of the Dry Valleys have extensive cyanobacterial (blue green
algae) mats that are a major source of carbon and nitrogen compounds to biota in
this region. While cyanobacteria in streams are important as a source of these
compounds, other non-photosynthetic bacteria also contribute a significant
fraction (~50%) of fixed nitrogen compounds to valley biota. This research
effort will involve an examination of exactly which non-phototrophic bacteria
are involved in nitrogen fixation and what environmental factors are responsible
for controlling nitrogen fixation by these microbes. This work will resolve the
environmental factors that control the activity, abundance and diversity of
nitrogen-fixing microbes across four of the McMurdo Dry Valleys. This will allow
for comparisons among sites of differing latitude, temperature, elevation and
exposure to water. These results will be integrated into a landscape wetness
model that will help determine the impact of both cyanobacterial and non-
photosynthetic nitrogen fixing microorganisms in this very harsh
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dry Valleys in many ways resemble the
Martian environment, and understanding the primitive life and very simple
nutrient cycling in the Dry Valleys has relevance for understanding how life
might have once existed on other planets. Furthermore, the study of microbes
from extreme environments has resulted in numerous biotechnological applications
such as the polymerase chain reaction for amplifying DNA and mechanisms for
freeze resistance in agricultural crops. Thus, this research should yield
insights into how biota survive in extreme environments, and these insights
could lead to other commercial applications.