* 1246929
* INSPIRE:   Statistical State Dynamics of Turbulent Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Brian Farrell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2017
* USD 600,912.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Climate and Large-scale Dynamics
Program in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Science of the NSF
Directorate for Geosciences (GEO), and the Plasma Physics Program in the Physics
Division of the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).

The goal of the project is to develop a theory for the relationship between
turbulence and large-scale coherent structures that can be applied very
generally to a variety problems in disciplines including atmospheric
circulation, plasma physics, planet formation, and the generation of planetary
magnetic fields. The work is based on stochastic structural stability theory
(SSST), a theoretical framework which the Principal Investigator has developed
in the context of geophysical fluid dynamics. The SSST method framework is used
to create equations for the mutual interaction of turbulence and coherent
structures, and the equilibrium solutions of the equations identify the
statistical mean states of the system. For example, when the theory is applied
to the formation of jet streams due to interactions between the zonal-mean
atmospheric flow and wave motions, it predicts an entire bifurcation structure
from jet emergence as a linear instability to finite amplitude equilibration
followed by a specific series of structural bifurcations as a function of
parameters, such as turbulence intensity, as well as existence of limit cycles
and chaotic mean state behavior. Applications of the theory considered here
include the formation of zonal jets in planetary atmospheres, jet formation in
toroidally confined plasmas, the self-sustaining magnetic fields of planets,
boundary layer turbulence accompanied by streamwise rolls and streaks (of
interest in meteorology and oceanography), and the maintenance of turbulent
angular momentum transport in Keplerian discs required for planetary formation.

The project has broader scientific impacts in that it seeks to identify unifying
principles for phenomena in several scientific disciplines that are not
currently recognized as having the same underlying structures and dynamics. The
unifying, cross-disciplinary nature of the work to be performed is the
justification for funding the project through the INSPIRE mechanism.