* 1246216
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Advancing Network Capacity, Efficiency, and Security for Wisconsin Big Data Research Through Improvement of campus research DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Bruce Maas, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 491,328.00

Powerful networks are the thread that holds together the computing and data
resources that underpin modern scientific discovery. With the ever-increasing
demands on bandwidth to support the analysis of the ever-growing volumes of
scientific data, this project will transition the University of Wisconsin -
Madison (UW-Madison) research community to a new era of networking technologies
and capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software Defined Network (SDN)
technologies will be employed to establish the UW-Madison science DMZ that will
support up to 100Gb/sec data transfer rate to universities and research
institutions across the US through Internet2. Integral to this new campus wide
resource will be the ability to use emerging networking protocols like OpenFlow
to dynamically provision communication bandwidth between departmental resources
and the campus DMZ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new campus wide team of both central
IT and research staff will facilitate the deployment and operation of these new
capabilities. This Advanced Network Team (ANT) will be responsible for the
integration of the new networking and software capabilities with the UW
CyberInfrastructure. An important element of the ANT activity will be to monitor
networking activities on the campus and guide research and development of new
distributed computing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This
will benefit all campus scholarly activities including other NSF sponsored
projects, activities funded by other federal agencies, and other campus
scholarship including the social sciences, humanities, and arts. The expertise
gained will be disseminated throughout the UW System, the Committee for
Institutional Cooperation, and the WiscNet regional network, which serves higher
education, K-12, and public libraries.