* 1246357
* Timing and Duration of the LGM and Post-LGM Grounding Events in Whales Deep Paleo Ice Stream, Eastern Ross Sea Middle Continental Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Philip Bart, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 12/31/2018
* USD 380,528.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Evidence from the eastern Ross Sea continental
shelf indicates that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet advanced and retreated during
the last glacial cycle, but it is unclear whether the ice sheet advanced to the
shelf edge or just to the middle shelf. These two end-member scenarios offer
different interpretations as to why, how, and when the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
oscillated. The PI proposes to acquire seismic, multibeam, and core data from
Whales Deep, to evaluate the timing and duration of two advances of grounded ice
to the outer and middle shelf of the Whales Deep Basin, a West Antarctic Ice
Sheet paleo ice stream trough in eastern Ross Sea. Grounding events are
represented by seismically resolvable Grounding Zone Wedges. The PI will collect
radiocarbon dates on in situ benthic foraminifera from the grounding zone
diamict as well as ramped pyrolysis radiocarbon dates on acid insoluble organics
from open-marine mud overlying the grounding zone diamict. Using these data the
PI will calculate the duration of the two grounding events. Furthermore, the PI
will test a numerical model prediction that West Antarctic Ice Sheet retreat
must have involved melting at the marine terminus of the ice sheet. Pore-water
from the grounding zone diamict will be extracted from piston cores to determine
salinity and &amp;#948;18O values that should indicate if significant melting
occurred at the grounding line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The data collected will provide constraints on the timing and pattern
of Last Glacial Maximum advance and retreat that can be incorporated into
interpretations of ice-surface elevation changes. The proposed activities will
provide valuable field and research training to undergraduate/graduate students
and a Louisiana high-school science teacher. The research will be interactively
shared with middle- and high-school science students and with visitors to the
LSU Museum of Natural Science Weekend-Science Program.