* 1246957
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Participation in Computer Science: AP Computer Science Principles Phase II
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Amy Briggs, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/29/2020
* USD 217,963.00

The College Board, in collaboration with Duke University and Middlebury College,
proposes to extend the developmental work accomplished during the NSF-supported
project "Using Computational Thinking to Model a New Course: Advanced Placement
Computer Science Principles (AP CSP I; NSF award #0938336)." That effort led to
the design of a new introductory computing course -- Computer Science Principles
(CSP) -- that aims to reach a broad, diverse audience of high school students
with rich computer science content and exciting pedagogy, while meeting the
rigor and high standards of the AP program. AP CSP will enable students to
explore the creative aspects of the field and will provide a solid academic
foundation for understanding the deep intellectual and practical contributions
of computing. This follow-on project -- Advanced Placement® Computer Science
Principles Phase II (AP® CSP II) -- will extend that developmental work by
completing all tasks required for deployment of the AP CSP exam during academic
year 2016-17. To meet the goal of this project and to support the CS 10K
initiative's interest in developing assessments and models of delivery, teacher
professional development, and AP support materials, the AP CSP II project will
(1) complete the assessment design to support the learning objectives of the AP
CSP Curriculum Framework, pilot implementation, and scoring of the computer-
based exam, and (2) conduct formative and summative evaluation of AP CSP II
activities, with a focus on determining the extent to which the assessment tasks
measure the learning objectives and whether the course and various assessments
foster participation and success in computer science education, especially among
students traditionally underrepresented in computer science.