* 1246761
* National Center for Earth-surface Dynamics 2: the past and future Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2020
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 2,999,993.00

National Center for Earth-surface Dynamics 2: the past and future
Earth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Paola, Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, Patrick
Hamilton, Vaughn Voller&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota,
EAR-1246761&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The National Center for
Earth-surface Dynamics (NCED) is an NSF Science and Technology Center (STC)
focused on predicting the evolution of the coupled geomorphic-ecological systems
of the Earth?s surface. NCED created the first national center anywhere focused
on the integrated Earth-surface environment, and sunset as an STC in July 2012.
This grant is to continue a small core of the most successful and community-
centric programs developed under NCED in a new format. Its goal is to perpetuate
the legacy of NCED in an innovative form that will engage the broader research
community by focusing activity around an annual research theme that will bring
together experimental, theoretical, and field researchers. The funding will be
used mainly to support young scientists, especially pre-tenure faculty,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students. Beyond its direct research
contributions, among NCED?s most important community benefits have been (1) its
?extended family? model for mentoring students and postdocs; (2) hosting
community activities such as workshops and shared field and experimental
facilities; (3) serving as a focal point to help catalyze and launch new
programs ? for example, the new AGU focus group, the new journal JGR-ES, and the
IYD, all launched during NCED?s tenure with leadership from NCED participants;
(4) hosting focused, ambitious research activities that afforded opportunities
for community participation through extended visits; (5) close integration of
research with informal education and Native American education, by development
of a long-term working partnership with key institutions and people; and (6)
hosting workshops and summer institutes, both strongly focused on young
scientists. With this grant, NCED2 is a set of linked programs; the central
theme will be a program of research theme years focused on key emerging areas in
Earth-surface Dynamics (ESD). The theme years will include workshops,
experiments, postdoc opportunities, visitor programs from undergraduate through
faculty level, and informal education and Native American activities. These
linked program components will allow a broad range of ESD scientists to
collaborate in new ways, enhancing and accelerating their individual efforts to
advance ESD. The focus of NCED2 is embodied in the proposal title: the past and
future Earth. Building on the legacy of the NCED STC, PIs work will be centered
on predicting the Earth-surface environment, combining observations of modern
and past surface systems, experiments, and a full spectrum of theoretical
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed NCED2 would provide the ESD research
community with a set of new ways to collaborate, through theme-year research
with many points of entry: shared synthesis postdocs; visits by graduate and
undergraduate students, and faculty, to take part in collaborative research and
interact with new people, methods, and ideas; workshops; summer institutes; and
a virtual research commons for informal exchange among the broad ESD community.
It would provide access to experimental and other facilities not available at
most institutions, and to the extensive network of researchers created in the
ten years of the NCED STC. The research results will accelerate development of
predictive Earth-surface dynamics, forming the basis for evaluating the future
of the surface environment ? the arena for most life and human activity ? in a
world of changing climate and growing human influence. The results will support
decision-making on topics ranging from river restoration and management to
rebuilding deltaic wetlands. By continuing the strong program NCED has built for
informal education with the Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM), NCED2 will
continue to provide a venue for energetic, multi-faceted, two-way communication
about our planet?s dynamic surface with the public ? a program that has now
reached international dimensions with the SMM-led Water Exhibition. Finally,
NCED2 will continue its commitment to building bridges and partnerships with the
Native American community through our Native American Water Resources, Manoomin,
Climate Change Partnership, giiwed?anang Minnesota Undergraduate AISES Alliance,
and Geoscience Alliance programs. The last of these in particular has now
evolved to a national-scale program to foster Native American environmental
education.