* 1246536
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: A Proof of Concept Study to Demonstrate Tunable Thermal Rectification in Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 54,565.00

CBET-1246536/1246611&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Murad/Puri
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal rectification permits a material to behave both as
a conductor and an insulator simultaneously depending on the direction of heat
transfer. For a material to exhibit thermal rectification it cannot be
homogeneous, and its thermal conductivity should be dependent both on the local
temperature in the material and the location. This requirement has generally led
to the conclusion that only composite materials, such as layered walls, will
exhibit thermal rectification. We propose a proof of concept study to
demonstrate that thermal rectification can be induced in liquids that are
generally homogeneous and not otherwise considered suitable. This will be shown
by manipulating solid-fluid interfaces using either external forces through
applied electric or magnetic fields, or by introducing surface forces, e.g. by
rendering the surfaces hydrophobic or hydrophilic. We will use the method of
molecular dynamics using a technique we have developed to investigate heat
transfer at such solid-fluid interfaces and the resulting thermal rectification.
We thus hope to demonstrate the possibility of thermal rectification for a wide
range of liquids that are already deemed suitable for industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal rectification has important
applications in the thermal management of electronics and thermoelectric
devices. It can also contribute to improving sustainability solutions, such as
solar water heaters that are now being increasingly used, where it is
undesirable to loose heat at night. Other possible applications include
biomedical ultrasound devices, thermal computers, energy saving and harvesting
materials, and direction dependent insulating materials. Solids cannot be easily
manipulated so it is difficult to tune, i.e., change, their rectification
behavior. Liquids are more amenable to such tuning, which will enable the
rectification to be dynamically changed. Thus a material could exhibit
rectification when desirable; else the directionality of rectification could be
inverted or even tuned off completely. This would allow many new devices to
benefit from thermal rectification than is currently possible.