* 1246225
* Travel support request for US participants in BIOT-ESBES meeting (Istanbul, Turkey) from September 23-26, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* William Kelly, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

1246225/ Kelly

This award from the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program
of the National Science Foundation will support the participation of thirteen US
scientists and engineers who are participating in the 9th European
Symposium(http://events.dechema.de/best2012) on Biochemical Engineering to be
held in Istanbul, Turkey from September 23-26, 2012. Bioengineering and the
separation of biomolecules are the main focus of this jointly organized event of
BIOT, ESBES and ISPPP. The symposium will take place at the same time and at the
same place as ECB15, the 15th European Congress on Biotechnology, allowing for
the unique opportunity to visit the complete scientific program of all these
congresses. The idea of this summit is to bring together the international
scientific communities in these fields, to foster communication, cooperation,
and cross-disciplinary exchange of ideas in analyzing the impact of the life
sciences industry in addressing humanity's great challenges. This event will
provide a unique platform for scientists both from industry and academia to
discover new science, technologies, processes and applications.

The meeting is being organized by a coordination group consisting of eight
individuals from ESBES and William J. Kelly (Villanova University, PA/USA) who,
as a current member of the ACS BIOT executive board, is representing ACS BIOT. A
diverse ACS BIOT subcommittee was created for the purposes of identifying US
scientists and engineers to invite as technical presenters and keynote speakers
at the ECB15 conference in Istanbul.

Intellectual Merit This conference is a pre-eminent venue in Europe for
discussing research at the cutting edge of this diverse and rapidly expanding
field. This particular meeting provides a unique opportunity for US scientists
from not one but these four different but overlapping technical areas involved,
to interact with their European counterparts. The thirteen US participants will
be primarily chairing or giving technical presentations in the following areas:
Frontiers and innovations in biopharmaceuticals, Nanotechnology in
bioprocessing, Stem cell bioengineering and cell therapy and tissue engineering
and Systems biotechnology and metabolic engineering. Five of the US speakers
were invited to give keynote talks to launch sessions that would be followed by
shorter technical talks in the same topical area.

Broader Impacts The focus of this conference will be on research at the cutting-
edge of the field of biotechnology in Europe and the US. The conference
organizers have made a significant effort to invite and recruit US speakers and
session chairs from groups underrepresented in science and engineering. Dr.
Claudia Schmidt-Dannert from the University of Minnesota is one of the five US
participants giving a keynote presentation. Furthermore, three of the thirteen
US participants are from the US biopharmaceuticals industry and the remaining
seven are US academics representing universities spanning the US from west to
the east coasts. As a result of this first collaboration between BIOT and ESBES,
there is the opportunity for increasing exchange between researchers in the
flagship scientific organizations in Europe and the US in the areas of
biotechnology. This is a first step in increased interaction between these two
important research communities.