* 1246932
* EAGER: Modeling the Equilibria of Marcomolecules
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Marvin Thrash, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 01/31/2014
* USD 58,676.00

The proposed project focuses on the development of a mathematical model that
describes the binding equilibria of large biological macromolecules. It is
anticipated that our work will lead to a robust model capable of simulating
single and multicomponent isotherms for biomolecules interacting with a variety
of adsorbents. The Gillespie stochastic algorithm is proposed to simulate multi-
component biomolecule isotherms. This method has been successfully used to
simulate reversible protein binding onto DNA active sites. The Gillespie
approach was selected because it has the needed flexibility to model multi-
component protein isotherms on a variety of adsorbents. In this proposal the
colloidal model will be used in conjunction with the Gillespie algorithm to
calculate the probability of binding interactions. Specifically the colloidal
model (CM) will be used to model single component isotherms. Successful modeling
of single component isotherms using the CM approach requires accurate knowledge
of the free energy contribution associated with adsorption. Once the free energy
is known the relative probability of adsorption for each biomolecule in a
multicomponent mixture can be estimated, thus facilitating the simulation of a
multicomponent isotherm with the Gillespie approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
adsorption of large biological macromolecules onto ion-exchange surfaces is
traditionally assumed to be driven by electrostatics. In prior publications we
have presented data showing that the release of water from the contact surface
of the protein and the ion-exchange adsorbent is also a key driving force. This
conclusion is further supported by endothermic heats of adsorption. Endothermic
heats of adsorption are an indication that the adsorptive driving force is not
solely comprised of simple electrostatics. We have incorporated this data into a
colloidal model and successfully simulated single component protein adsorption
isotherms using an ion-exchange adsorbent. We are proposing to expand our
investigation of this phenomenon by incorporating a larger selection of
biological macromolecules and adsorbents in this study. We will use both cation
exchange adsorbents, anion exchange adsorbents and hydrophobic interaction
adsorbents in this study. Chromatographic adsorbents provide a convenient
platform because we have the capability to synthesize materials with different
functionalities. Surface characteristics such as charge density and
hydrophobicity can be varied. We intend to calculate the free energy
contributions of the various adsorptive mechanisms such as electrostatics, van
der Waals interactions, water-release and repulsive interactions. Moreover we
will incorporate these effects into a colloidal model to simulate single
component isotherms. It is also proposed to simulate multi-component isotherms
using the Gillespie stochastic algorithm. We anticipate the development of a
flexible, user friendly model that can be used to simulate multi-component
equilibria involving large macromolecules such as proteins or supercoiled DNA.
Moreover the ability to model the adsorption equilibria of macromolecules is
important because successful simulations are an indication that we have a
fundamental understanding of the adsorptive/binding process. It is anticipated
that a breakthrough in our mathematical understanding of protein adsorption onto
functionalized surfaces will have a transformative effect in the areas of
chromatographic separations and material development for biomedical
applications. Moreover since we will develop these mathematical modeling tools
using desktop applications such as Matlab, a secondary transformative effect is
also anticipated because chemists and biologists will have access to the same
set of modeling tools as engineers to construct models for their specific
application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support two undergraduate
students each year during the life of the grant. The outreach component of this
proposal includes research opportunities for undergraduates from
underrepresented groups. Moreover a new course that covers the adsorption and
purification of proteins will also be offered. The course will be open to
graduate students and undergraduates with the proper prerequisites. The models
and teaching materials developed from this project will be made available to the
public through the Miami University website.