* 1246416
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamic Response of the Ross Ice Shelf to Wave-induced Vibrations
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Ralph Stephen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 316,597.00

Bromirski/1246151&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project intended to
discover, through field observations and numerical simulations, how ocean wave-
induced vibrations on ice shelves in general, and the Ross Ice Shelf (RIS), in
particular, can be used (1) to infer spatial and temporal variability of ice
shelf mechanical properties, (2) to infer bulk elastic properties from signal
propagation characteristics, and (3) to determine whether the RIS response to
infragravity (IG) wave forcing observed distant from the front propagates as
stress waves from the front or is "locally" generated by IG wave energy
penetrating the RIS cavity. The intellectual merit of the work is that ocean
gravity waves are dynamic elements of the global ocean environment, affected by
ocean warming and changes in ocean and atmospheric circulation patterns. Their
evolution may thus drive changes in ice-shelf stability by both mechanical
interactions, and potentially increased basal melting, which in turn feed back
on sea level rise. Gravity wave-induced signal propagation across ice shelves
depends on ice shelf and sub-shelf water cavity geometry (e.g. structure,
thickness, crevasse density and orientation), as well as ice shelf physical
properties. Emphasis will be placed on observation and modeling of the RIS
response to IG wave forcing at periods from 75 to 300 s. Because IG waves are
not appreciably damped by sea ice, seasonal monitoring will give insights into
the year-round RIS response to this oceanographic forcing. The 3-year project
will involve a 24-month period of continuous data collection spanning two annual
cycles on the RIS. RIS ice-front array coverage overlaps with a synergistic Ross
Sea Mantle Structure (RSMS) study, giving an expanded array beneficial for IG
wave localization. The ice-shelf deployment will consist of sixteen stations
equipped with broadband seismometers and barometers. Three seismic stations near
the RIS front will provide reference response/forcing functions, and measure the
variability of the response across the front. A linear seismic array orthogonal
to the front will consist of three stations in-line with three RSMS stations.
Passive seismic array monitoring will be used to determine the spatial and
temporal distribution of ocean wave-induced signal sources along the front of
the RIS and estimate ice shelf structure, with the high-density array used to
monitor and localize fracture (icequake) activity. The broader impacts include
providing baseline measurements to enable detection of ice-shelf changes over
coming decades which will help scientists and policy-makers respond to the
socio-environmental challenges of climate change and sea-level rise. A
postdoctoral scholar in interdisciplinary Earth science will be involved
throughout the course of the research. Students at Cuyamaca Community College,
San Diego County, will develop and manage a web site for the project to be used
as a teaching tool for earth science and oceanography classes, with development
of an associated web site on waves for middle school students.