* 1246484
* Antarctic Peninsula Exhumation and Landscape Development Investigated by Low-temperature Detrital Thermochronometry
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* David Shuster, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 101,315.00

Intellectual Merit: The PIs propose to use the (U-Th)/He system in apatite to
investigate the exhumation history, development of the present topography, and
pattern of glacial erosion in the central Antarctic Peninsula. The Antarctic
Peninsula has been glaciated since the Eocene and Pleistocene climate cooling is
hypothesized to have suppressed, rather than enhanced, glacial erosion. To
achieve these goals, the PIs will use a thermochronometric record of when and
how the present glacial valley relief formed. A challenge to the proposed
research is that, unlike Pleistocene glacial landscapes in temperate areas, the
Peninsula is ice-covered and it is not possible to directly sample the bedrock
surface. The PIs hope to learn about the timing and process of glacial valley
formation through apatite (U-Th)/He and 4He/3He measurements on glacial sediment
collected near the grounding lines of major glaciers draining the Peninsula.
Learning how the Antarctic Peninsula landscape formed is important to discern
how the mechanics of glacial erosion operate on long time scales, and to
understand how glaciers mediate the interaction between climate change and
orogenic mass balance. This work addresses a fundamental question in Antarctic
earth science of how to infer geologic and geomorphic processes active on an
ice-covered and inaccessible landscape.

Broader impacts: This proposal will bring new researchers into the Antarctic
research community. A proposed collaboration with British Antarctic Survey
researchers will build an international collaboration. The outcomes of this
project have ancillary importance to other fields and addresses fundamental
challenges in Antarctic Earth Science.