* 1246203
* Collaborative Research:  THE MCMURDO DRY VALLEYS:  A landscape on the Threshold of Change
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Michael Gooseff, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 11/30/2015
* USD 110,122.00

Collaborative Research: THE MCMURDO DRY VALLEYS: A Landscape on the Threshold of
Change is supported by the Antarctic Integrated System Science (AISS) program in
the Antarctic Sciences Section of the Division of Polar Programs within the
Geosciences Directorate of the National Sciences Foundation (NSF). The funds
will support the collection of state-of-the-art high resolution LIDAR (combining
the terms light and radar) imagery of the Dry Valleys of Antarctica in the
2014/2015 Antarctic field season, with LIDAR data collection and processing
being provided by the NSF-supported NCALM (National Center for Airborne Laser
Mapping) facility. LIDAR images collected in 2014/2015 will be compared to
images from 2001 in order to detect decadal change. Additional fieldwork will
look at the distribution of buried massive ice, and the impacts that major
changes like slumping are having on the biota. All field data will be used to
improve models on energy balance, and hydrology.

Intellectual Merit: There have been dramatic changes over the past decade in the
McMurdo Dry Valleys: glaciers are deflating by tens of meters, rivers are
incising by more than three meters, and thermokarst slumps are appearing near
several streams and lakes. These observations have all been made by researchers
in the field, but none of the changes have been mapped on a valley-wide scale.
This award will provide a new baseline map for the entire Dry Valley system,
with high-resolution imagery provided for the valley floors, and lower
resolution imagery available for the higher elevation areas that are undergoing
less change. The project will test the idea that sediment-covered ice is
associated with the most dramatic changes, due to differential impacts of the
increased solar radiation on sediment-covered compared to clean ice, and despite
the current trend of slightly cooling air temperatures within the Dry Valleys.
Information collected on the topography, coupled with the GPR determined buried
ice distributions, will also be incorporated into improved energy and
hydrological models. In addition to providing the new high-resolution digital
elevation model (DEM), the project will ultimately result in identification of
areas that are susceptible to sediment-enhanced melt-driven change, providing a
powerful prediction tool for the impacts of climate change.

Broader Impacts: The new DEM will be immediately useful to a wide range of
disciplines, and will provide a comprehensive new baseline against which future
changes will be compared. The project will provide a tool for the whole
community to use, and the investigators will work with the community to make
them aware of the new assets via public presentations, and perhaps via a
workshop. The map will have international interest, and will also serve as a
tool for environmental managers to draw on as they consider conservation plans.
Several undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the project, and
one of the co-PIs is a new investigator. The imagery collected is expected to be
of interest to the general public in addition to scientific researchers, and
venues for outreach such as museum exhibits and the internet will be explored.
The proposed work is synergistic with 1) the co-located McMurdo LTER program,
and 2) the NCALM facility that is also funded by the Geosciences Directorate.