* 1246042
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Using Software-Defined Networking to Facilitate Data Transfer
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Tracy Futhey, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 496,563.00

Duke University is enhancing the capabilities of its data network to better
support data-intensive research. By deploying a mix of next-generation software-
defined networking (SDN) hardware along with enhanced high-speed conventional
networking links, Duke creates on-demand high speed paths either through Duke's
own network (connecting resources in different parts of campus) or directly from
campus laboratories to external networks. In both cases these dynamically
managed links can bypass layers of network management which, while sensible for
routine traffic, add latency and limit speed for trusted high volume science
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As Duke's core network is already fast and agile,
the emphasis in this work is on improving network capability over the last few
meters through local building switches and directly to the instrument or
computer sourcing or sinking the data. Faster networking to the devices coupled
with intelligent (SDN-mediated) routing at the building level of specific
scientific data flows via "short-cut" paths through the core is expected to
result in higher overall performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is expected
to demonstrate that judicious deployment of intelligent edge devices can provide
data-intensive science researchers with all the advantages of a dedicated
science network without expensive re-engineering of an already capable core
network.