* 1246504
* I-Corps:  FloWorks - A Modern Infrastructure for Spatiotemporal Data Modeling and Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jonah Duckles, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

This goal of this Innovation Corps project is to explore the commercial
viability of software tools developed as part of the Cybercommons for Ecological
Forecasting. The IT Informatics Team at The University of Oklahoma has developed
a flexible suite of modular software components for data cataloging, modeling
and analysis/visualization. The Innovation Corps curriculum and associated
funding will be used to: i) rapidly explore target markets with data management
and modeling challenges; ii) create an actionable strategy for developing a
small business; iii) packaging and enhancing existing software tools as a fee-
based hosted Software as a Service (SaaS) offering, which can meet an expressed
need for data collection and modeling. As data sets grow larger, it becomes
necessary to present new computational tools and paradigms to traditionally non-
computational disciplines. Expanding the commercial opportunities for applying
this toolset will continue to advance the usability and research capabilities of
the tools, while expanding avenues for commercial application of ecological
forecasting and related science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity,
developing commercial applications for an existing software research
infrastructure, will have broader impacts in several areas. It will provide a
significant expansion of the user community for these research software tools,
enabling the opportunity to enhance usability and robustness of the tools. If
successful, this activity will improve the commercial viability of software
tools, thus enhancing the research competitiveness of the region.