* 1246443
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: CADIS -- Cyberinfrastructure Advancing Data-Interactive Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Joel Tohline, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 499,758.00

Modern scientific research often involves the marshaling of very large data sets
through extensive processing pipelines before usable information can be
extracted. Examples of this type of data-intensive research include the near
real-time analysis of time-varying medical images, decoding the genetic
structure of diverse biological systems, simulating the merger of binary star
systems, modeling complex flow structures in chemical reaction tanks, and
determining how to effectively interact with extraordinarily high-resolution
lunar and planetary data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CADIS project provides the
critical networking infrastructure that enables this wide range of data-
intensive research activities at Louisiana State University (LSU). CADIS links
high-performance computer systems located on campus and at other state and
national facilities to a new state-of-the-art building at LSU -- the Louisiana
Digital Media Center (LDMC). Serving as a center for diverse, data-intensive
research activities, the LDMC houses high resolution display technologies and
custom visualization systems and is dedicated to digital computation, media
production, and advanced teaching methods. CADIS enhances student learning
experiences by facilitating the use of actual data sets from experimental
instruments and large-scale computational simulations, and the classroom
application of novel visualization methods. CADIS also is expected to open new
opportunities for collaboration between LSU researchers and the growing digital
media industry across Louisiana.