* 1246329
* WORKSHOP: Summer Institute on Sociotechnical Systems and Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Steven Sawyer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2014
* USD 40,998.00

This is funding to cover airfare and ground travel for approximately 40 student
participants, as well as certain other expenses associated with, the 5th Young
Investigators Summer Institute that is being organized by the PI under the
auspices of the Consortium for the Science of Socio-Technical Systems (CSST),
and which will be held July 29-August, 2012, at Bishop's Lodge in Santa Fe, New
Mexico. The CSST resulted from recognition of the growing importance of research
on the interplay of humans and technology. The science of socio-technical
systems (SST) is fundamental to the rapidly growing "virtual organizations"
thematic area, among others, thus the urgent national need for research that is
firmly grounded in the SST tradition. Yet this community of scholars, which
includes faculty in diverse fields such as social informatics, social computing,
CSCW, computational social science, HCI, and information science, remains
fractured and largely invisible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSST series of Summer
Institutes is a critical step toward unifying this diverse community and
enhancing its visibility, by providing an immersive experience for the next
generation of SST leaders (both advanced doctoral students and pre-tenure
faculty) so that they will be well prepared to engage in distributed scientific
inquiry. The Summer Institutes build critical intellectual and social capital by
fostering creation of a cohort group of new researchers whose work is shaped by
hearing experts in socio-technical systems research provide encouragement and
give advice on how to advance the field's intellectual basis, methodological
approaches, and potential for sustained, meaningful and even transformative
impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 workshop will adhere to the successful
format that has evolved and been refined over the course of the prior Summer
Institutes. The workshop will bring together early career researchers selected
through a competitive review process with a set of more senior researchers for
an intensive five-day research exchange. The event will be residential and
located in a semi-isolated locale to encourage the maximum amount of social
interaction among participants. Senior faculty, junior faculty, and advanced
doctoral students will collectively strive to articulate in more coherent and
contemporary forms the basic principles, goals and approaches to doing socio-
technical science across a range of relevant intellectual communities. They will
explore topics and methods for advancing the science of socio-technical systems,
while focusing on intellectual development of individual research that is
aligned with core aspects of the socio-technical perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The diversity of Summer Institute
participants across a number of dimensions (e.g., institutional, disciplinary,
geographic, gender, minority group status), serves to broaden participants'
perspectives at a critical stage in their careers. The immersive intellectual
experience during the workshop will facilitate creation of a social network
among the participants and the senior researchers who serve as instructors for
the Summer Institute. This network will play a major role both in the
professional development of the participants and in the evolution of the field
of socio-technical systems research.