* 1246991
* RTG: Parameter Estimation Methodologies for Mechanistic Biological Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2021
* H. Thomas Banks, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,500,000.00

This Research Training Group (RTG) grant will train undergraduate students,
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, in statistical and inverse
problem methodologies applied to mathematical models for biological systems. The
research component of the RTG will revolve around a number of projects that
represent different disciplinary applications of modeling and development of
parameter estimation methodologies in the biological sciences. Each project will
involve at least four RTG participants, including faculty, students and/or
postdoctoral researchers. Some projects will focus more on development of new
methodologies, while others aim more at utilizing these methodologies in a
particular biological setting. Important cross-cutting themes will include
parameter estimation and parameter identifiability, model selection, model
robustness, uncertainty quantification and model-based experimental design.
Students will receive preparation for research activities in this area through a
number of supporting courses, the majority of which will be offered at the
graduate level, but will be accessible to advanced undergraduates.
Interdisciplinarity and team-working skills will be emphasized and developed
through careful mentoring and using a number of activities, such as regular
research presentations, both within and between the project groups, and journal
clubs. Professional development sessions will help prepare participants for
current and future careers in interdisciplinary environments both inside and
outside of academia. These will be offered at various levels, designed to cater
for the needs of the different participants, in some cases focusing on issues
unique to scientists working in the biological realm. An annual RTG workshop,
including external speakers, will showcase participants' accomplishments and
give opportunity to reflect on the successful (and less successful) aspects of
the year's research and training activities. In alternate years, the workshop
will be expanded to include a week-long lecture, tutorial and laboratory course,
providing a condensed presentation of chosen aspects of the RTG curriculum to
external participants, primarily advanced undergraduates and early-stage
graduate students.

Ever increasing amounts of biological data are being collected, at a range of
scales from the molecular and cellular through to the population and ecosystem.
Mechanistic mathematical models are increasingly being used as a way of making
sense of this data, providing important insights into the workings of biological
systems. The success of this enterprise not only requires development and
analysis of biologically appropriate models but confrontation of these models
with biological data. This, in turn requires development of methodologies that
allow this confrontation to occur, including practical methods that allow
researchers to analyze biological data using mechanistic models. The main
objective of this RTG is to develop training and research activities that will
train cohorts of mathematical scientists with strengths in both applied
mathematics and statistics who will have the interdisciplinary skills to work
effectively with biologists, preparing them for the challenges and opportunities
of the scientific workplace of the 21st century.