* 1246525
* Interdisciplinary Approaches to Endangered Language Documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Susan Penfield, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 02/28/2015
* USD 13,961.00

This project organizes a speaker's series that will take place at the 3rd
International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC), to
be held at the University of Hawai'i at Manoa (UHM) in late February of 2013.
The speaker's series meets the need to share specific examples of exemplary
interdisciplinary research in the field of language documentation with the
conference attendees. Sometimes called "themed" documentation, this research
approach exemplified by the speakers invites the layering of more than the one
standard discipline within a given project. In this speaker's series, work in
ethno-biology, spatial cognition, language acquisition and sociolinguistics are
specifically addressed in relation to the documenting of endangered languages.
As the speakers will attest, the emerging science of language documentation has
evolved to be highly interdisciplinary and begs to be further defined by new
methods that blend the contributing disciplines in intellectually interesting
ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The speaker's series builds on the conference theme
of "Sharing our Knowledge" which was chosen to reflect this new
interdisciplinary trend within the discipline of language documentation. This
series of four targeted presentations, each involving a different sub-
discipline, will fill a gap in the conference structure by providing current
examples from expert researchers of ongoing interdisciplinary work within the
field. By adding this to the conference, these examples will allow the broader
conference audience, as well as workshop participants, to interact with
researchers who are actively engaged interdisciplinary research. The resulting
papers, to be submitted by the speakers, will form a special issue on
interdisciplinary research within language documentation for the Journal of
Language Documentation and Conservation in order to reach an even broader
audience.