* 1246588
* Experimental and Theoretical Analysis of Cognitive Processes Underlying Clicker Use in STEM Education
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Alice Healy, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,274,164.00

This proposal describes a research project based at the University of Colorado
on the use of clicker technology in the teaching and the learning of STEM
content, in this case undergraduate statistics. With this technique, each
student is given a hand-held response device called a clicker, which is used to
respond to periodic probe questions asked by the instructor about material
recently presented in a lecture. Students are tested at multiple unpredictable
points during a lecture, and the results of these tests are immediately
available to both the instructor and students in summary form. The investigators
bring their expertise in mathematical modeling, cognitive psychology, workforce
training, statistics education, learning technology, assessment, and science
education to bear in an initial set of laboratory and classroom studies of a
number of relevant variables in order to determine the conditions under which
the use of clickers is most effective, both for learning by the student and as a
means of assessment by the teacher.

The research focuses on a real educational intervention already in use in
classroom. An analytical experimental approach is used to identify the cognitive
mechanisms that underlie this educational intervention, and this analysis allows
for its refinement and improvement. The project further develops ways to
optimize not just the acquisition of knowledge but also students? ability to
retain that knowledge and transfer it to new situations and domains.