* 1246750
* INSPIRE: Dynamical Principles of Animal Movement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Andrew Gracey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 993,963.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition
Program and the Linguistics Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, and
the Animal Behavior Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in
the Directorate for Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is enormous diversity in
the ways that animals move, from crawling and swimming to courtship displays and
talking. Of special interest is whether the context of the movement, such as
whether or not it performs a communicative function, fundamentally changes the
coordination principles. The proposed research brings together an
interdisciplinary team of biologists, linguists, and psychologists to
investigate the movements of a diverse set of animals: human, octopus, and a
nematode worm. The work allows, for the first time, a comparison of
communicative and non-communicative actions both within and between animal
species. The cross-species comparisons also allow an exploration of how symbolic
and discrete linguistic communication in humans could have evolved from the
continuously moving tongue and arms. More generally, movement control systems,
in common with the human linguistic system, have a generative capacity to create
new functional complex movements (or sentences) from smaller subparts. Does
muscular control underlie this generative capacity in any way?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inclusion of both dysarthric speech movements and
signed speech enhances the broader impacts of these experiments. In addition,
the worm C. elegans shows promise as a model for the dysarthria that occurs in
Parkinson's disease; dopamine synthesis and uptake in C. elegans will be
manipulated so as to model the abnormal dopamine signaling in people with
Parkinson's disease. The investigators have also partnered with the USC
Neighborhood Academic Initiative to bring the research to the attention of
students in local high schools, especially those serving minority students
under-represented in science.