* 1246211
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Bandwidth for Leadership in Advancing Science and Technology (BLAST)
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Robert Harrison, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

The Bandwidth for Leadership in Advancing Science and Technology (BLAST) project
award to the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK) is designed to
significantly improving a wide range of science data flows for local, state of
Tennessee, and national science and engineering research communities by
connecting the UTK campus to the 100 gigabit per second national network and
extending this connection to the leadership class high-performance computing
(HPC) facilities at the National Institute for Computational Sciences (NICS). By
dramatically improving the bandwidth available for all types of campus bridging,
data transfer services to/from HPC resources, data archives, and wide-area
network file systems, BLAST directly addresses bottlenecks to scientific
discovery in leading data and compute intensive research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network infrastructure upgrade provided by
BLAST improves science and engineering research productivity and facilitates
scientific discovery by enabling researchers to exploit high performance
networking bandwidth for science data flows to support knowledge exchange and
scientific discovery. Some examples uses of this upgraded network infrastructure
include improved gridFTP data transfers, high-performance access to archives and
WAN file systems, and data transfers with Globus Online. The BLAST project also
includes end-to-end network performance tuning collaborations between UTK, NICS
and four leading data and compute intensive research projects in earthquake
simulation, numerical weather prediction, Earth climate research on intra-
seasonal and inter-decadal time scales, and simulations for the study of climate
effects on public health, water resources and energy. The information obtained
and lessons learned will be disseminated to the broader community to share this
important knowledge.