* 1246057
* Collaborative Research: CC-NIE Integration: Transforming Computational Science with ADAMANT (Adaptive Data-Aware Multi-Domain Application Network Topologies)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 204,070.00

Workflows, especially data-driven workflows and workflow ensembles are becoming
a centerpiece of modern computational science. However, scientists lack the
tools that integrate the operation of workflow-driven science applications on
top of dynamic infrastructures that link campus, institutional and national
resources into connected arrangements targeted at solving a specific problem.
These tools must (a) orchestrate the infrastructure in response to application
demands, (b) manage application lifetime on top of the infrastructure by
monitoring various workflow steps and modifying slices in response to
application demands, and (c) integrate data movement with the workflows to
optimize performance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project ADAMANT (Adaptive Data-Aware
Multi-domain Application Network Topologies) brings together researchers from
RENCI/UNC Chapel Hill, Duke University and USC/ISI and two successful software
tools to solve these problems: Pegasus workflow management system and ORCA
resource control framework, developed for NSF GENI. The integration of Pegasus
and ORCA enables powerful application- and data-driven virtual topology
embedding into multiple institutional and national substrates (providers of
cyber-resources, like computation, storage and networks). ADAMANT leverages
ExoGENI - an NSF-funded GENI testbed, as well as national providers of on-demand
bandwidth services (NLR, I2, ESnet) and existing OSG computational resources to
create elastic, isolated environments to execute complex distributed tasks. This
approach improves the performance of these applications and, by explicitly
including data movement planning into the application workflow, enables new
unique capabilities for distributed data-driven "Big Science" applications.