* 1246958
* EAGER: Stochastic Synchronization and Coordination Problems in Complex Networks with Time Delays
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Gyorgy Korniss, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2016
* USD 192,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this EAGER award. Synchronization,
coordination, and balancing resources in networks are complex tasks and they are
very sensitive to time delays. The PI will investigate the impact of time delays
in stochastic network synchronization and coordination problems, which are
present in most natural and engineered network-coupled systems. Delays can be
attributed to both nonzero transmission times between the nodes and to non-zero
time for the node to process and act. Time delays can have profound implications
for the stability of signal and communication-driven systems at all scales,
ranging from transport through disordered materials to cell kinetics and growth,
neuronal networks, and genetic regulatory networks, to info-social and
communication networks, leading to the emergence of optimization and trade-offs
between low-connectivity/poor-communication and high-connectivity/frequent-
communication instabilities. Building on recent advances in statistical physics
and network science, it is precisely the combination of these three key
ingredients - networks, noise, and time delays, which provides avenues for
cross-cutting applications, and significant advance.

The PI will also investigate fundamental statistical properties of extreme
fluctuations in stochastic networks synchronization problems with time delays.
Extreme fluctuations not only play an important role in disordered materials,
but in infrastructure and information networks as well. Due to constrained
costs, these networks are often designed to operate just below their capacity.
Thus, in addition to the average load in the network, knowing the typical size
and the distribution of the extreme fluctuations is of great importance from a
system-design viewpoint, since system delays or global failures are often
triggered by extreme events occurring on an individual node.

The education and training of students and postdocs in simulations and modeling
with applications in statistical physics and random networks are integral parts
of the proposed research. Students and postdocs supported by this grant will be
part of a larger interdisciplinary collaborative environment that facilitates
collaborations within the university and with other universities in the United
States. The PI will also be engaged in outreach activities, primarily through
classroom interaction with high-school students which target science-oriented
high-school students in the Albany, New York area.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this EAGER award.

The formal concept of networks involves nodes interconnected by links and
provides a potentially insightful avenue to analyze natural and engineered
systems. The internet and power grid are familiar examples of networks. The
dynamical properties of networks are of increasing interest in the application
of this concept to materials, biological systems such as cells and the brain, as
well as in predicting the response of the power grid and other infrastructure
networks to rapid changes in demand or component failure. The PI will combine
the methods of statistical mechanics with network theory to investigate the role
of time delays in networks in which individual nodes change their properties but
interact only with their local neighbors. The large number of interacting nodes
in most complex systems of interest from neurons in the brain to atoms in
materials, leads to challenging problems. The theoretical advances in this
project may enable progress on difficult problems, most notably in materials and
biological systems and have impact on mathematics and statistics.

The education and training of students and postdocs in simulations and modeling
with applications in statistical physics and random networks are integral parts
of the proposed research. Students and postdocs supported by this grant will be
part of a larger interdisciplinary collaborative environment that facilitates
collaborations within the university and with other universities in the United
States. The PI will also be engaged in outreach activities, primarily through
classroom interaction with high-school students which target science-oriented
high-school students in the Albany, New York area.