* 1246003
* CC-NIE Integration: Multi-Wave - A Dedicated Data Transport Ring to Support 21st Century Computational Research
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* John Dubach, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2014
* USD 867,040.00

Multi-Wave deploys new cyber-physical infrastructure on the campus of the
University of Massachusetts Amherst, at the Massachusetts High-Performance
Computing Center (MGHPCC), and at two collocation sites (1 Federal Street,
Springfield, MA and 300 Bent Street, Cambridge, MA) to build a dedicated multi-
lambda transport ring between the sites and to provide researchers with a
dedicated high-bandwidth network. This new infrastructure allows research
traffic to be isolated from the mix of other information by dedicating one of
two wavelengths for the research network only. All other traffic is transported
on the other wavelength. This new cyber-physical infrastructure is supporting
research in the areas of big data and genomics, remote sensing, biostatics,
planetary science, distributed systems and software defined networking, and
climate science. Besides offering a reliable, high-bandwidth transport ring for
researchers in computational sciences, the new cyberinfrastructure is also
designed to integrate well into the existing, nation-wide Global Environment for
Network Innovations (GENI) testbed.

This project will significantly impact researchers at UMass Amherst who are
dealing with very large data sets. The new cyber-physical infrastructure will
allow these researchers to transport large data sets between sources on and off
campus to the MGHPCC, where significant computing resources are housed. For
example, genomics researchers will be able to transmit very high volumes of data
from storage systems at a sequencing center to the computing cluster at MGHPCC,
instead of physically shipping hard drives via express mail as they do now.