* 1246893
* The Impact of R&D Practices on R&D effectiveness (RQ)
* SBE,NCSE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Anne Marie Knott, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* NIRMALA KANNANKUTTY
* 12/31/2014
* USD 106,537.00

In January 2011, President Obama signed into law the America COMPETES
Reauthorization Act of 2010. The goal of the act was to invest in innovation
through R&D and to improve the competitiveness of the United States. However,
increasing investment in and of itself is unlikely to produce desired results.
We need to understand who should increase spending and how. NCSES is well-
positioned to provide that understanding through its data on firm innovative
activities in the Survey of Industrial Research and Development (SIRD)
(1987-2007), and its successor, the Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS)
(2008-2011). The proposed study empirically examines the impact of US firms'
innovative activities on economic outcomes by matching a new measure of economic
performance, firms' Research Quotient (RQ) to the SIRD and BRDIS data. This
matching enables us to test major hypotheses within the economics of innovation
literature that have been unresolved previously due to lack of reliable firm-
level measures of innovative outcomes. These hypotheses pertain to the impact of
firm size, market structure, firm heterogeneity, innovation type, innovation
source, and appropriability on the incentives to conduct R&D as well as the
effectiveness of that R&D.

Broader Impact. At the policy-level, the study provides theoretically motivated
and empirically rigorous insights for directing investment in innovation for the
America COMPETES Reorganization Act of 2010: characteristics of firms likely to
generate the highest returns to that investment (who). Second, for
practitioners, the study offers firms prescriptions for increasing their R&D
effectiveness (how). Thus the study has the potential to increase the aggregate
R&D productivity in the US. Finally, for academics, the study will answer long-
standing questions in the economics of innovation literature to support future
theory development on the optimal conditions for innovation.