* 1246925
* Crustal Anisotropy Across Tibet: Implications for the Existence of Partial Melt and the Vertical Coherence of Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Peter Molnar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 145,000.00

The proposed work aims to improve understanding of the deformation of Tibet by
modeling seismic anisotropy. This approach is not entirely new, but current
observations are either highly localized or poorly resolved so that insight
remains incomplete. The proposed research will produce new, high-resolution
information about radial and azimuthal anisotropy in the Tibetan crust and
uppermost mantle based on data from PASSCAL experiments and, through Chinese
collaborators, the Chinese Earthquake Array. Three specific types of seismic
observations will be made. (1) High resolution Love wave phase velocity
measurements obtained from ambient noise and earthquakes across all of Tibet
will be obtained to infer Vsh in the crust. These observations will help to
determine whether the observed crustal LVZs result entirely or only partially
from mineral alignment. (2) Azimuthal anisotropy observed for the crust from
ambient noise and for the lower crust and uppermost mantle from earthquake
records constrain vertical continuity of strain. These observations will help to
adjudicate between channel flow and vertically coherent deformation. (3) Joint
inversion of receiver functions with surface wave dispersion will help to
calibrate the model parameterization in the crust, providing information about
potential velocity jumps at the top and bottom of the crustal LVZ and about a
potential eclogitized layer at the base of the crust. This will improve the
estimate of the strength of mid-crustal radial anisotropy, which is crucial to
determine whether mineral alignment suffices to produce the observed LVZs or if
partial melt may be required. All inversions leverage recent advances in surface
wave tomography methods (e.g., eikonal and Helmholtz tomography) to improve the
fidelity of estimated wave speeds. A key component of this work is the
estimation of uncertainties using Monte Carlo and related Bayesian statistics
from primary measurements to the final seismological models. Tibet presents a
natural laboratory to study continent- continent collision, a process that has
shaped and scarred the Earth throughout its history but is at present unique to
Tibet. The proposed research aims to illuminate the nature of deformation in the
Tibetan crust and is motivated particularly by the following questions. To what
extent is deformation of the middle crust localized in a channel (channel flow)
and hence different from that above and perhaps below it? Does extensive partial
melt facilitate channel flow? In particular, are the low velocity zones (LVZs)
observed across the Tibetan middle crust caused by the extensive presence of
partial melt, or do they dominantly reflect the alignment of anisotropic
minerals caused by previous or on-going deformation? At the opposite extreme, to
what extent is deformation of the entire lithosphere vertically coherent? These
question will be addressed through the development of new high resolution models
of directionally-dependent seismic wave speeds (anisotropy) in the crust and
uppermost mantle beneath Tibet. New seismic data resources installed by the
Chinese and collaboratively between the US and Chinese will form the basis for
the research and new methods of tomography will be to produce much higher
resolution and reliable images than were possible previously.