* 1246202
* Ocean Acidification Seascape:   Linking Natural Variability and Anthropogenic changes in pH and Temperature to Performance in Calcifying Antarctic Marine Invertebrates
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 09/30/2018
* USD 510,394.00

The research supported in this project will examine the effects of environmental
change on a key Antarctic marine invertebrate, a pelagic mollusk, the pteropod,
Limacina helicina antarctica. There are two main activities in this project: (1)
to deploy oceanographic equipment ? in this case, autonomously recording pH
sensors called SeaFETs and other devices that record temperature and salinity,
and (2) to use these environmental data in the laboratory at McMurdo Station to
study the response of the marine invertebrates to future changes in water
quality that is expected in the next few decades. Notably, changes in oceanic pH
(aka ocean acidification) and ocean warming are projected to be particularly
threatening to calcifying marine organisms in cold-water, high latitude seas,
making tolerance data on these organisms a critical research need in Antarctic
marine ecosystems.

These Antarctic shelled-animals are especially vulnerable to dissolution stress
from ocean acidification because they currently inhabit seawater that is barely
at the saturation level to support biogenic calcification. Indeed, these polar
animals are considered to be the 'first responders' to chemical changes in the
surface oceans. Thus, this project will lead to information about the adaptive
capacity of L. helcina antarctica. From an ecological perspective this is
important because this animal is a critical part of the Antarctic food chain in
coastal waters and changes in its abundance will impact other species. Finally,
the research conducted in this project will serve as a training and educational
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
scholars.