* 1246546
* Impacts of Vegetation and Climate Change on Dryland Rivers: Lesssons from the Rio Puerco, New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 299,994.00

Summary: The arid American West relies on rivers for much of its water.
Pressures from population growth, climate change, and invasive plant species
threaten to transform the nation's dryland rivers, their water resources, and
their ecosystems in ways that have been traditionally difficult to foresee.
Sustainable, adaptive management of these resources requires an ability to
predict how they will respond to perturbations. Because future drivers are
likely to reach well beyond the conditions that have been observed in the past,
it is critical to have process-based models that can make useful, transferrable
predictions beyond the historical range of variability. The validity of such
process-based models can only be demonstrated, however, by comparison to well
constrained case studies of past and present behavior. We propose to create a
unique new database that will provide a valuable opportunity to study the causes
and consequences of river transformation over time scales of years to decades.
One of the best studied and most dynamic basins in the southwest, the Rio
Puerco, New Mexico, provides the springboard for our analysis. Over the past
century, the Rio Puerco and its floodplains have undergone major changes in
hydrology, sediment yield, and vegetation. Many of these changes are linked with
the introduction of the exotic tree species tamarix in the 1920s, and its
subsequent spread throughout the valley network. More recently, efforts to
destroy tamarix have led to dramatic changes in channel geometry and sediment
yield. Thus, the Rio Puerco represents a unique natural experiment in the
effects of long-term vegetation change on a dynamic fluvial system. To take
advantage of this experiment, we propose to build and analyze a database that
integrates historical flow and sediment data, time series measurements of
channel cross-section form, modern and historic vegetation patterns, flood
sedimentation patterns, and high-resolution measurement of recent channel change
derived from lidar imagery. Our analysis encompasses two timescales: (1) the
event scale, addressing the impact of a large flood with pre- and post-event
lidar, and (2) the decadal scale, focusing on the response to tamarisk spread
from 1930s to present. In addition to providing new insight into river
transformation, the integrated database will provide the scientific community
with a unique platform for testing and refining the next generation of coupled
flow-sediment-vegetation models.

Intellectual Merit: Dryland river environments embody a rich set of feedbacks
among flood flow, riparian vegetation, channel geometry, fine-sediment erosion,
reservoir siltation, in-stream infiltration, and water quality. By exploring the
system in the context of an extensively studied test case, this project will
illuminate the nature and magnitude of these feedbacks. The project will also
provide a first test of the hypothesis that it is possible to compute, from
basic principles, the response of a dryland river system to perturbations in
water input and vegetation cover on annual to multi-decadal time scales.

Broader Impacts: The project closely integrates research, education, and
outreach through a program of (1) partnership with K-12 teachers in bringing the
exciting science of river dynamics into the classroom, (2) involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary research, and (3)
broader outreach through development, and distribution of study packages that
include data analysis exercises in water, sediment, and vegetation trends over
time, and model animations that illustrate processes and feedbacks. We also
address an important societal need to predict potential consequences of
environmental management actions, such as the recent introduction of tamarisk
leaf beetle as a biocontrol agent. Finally, we will produce and distribute a
detailed, quantitative database for benchmarking future models, on time scales
ranging from a single flood event to eight decades of river transformation.