* 1246492
* RDE-BPR1: An Investigation of GI Bill Recipients with Disabilities Pursuit of STEM as a Viable Career Option
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Getzel, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2016
* USD 606,940.00

This award is a Broadening Participation Research project designed to
investigate to what extent GI Bill recipients with disabilities are
underrepresented in STEM in public associate and baccalaureate granting
institutions, the impact of veteran and disability status on STEM learning, and
the organizational factors that lead to more equitable and inviting
postsecondary STEM educational environments for GI Bill recipients with
disabilities. Participants in this study include veterans and dependents with
and without disabilities who use GI Bill benefits to attend public two and four
year colleges and universities in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation includes five specific research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;1) To what extent are GI Bill recipients with disabilities
participating in STEM programs when compared to GI Bill recipients without
disabilities? &lt;br/&gt;2) How does veteran's status affect the interest,
performance, persistence, and perceptions of GI Bill recipients with
disabilities enrolled in STEM fields? &lt;br/&gt;3) Among GI Bill recipients
with disabilities, is type of disability associated with STEM enrollment?
&lt;br/&gt;4) What specific supports do key informants of STEM faculty members,
campus service professionals (i.e. career center staff, disability support
service providers), and certifying officials believe to be the most effective in
supporting veterans with disabilities as well as their dependents with
disabilities? &lt;br/&gt;5) How do GI Bill recipients with disabilities
prioritize the organizational factors which affect recruitment, enrollment and
persistence in STEM programs? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are 19,000 veterans
and their dependents eligible for the GI Bill in Virginia, and the research is
collecting on-line web survey data from 7,600 for their subject pool. The
subjects are being recruited through all public two and four year institutions
of higher education in Virginia. The surveys are constructed with input from
data obtained during structured interviews with STEM faculty members, university
officials who certify student eligibility for the GI Bill, veterans with
disabilities, disability support professionals, and career center staff at
universities and community colleges. To address the specific research questions,
data is being collected from 760 veterans, and their dependents with
disabilities, who are eligible for the GI Bill in Virginia. Quantitative survey
responses from the disabled student subjects are being triangulated with
qualitative interviews from 20 of the student veterans with disabilities
enrolled in STEM. The research team is using a combination of descriptive and
inferential statistical analyses, including appropriate parametric and non-
parametric measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An independent evaluation of the
project, which will be conducted by Dr. Donna Jovanovich of Suna Associates,
LLC, will include both formative and summative assessments.