* 1246507
* Joint estimates of permeability using complex resistivity and proton nuclear magnetic resonance
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lee Slater, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 379,711.00

Modeling the flow of groundwater is fundamental for understanding the quantity
of water available for human use, and the movement of chemicals, such as carbon,
underground, into streams, and into the atmosphere. Accurate groundwater models
require an understanding of the properties of soils and rocks that affect the
flow of water (i.e. the permeability). Permeability is traditionally measured
directly by inducing groundwater flow using pumping, slug, or packer tests;
however, these methods can be limited by small measurement volumes and require
the existence of wells. Indirect estimates of permeability based on geophysical
techniques benefit from relatively short measurement times, do not require fluid
extraction, and are non-invasive when made from the surface (or minimally
invasive when made in a borehole). However, estimates of permeability based on a
single geophysical method often require calibration for rock type, and cannot be
used to determine all of the physical properties required to accurately
determine permeability. This research focuses on developing an innovative method
for estimating permeability based on the synergistic coupling of two
complementary geophysical methods - complex resistivity (CR) and nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) - aimed at providing a robust and minimally-invasive
determination of permeability at the watershed scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will use a combination of mechanistic model development,
laboratory measurements, and field measurements to develop a permeability model
based on CR and NMR parameters. The model and measurements will be tested at the
Christina River Basin, an NSF funded Critical Zone Observatory (CRB-CZO), in
which the accuracy of groundwater models has been limited by complex spatial
variation in subsurface permeability. This research represents a critical step
towards the development of joint NMR/CR measurements to obtain spatially dense
information about permeability that will improve the quantitative
characterization of groundwater flow.