* 1247525
* Alabama LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Auburn U
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Louis Dale, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2015
* USD 987,000.00

The Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) is a NSF
Senior-Level Alliance and has an infrastructure that is uniquely positioned to
implement a Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)program. Auburn University is the
Alabama LSAMP BD site for 2012-2014. The University was established in 1856 and
is a major state-assisted, comprehensive, Research I, land-grant institution
with a long tradition of academic excellence and graduate education. Twelve
LSAMP students will be selected from Alabama LSAMP partners and other LSAMP
institutions across the nation to participate in the Alabama BD program
beginning with the fall semester 2012. These new BD students will have the older
BD students to provide peer consultations and networking opportunities. Selected
BD participants will be assigned faculty mentors and have the opportunity to
attend at least one professional scientific meeting each year. In addition, BD
participants will be required to apply for an NSF Graduate Fellowship and attend
special topic seminars regarding graduate school matriculation designed
specifically for the program. A plan for formally connecting a significant
number of newly matriculated LSAMP students to doctoral degree programs has been
developed and participants will be tracked. The program will be evaluated at the
end of the first semester of the 2012-2013 academic year and again at the end of
the second year. Further, evaluation information will be forwarded to the Urban
Institute for the general BD program review. The evaluation is designed to
provide documentation of the performance of the designated site in retaining,
graduating, and placing significant numbers of its minority graduates into
doctoral-degree programs.

The project is an important step in advancing the knowledge of underrepresented
minority students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. The
experiences gained by these students working with science and engineering
faculty will position them for excellent career advancement. The project
broadens participation of underrepresented groups in graduate education with the
real prospect of increasing the number of such groups in attaining doctoral
degrees in STEM and entering the professoriate. Discovery and understanding
resulting from this project will be disseminated via a national BD publication
to other institutions and programs focusing on graduate education.