* 1247909
* Dynamic Behavior and Coexistence of Intelligent Radio Spectrum Access Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Xiaohua Li, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 285,422.00

Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) allows new wireless systems to reuse the spectrum
currently occupied exclusively by primary systems. A DSA system must be
intelligent enough to detect primary system's activity and be flexible enough to
allow new and advanced technology to be adopted to compete for spectrum access.
The intelligence and flexibility make DSA system to have complex dynamic
behaviors such as oscillation and fluctuation that are quite different from what
was intended. They also make it difficult to guarantee the coexistence of
heterogeneous DSA systems. This project develops a theoretical framework for
modeling and analyzing the dynamic behavior and the coexistence of heterogeneous
DSA systems. It employs many methodologies from theoretical ecology to study the
cooperation, competition, altruism, selfishness, and other intelligent human-
like behaviors. Two approaches are exploited to study such complex interactions
among multiple spectrum access strategies: an evolutionary game theoretic
approach based on an efficient Markov-model bank, and a population dynamic
approach based on a spectrum-usage model. In addition, this project initiates
pioneering research on DSA policy modeling and analysis by applying the two
approaches.

This project builds the underlying theoretical foundation to support the
development of new DSA techniques, new heterogeneous DSA systems, and new DSA
policies that enhance the efficiency and fairness of spectrum access. The
theoretical methodologies are useful for the development of many other
heterogeneous and intelligent systems in general. This project stimulates the
integration of the two traditionally disparate areas: wireless communications
and theoretical ecology, in both research and education.