* 1247351
* Estradiol's Modulation of Central Auditory Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Raphael Pinaud, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2013
* USD 24,391.00

Recently, Dr. Pinaud's research group demonstrated that the female hormone
estrogen controls how auditory signals are processed and interpreted by auditory
neurons in the brain. These are exciting findings because they indicate that
estrogen insufficiency may impact hearing function and manipulations directed at
estrogen levels may ameliorate or recover hearing dysfunction triggered by
hormonal deficits. Although these novel findings are promising, it is necessary
to uncover the mechanisms by which estrogen impacts the functionality of
auditory neurons and the functional relevance of this hormonal modulation. This
project will address these gaps by using a combination of molecular biology,
electrophysiology and high-throughput proteomics approaches to understand: 1)
how estrogen controls the activation of auditory neurons by acoustic signals; 2)
how estrogen shapes selectivity of neuronal responses to auditory signals; 3)
the gene expression programs controlled by estrogen in auditory neurons. This
work should significantly impact our understanding of how estrogen controls
auditory processing and affects long-term gene expression activated by auditory
signals in the brain. Consequently, these efforts are a critical first step in
the path to exploring how hormonal manipulations may be used to shape how
efficiently vertebrates extract acoustic cues for the environment. This project
will also generate resources for the scientific community. Specifically, part of
the results of this project will be posted on Dr. Pinaud's website
(www.pinaudlab.org) during the progression of this project. In addition to the
scientific impact of this project, two educational programs will provide 1)
students of under-represented minorities with opportunities to participate in
these studies, and 2) workshops to children at the Elementary School level, as
well as their parents, on concepts in neuroscience and the importance of basic
scientific research. The project will also include an exchange program with the
Brazil to bring students of under-represented minorities to conduct research in
this US laboratory. This program does not constitute a one-way exchange, but
rather is an opportunity for young scientists from both cultures to participate
in learning experiences that differ significantly from their own programs and
backgrounds. This exchange could lay the foundation for future international
collaborations that could significantly impact this research area.