* 1247864
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Big Bandwidth: Finding Anomalous Needles in the Spectrum Haystack
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Wade Trappe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed project is to explore the
problem of scanning large amounts of spectrum in order to detect anomalous usage
of that spectrum. The project will examine spectrum scanning using a single
spectrum sensor and using multiple spectrum sensors. The approach will involve
using game theoretic formulations that allow for the determination of scanning
strategies that give an optimal likelihood of detecting an adversarial or
accidental misuse of spectrum in terms of the bandwidth that can be scanned in a
single scan and the bandwidth that an anomalous activity might involve. The
optimization of strategies are complemented by techniques that increase the
amount of spectrum that can be scanned in a single scan, and spectrum mapping
algorithms that estimate the received power levels at arbitrary spatial
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed effort stems from the pulling together of a mixture of
technologies from different fields, including game theory, signal processing,
security, wireless communications, and RF photonics to address the challenging
problem of detecting and preventing anomalous spectrum activity across a wide
swath of bandwidth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the proposed effort will include the cross-pollination between
different disciplines, such as game theory, security, photonics and signal
processing. Additionally, the project will guide the development of graduate and
undergraduate students at both participating institutions, giving the students
new tools with which to contribute to wireless and optical communications.
Finally, new interdisciplinary curricula will be developed as part of the
effort.