* 1247950
* INSPIRE:  Fully-assembled Biology via Light-field Illumination and Intact-tissue Imaging
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Karl Deisseroth, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Modulation Program in the Divison
of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, by
the Graphics and Visualization Program in the Division of Information and
Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer Information in Science and
Engineering, by the Advances in Biological Informatics in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and by the
Emerging Frontiers Program in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will capitalize on a
remarkable opportunity driven by new chemical-engineering technology to define
the full brainwide activity patterns underlying complex mammalian behaviors.
Achieving high-precision control and high-resolution information on a complex
system, while maintaining intact a full global perspective on the same system,
is especially difficult for neuroscience but extends to the study of all
biology. The expected outcome of this work will be to enable biologists around
the world to readily observe simultaneous activity of cells in 3D volumes of
tissue and in real time. From the perspective of both society-at-large and NSF,
the significance of this INSPIRE proposal may be very broad. This information
will be crucial for understanding how complex behaviors can be tuned, and how
complex biological systems operate, and will lead to development of what will be
among the largest datasets in biology. This research program also will integrate
new multidisciplinary approaches encompassing bioengineering, genetics, optics,
chemical engineering, and computer science, which will capitalize upon and
strengthen the rich local and nationwide multidisciplinary training and
education environments. Computational tools will address data curation and free
online public access to resulting information that will be accessible via the
website (www.optogenetics.org), and the technology will be freely transferred to
other U.S. academic or government laboratories. This Project meets the challenge
of achieving high-resolution information on a complex system, while at the same
time maintaining a global and functional perspective on the same system: an
approach may be transformative, not only in neuroscience, but also throughout
biology.