* 1247857
* Transport and Deposition of Metallic Nanoparticles as a Hydrothermal Ore-forming Process
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* James Saunders, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2016
* USD 199,275.00

Nanoparticles typically have sizes between 10-6 and 10-9 m (&lt;1 micron in
size) and have different chemical and physical properties than the bulk mineral
solids. We now understand that they are transitional between truly dissolved
atoms or molecules and crystalline solids and may have special properties that
can be exploited by new nanotechnologies. Previous research at Auburn University
has shown that some metallic hydrothermal ores in the western United States
formed by aggregation of metallic nanoparticles, particularly ones rich in such
valuable metals as gold and silver. Thus the transport of solid nanoparticles of
gold, silver and other metals appears to be a new but little-studied ore-
formation process. Previously, researchers have assumed that metals were
delivered to the site of their ultimate deposition in true solution, and this
now appears not to be the case, at least in some situations. A present-day
example of this process is the black smoke emanating from sea floor hydrothermal
vents on the ocean floor, which is composed mainly of metal-sulfide
nanoparticles entrained in supercritical hydrothermal
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-supported grant will look at transport of
metallic nanoparticles involved in the formation of shallow bonanza
('epithermal') vein deposits of gold and silver, which were the type of
precious-metal ores commonly mined in the western US in the 1800s. These ores
not only exhibit spectacular mineral textures formed as a result of aggregation
of metallic nanoparticles, but preliminary isotopic (copper, lead, and sulfur)
investigations have suggested that the nanoparticles that formed the ore mineral
textures, appear to have come from much deeper down in the crust than the
shallow setting where they were deposited. The hypothesis to be tested with this
study is that basaltic magmas, formed from partial melting in the underlying
mantle, may release metals in a sulfur-rich, low density phase akin to a
'vapor', which forms nanoparticles of metals, metalloids, and sulfur upon some
degree of cooling. Thus the nanoparticles appear to lock in high temperature and
primitive isotopic compositions similar to the source magma chambers, and
therefore must be transported upward a considerable distance (a few km?) to form
the shallow ores. If this can be substantiated by the planned new isotopic
investigations of ores from Nevada and Idaho, this will be a new aspect of
hydrothermal ore-forming processes that can guide how and where such valuable
ores occur, both at a regional and district scale. Results have implications for
better understanding metal release and transport from magmas, and perhaps will
shed light on what are the sources of magma composition that lead to formation
of such ores.