* 1247029
* Frictional Sliding and Rocking of Precariously Balanced Rocks Under Earthquake Excitation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Swaminathan Krishnan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2015
* USD 89,205.00

There are several precariously balanced rocks (PBRs) in the western
US&lt;br/&gt;located on hill-sides and cliffs. Many of these rocks have
evolved&lt;br/&gt;naturally and have been in their present configuration for
thousands of&lt;br/&gt;years. Cosmogenic dating of the pedestal, rock and other
surfaces on&lt;br/&gt;the surrounding landscape has been conducted to estimate
the amount&lt;br/&gt;of time these rocks have remained precarious. Through
analysis, if we&lt;br/&gt;can establish the nature of ground shaking that would
cause these&lt;br/&gt;rocks to topple, we can confidently state that such motion
could not&lt;br/&gt;have occurred during the "precarious age" of the rock. Thus,
these&lt;br/&gt;rocks are effectively low-resolution strong motion seismoscopes
that&lt;br/&gt;provide strong statistical constraints on ground motion from
historic&lt;br/&gt;earthquakes in the region. Such information is critical for
the&lt;br/&gt;proper siting and designing of nuclear/chemical power plants
and&lt;br/&gt;waste storage facilities to protect them against plausible
ground&lt;br/&gt;shaking from long-term future
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research are: (i) to develop
a fundamental&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the mechanics of rocking and sliding of
precariously&lt;br/&gt;balanced rocks (PBRs) under earthquake excitation; (ii)
to&lt;br/&gt;characterize the sensitivity of the overturning of PBRs to
ground&lt;br/&gt;motion features; (iii) to use PBRs to help establish the
veracity of&lt;br/&gt;ground motion simulations; and (iv) to estimate the upper
bounds of&lt;br/&gt;seismic shaking intensity in a given region or a specific
site,&lt;br/&gt;perhaps where hazardous materials are handled (e.g., nuclear
or&lt;br/&gt;chemical waste storage facilities or plants). We plan to achieve
the&lt;br/&gt;project goals by combining recently developed 3-D imaging
(Terrestrial&lt;br/&gt;Laser Scanning) and image processing techniques with a
recently&lt;br/&gt;developed rigid body dynamics algorithm to create high-
fidelity 3-D&lt;br/&gt;models of existing precariously balanced rocks and the
supporting&lt;br/&gt;pedestals. The models will strive to mimic the physical
condition of&lt;br/&gt;contact to credibly capture the interplay of sliding and
rocking when&lt;br/&gt;the pedestal is shaken by 3-component ground excitation.
The investigators propose&lt;br/&gt;to validate the analysis algorithm using
data from shake table tests&lt;br/&gt;on regular blocks and irregular rocks.
They intend to conduct&lt;br/&gt;parametric analyses of several PBRs subjected
to idealized waveform&lt;br/&gt;excitation characterized by frequency,
amplitude, and number of&lt;br/&gt;cycles. This will help establish the toppling
sensitivity of the&lt;br/&gt;rocks to these ground motion features. Using these
toppling analyses,&lt;br/&gt;we plan to compute statistical bounds on the values
of various ground&lt;br/&gt;motion features from historical earthquakes that
have occurred at the&lt;br/&gt;sites of the PBRs. These results will not only
help inform future&lt;br/&gt;editions of the National Seismic Hazard maps but
also help guide the&lt;br/&gt;siting and design of critical nuclear and chemical
facilities. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, they plan to excite the PBRs with 3-component
acceleration&lt;br/&gt;histories predicted for these sites by seismic wave
propagation&lt;br/&gt;simulations of past earthquakes. If the synthetic
excitation is found&lt;br/&gt;to overturn the PBR models, it would point to
shortcomings in the&lt;br/&gt;ground motion simulation methodology. Alternately,
the absence of&lt;br/&gt;overturning would lend credibility to seismic wave
propagation&lt;br/&gt;simulations.