* 1247813
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: DA: ESCE: Collaborative Research: Scalable Statistical Computing for Emerging Omics Data Streams
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Martin Morgan, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,200,000.00

Bioinformatic data sets are large and complicated. Marshalling and managing
necessary resources (e.g., hardware; computer and programmer time) requires
significant skill. Effective analysis and comprehension involves sophisticated
statistical understanding. Domains of application and available data types
change rapidly, requiring flexible and familiar programming environments.
Collaborations involve diverse research groups of heterogeneous size and
expertise. This project develops and disseminates new and efficient approaches
to solving present and emerging problems in statistical analysis and
interpretation of very large data. The project combines the strengths of two
very widely used and complementary bioinformatics projects, Bioconductor and
Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three components. The first,
providing scalable access, develops R programming paradigms appropriate for
scalable analysis. R/Bioconductor software will be developed for efficient
reduction of large data to statistical descriptions by iterating data through
transformation kernels. Bioconductor will be deployed for use in an accessible
cloud-based environment, and will be integrated into the Galaxy deployment
scheme. The second component is to provide statistical methods for big genomic
data bydeveloping high performance statistical methodologies for analysis of
large bioinformatics data. This applies the initial technical achievements to
specific requirements of statistical analysis in genomics. Domains of
application include: quality assessment and normalization of very large raw
data; data reduction and uncertainty measure calculation for downstream
interrogation; and discovery, reporting and auditing of novel biological
findings. Developments require novel computational approaches that avoid all-
data-in-memory computational models (prevalent in current algorithm
implementations), and that re-express monolithic algorithms as concurrently
executable independent components. This emphasizes extensible and composable
elements to yield a richer toolkit for statistical genomics. The aim leverages
R?s strength as a language for rapid development of statistical methodologies,
and emphasizes areas of proven strength in the Bioconductor project. The third
component addresses decision making. This aspect provides integration of R /
Bioconductor work flows into Galaxy. We will deploy key results from Aim 2 as
Galaxy work flows. New real-time feedback for streaming analytics will be
introduced to Galaxy, and leveraged by Bioconductor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes very significant capacity building. The Bioconductor project
successfully solicits, tests, and disseminates over 600 R packages for the
statistical analysis and comprehension of high-throughput genomic data. All
packages include extensive documentation, including vignettes describing intent,
function, and interoperability. Packages reflect contributions from a broad
scientific community, and enable national and international graduate, post-
graduate, and commercial research activities in statistical, bioinformatic, and
computational domains. This project furthers the capacity building impact of
Bioconductor by addressing memory and performance limitations to statistical
analysis of large and complicated bioinformatic data. Galaxy enables broad
access to computational resources for data intensive biomedical research. This
project enhances the capacity building impacts of Galaxy by providing scalable
processing of big bioinformatic data, and enabling exploratory analysis by a
broad bioinformatic community. The coupling of Bioconductor and Galaxy provides
significant synergy, facilitating rapid translation of statistical and
bioinformatic research developed in R to broad use through Galaxy.