* 1247971
* INSPIRE: The Hunting of the Spark: A Systematic Study of Natural Creativity in Human Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Ali Minai, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 999,762.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition
Program and the Social Psychology Program in the Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences, and the Human-Centered Computing Program in the Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering.

The notion of collective wisdom - that many interacting individuals can produce
better ideas, insights, solutions and decisions than a single individual can
produce - is a foundational principle for many institutions of modern societies,
including elections, parliaments, governing boards, free markets and the free
press. Until recently, such collective wisdom could only be harnessed through
massive unstructured mechanisms such as elections and markets, or through highly
structured and interactive but smaller-scale mechanisms such as legislatures,
committees, boards and panels. With the advent of the Internet, the World-Wide
Web and social network technology, the paradigm has changed. It is now possible
for large numbers of diverse, geographically distant individuals to interact in
structured ways and at almost no cost. This has opened up vast possibilities for
innovation and creativity, but these possibilities are still largely unrealized.
A major reason for this is the lack of a systematic scientific understanding of
collective innovation in human networks. The current project addresses this
through a combination of methods from several disciplines, bringing together a
unique group of researchers with expertise in social psychology, cognitive
science, computer science, engineering and network theory.

The fundamental principle underlying the research is that an understanding of
natural human innovation requires a coordinated combination of laboratory and
field studies and that neither is sufficient on its own. Field studies of
innovative human networks (communities of research scholars and engineers) will
be used to identify natural patterns of innovation through data mining and
intelligent analysis methods. Laboratory experiments will then verify and
validate these patterns under controlled conditions. Thus, through a combination
of large-scale fieldwork and careful experiments, the investigators will develop
better metrics for measuring innovation and discover ways to help groups and
individuals be more innovative. Most importantly, this project will clarify how
the connectivity of individuals in a network acts to boost or suppress
innovation, leading to recommendations for making human networks from
corporations to social networks more innovative.

Recent studies suggest that the rate of innovation must increase exponentially
to sustain a growing and urbanizing global society. While the proposed research
will focus on specific areas, the methods it generates will inform organizations
and governments broadly in developing policies conducive to innovation. In
today's fast-moving, highly competitive world, such policies are likely to be a
major determinant of scientific, technological and geopolitical leadership.