* 1247560
* Coordinating International Global-change Research and Synthesis to Help Guide Society onto a Sustainable Pathway: The International Geosphere-Biosphere Program
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Sybil Seitzinger, International Geosphere
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,678,187.00

The International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), organized under the
auspices of the International Council for Science recently completed a synthesis
of its first decade of research and is embarking on its second decade with a
broader, and even more integrative research agenda. The overall goal of this
effort is to study interactions between biological, chemical and physical
processes, and human systems. This effort will be conducted through eight core
projects focused on the three major Earth System compartments (land, ocean and
atmosphere), the three interfaces between these compartments, and two projects
dealing with systems-level integration from the past through the present and
into the future.

The IGBP will be coordinated by a scientific committee supported by the IGBP
Secretariat. These coordination and integration activities will be aimed at
facilitating the Earth System Science focus of the IGBP network by a) affecting
efficient and comprehensive communication between the IGBP core projects and
providing the Earth System context for the these projects; b) collaborating with
its international partner programmes in the transdisciplinary Earth System
Science Partnership to address wider issues of sustainability science and put
IGBP results in the global change context; c) communicating the results of IGBP
investigations into global environmental change in an understandable way to the
wider scientific community, the education sector, agencies and other stakeholder
organizations, and the public.

This integration will involve careful planning: identifying systems-level
hypotheses and questions, constructing research infrastructure to address them,
and ensuring that the efforts of the IGBP core projects are carried out in a
synergistic manner. This will enable scientists from the natural and related
social sciences and from more than eighty countries to collaborate in an
efficient and focused manner to advance, not only their disciplinary fields,
but, more importantly, address systems-level global environmental change issues.
The IGBP will also continue to develop new ways of communicating the results of
its research to stakeholders outside the science community.