* 1247929
* Collaborative Research: EARS: Cognitive and Efficient Spectrum Access in Autonomous Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Harish Viswanathan, Nokia of America Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 01/31/2016
* USD 45,456.00

The objective of this project is to enable more efficient and reliable operation
of autonomous femtocell networks with agile spectrum access, autonomous
interference control, as well as intelligent network self-organization and self-
optimization. This project falls into four interacted thrusts: 1) Incorporate
cognition into the femtocell networks to cognitively reuse the available
spectrum sensed; 2) Develop distributed, dynamic and cooperative interference
management schemes exploiting antenna techniques and based on sensed
environmental conditions; 3) Investigate the scenarios and schemes that
femtocells can be exploited to facilitate macrocell transmissions, and the
potential gains in capacity, coverage and reliability; 4) Incorporate
interference cancellation for data multicast, and develop techniques to support
multiuser video streaming. The project also develops a testbed with open source
programmable wireless platforms, for prototyping and evaluating the
effectiveness of various techniques developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research has the potential to significantly increase the capacity and
resilience of existing and future wireless networks. The agility and resilience
of the system will also make it instrumental to support communications and
applications that are important for national security and economy. The PIs will
facilitate technology transfer through their industrial partners and industry
affiliate programs. Complementary to the research agenda, the project will carry
out a broad range of education and outreach activities, including integration of
research findings into the courses, promoting underrepresented and undergraduate
populations, and engaging with the K-12 schools to raise the level of student
interests in pursuing advanced education and career in the areas of engineering
and mathematics.