* 1247322
* EAGER:  Central IT Operational Support for Production OpenFlow Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Bruce Maas, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,995.00

This project will deploy a pilot Software-Defined Science Network (SDSN) to
interconnect research computing resources on the University of Wisconsin-Madison
campus and link them to national WAN circuit fabrics via Internet2. This pilot
deployment will support both Computer Science applications such as GENI WiMax
experiments and prototyping activities for the University of Wisconsin?s Science
DMZ between campus partner sites and the Internet.

The project will provide an opportunity to develop an operational model for the
innovations promised by OpenFlow. In particular, significant effort will be
expended in integrating management tools such as the UW developed web
application Authorized Agent Network Tool Suite (AANTS), network monitoring
tools such as PerfSONAR and traffic engineering tools such as Netflow/IPFIX. The
GENI toolsets (Expedient, FOAM) will be examined for suitability for enterprise
use. UW will partner with Cisco for the OpenFlow rollout. Travel budget is
included for sharing and presentations of findings to the broad GENI community
and non-technical user communities.

Broader Impact: The pilot will provide an opportunity to gain experience with
architectural, deployment, administrative and operational issues of OpenFlow in
campus settings. Integration with WiMax as an extension of the UW production
network will allow for advanced opportunities to the research and education
communities such as streaming live high definition video from campus natural
areas into classrooms. The PIs will report on issues and operational experience
associated with the deployment. These reports and the PI?s willingness to share
their experience with other universities will reduce barriers to use of GENI
from campuses, establish GENI technologies and OpenFlow as building blocks for
science networking, inform ongoing upgraded to campus infrastructure in support
of domain sciences on campus, and via the partnership with Cisco facilitate the
broader deployment of SDN technologies.