* 1247980
* SBIR Phase I:  Visual Communication for the 21st Century
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Ray Emrani, VizCommunication
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 154,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to test the
feasibility of building a cloud-based platform for creation and sharing of
informational content that is easy to visualize and understand. The platform
will consist of VizLanguage, VizTools, VizDocs, and VizPublish. VizLanguage is a
system of rules for presenting content in digital media to enable
learning/reading using visualization techniques. (VizLanguage shares some
similarities with graphic organizers, such as concept maps, but significantly
differs in structure and function. The significance of the innovation is in its
potential to dramatically decrease the cognitive load for people, with or
without a learning disability, to understand, memorize, and recall information.)
VizTools will enable the authoring and viewing of documents in the VizLanguage
format. VizDocs will be interactive multimedia documents written in VizLanguage.
VizPublish will be a service which allows social creation and sharing of
VizDocs. The team is well-suited to execute Phase I research objectives to
design, develop and evaluate the viewer and authoring
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is that VizLanguage directly benefits two user groups: the
readers/consumers of informational content and authors/creators (including
presenters/trainers/educators) of informational content. The mass market
commercial impact could be strong, depending on the company?s ability to attract
a large number of readers/learners, as well as authors/creators adding new
information. The proposal also has the potential to allow K-16 educators,
business presenters, and corporate trainers to organize their material in a
logical fashion and minimize use of words to make connections between concepts.
The project has generated interest from scientists and faculty members of
academic institutions who are interested in becoming content contributors. When
the product is fully developed, this visual approach to communication will be
particularly helpful for those with learning and processing disabilities and
should broaden participation of underrepresented groups. The company plans to
partner with a large company for distribution and scaling. If successful, the
platform is expected to help people worldwide learn, teach, train, and
communicate more effectively. The technology is also expected to open up many
new research opportunities in cognitive psychology, information visualization,
information accessibility, graphical user interface and the numerous fields that
they impact.