* 1247448
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanometer Scale Raman Force Microscopy for Topographic, Strain, and Chemical Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Sung Park, Molecular Vista, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,998.00

This Small Innovation Research Phase I project aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of the Raman Force Microscope (RFM) to provide a new metrology tool
for in situ topographic, strain, and chemical analysis with nanometer spatial
resolution. Feature size reduction in the semiconductor industry requires that
metrology methods must routinely measure properties down to the atomic scale.
Novel materials and geometries add to the complexity of measurements. RFM
technology is a combination of Raman microscopy and atomic force microscopy
(AFM), where an AFM tip provides a nanometer scale light source to generate
stimulated Raman scattering, and at the same time measures the force gradient
arising from the Raman scattering. The use of the AFM tip as the Raman
scattering detector significantly simplifies Raman signal acquisition and system
configuration. By combining a high-speed AFM scheme, this technology allows for
in-line characterization of physical and chemical properties of nanoscale
materials and structures in the manufacturing environment, i.e. stress in the
channel layer and chemical characterization defects. The objectives of the
proposed Phase I study are (1) to demonstrate reflection mode RFM for Raman
signal measurement of Si wafers and (2) to demonstrate measurement of stress-
induced Raman shifts in nanometer-sized features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be felt not only in the
semiconductor industry but across many disciplines and industries, both in
academia and industry. RFM can be used to measure and characterize a wide
variety of nanoscale materials and structures, e.g. high- and low-k dielectric
films and other emerging materials (such as graphene) used in advanced
semiconductor processes. It can be also widely used across disciplines, e.g. for
the measurement of nanoparticle homogeneity or optimization of self-assembled
monolayers in surface chemistry. The RFM technique also has the capability to
image individual biomolecules in situ, such as for the real-time monitoring of
membrane protein dynamics on cells, which will provide unprecedented utility in
biomedical and clinical research. A reliable label-free imaging tool with the
capability to identify chemical bond information at the molecular level will
potentially bring about revolutionary advances in many fields of basic and
applied biological science, including drug discovery, proteomics, structural
biology, and personalized medicine. The RFM technique will be simpler to
implement as compared to other hybrid instruments involving high resolution
microscopy, resulting in an affordable instrument for academic and research
institutions.