* 1247893
* EARS: Spectrally Aware Interference Tolerant RF Nanosystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jeffrey Rhoads, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 12/31/2016
* USD 516,232.00

Spectrally Aware Interference Tolerant RF Nanosystems&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dimitrios
Peroulis, Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
overarching goal of this proposal is to investigate fundamental issues of
interference mitigation based on novel filtering architectures and
nanomechancial resonators. These are expected to result in interference tolerant
nanoreceivers with unprecedented capabilities not found in conventional
receivers. Interference mitigation is among the most critical features of
reconfigurable radio frequency front-ends of adaptive receivers. Unlike
conventional simplified approaches that typically define a receiver?s minimum
detectable signal with respect to its noise level, it is truly signal
interference that primarily limits the achievable communication range in a
signal-dense environment. As a result, the scientific objectives of this effort
can be summarized as: 1) Investigate new adaptive filtering architectures with
the ability to dynamically reject strong interferers even when located
arbitrarily close to the desired band. 2) Demonstrate new bandstop filter
architectures that can be implemented with relatively low quality factor
integrated resonators but achieve rejection levels found in traditional filters
only when implemented with high quality factor resonators. 3) Demonstrate
integrated nanoresonators used for objectives 1 and 2 based on a simple post-
CMOS processing technology. The integrated nanoresonators will be highly
reproducible, tunable, and will be fabricated with high yield
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A number of steps have been planned to
expand the broader impacts of this project. The most important activities
include: 1) Integrate research results into the curricula and widely disseminate
important research results. Specifically, in addition to standard journal and
conference publications, research results will be integrated into the courses
taught on microsystems, radio frequency design, and nanoscale engineering.
Articles will also be submitted to communications and microsystems trade
magazines to have the work spread to the professional engineering community at
large. 2) Extensive use of the memsHUB web portal to disseminate results from
this study to the micro/nano-engineering community through online simulation
tools. This is expected to be critical in bridging the gap between fundamental
science and microsystems engineers. 3) Support of undergraduate student research
through the NSF REU and/or other funding sources. All professors have strong
histories of involving undergraduates in their research. Junior-level students
will be hired to support the proposed research. 4) Attract and retain U.S.
minority students through appropriate programs as well as engage undergraduate
students to research early in their careers. Accomplishing these goals through
service-learning and project-oriented programs at Purdue will be a priority. The
investigators have already a record in attracting and retaining minority
students including through similar efforts.