* 1247059
* The Retention and Promotion of Women and Minority Faculty Members: Effects of Institutional Hiring, Promotion, Diversity and Work-Life Initiatives, 1993-2008
* SBE,NCSE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Frank Dobbin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* NIRMALA KANNANKUTTY
* 09/30/2013
* USD 95,544.00

U.S. colleges and universities have implemented a wide range of programs to
promote diversity in the professoriate. Special recruitment programs, tenure
extension policies for new parents, paid maternity leaves, mentoring programs
targeting female and minority faculty members, dual-career hiring initiatives,
and ethnic affinity networks for faculty are but a few of the initiatives. Which
of these programs work? It is anyone?s guess, and critics argue that many of the
programs may have no effects, or even adverse effects. This goal of this project
is to understand the role of university recruitment, promotion, diversity, and
work-family programs in attracting and retaining female and minority professors.
The project will address questions such as: Do tenure extension programs for new
parents help female faculty members win tenure, or do they do more to help male
faculty members, who more often have spouses with low-demand careers? Do
networking programs help African-American and Latino faculty members to succeed,
or do they stigmatize and isolate those faculty members? Do formal promotion
requirements help women and minorities to win promotion, or do they serve as
window-dressing?

NCSES' Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR) data from 1993 to 2008, as well as
new survey data, will be used to address these questions. The project will
develop and pilot a questionnaire designed to obtain historical data on
university recruitment, promotion, diversity, and work-family programs, develop
a sample of colleges and universities and matched SDR respondents, and build
methods for analyzing the data. The goal is to show the effects of the presence,
and adoption, of different programs on the career progression of male and
female, majority and minority Ph.D.s. New methods will be developed for
analyzing individual-level data from the SDR panels, using multinomial logit
methods in hierarchical linear models, in which individuals are embedded in
institutions. We will develop models that account for both left and right
censoring in the data, but which make use of the multiple years of observation
available for SDR respondents.

Broader impacts: The result of this project will be to show which types of
programs help schools to attract, retain, and promote women and minority faculty
members, and will guide future administrators in making choices about program
utilization and design. This project will also train 3 to 5 doctoral students to
analyze data from the Survey of Doctorate Recipients, and to use advanced
statistical techniques to examine factors shaping the careers of U.S. scientists
and engineers.