* 1247022
* Evolution and dynamics of subduction, plumes and plate motions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2016
* USD 560,000.00

The surface of the earth is in constant motion via a process known as plate
tectonics. The surface of the earth is divided into about a dozen tectonic
plates whereby one plate moves (at a few inches per year) with respect to other
plates along great faults and fault zones. Although these motions seem small,
they are responsible for earthquakes, including great earthquakes, mountain
building, and the formation of sedimentary basins. Consequently, plate tectonics
is simultaneously responsible for both some of the most significant geological
hazards as well as the formation of the largest hydrocarbon reservoirs. With
this project, we aim to better understand the forces that drive and resist plate
motions and thereby obtain a deeper understanding of the forces that drive
natural hazards and natural resources. Within this project, by linking the most
advanced computational tools to existing observations, we will determine the
forces and physical properties associated with plate tectonics. The most
important impact will be the training of two Ph.D. students in geophysics and a
postdoctoral scholar. They will gain enormous experience with sophisticated
numerical methods, supercomputing technologies, and the linkage of data with
numerical models. These are essential skills in science and the new knowledge
economy. The proposed research will impact several large observational programs
by developing hypotheses that could be tested with deep sea drilling under the
auspices of IODP and geological sampling and seismic imaging of the Aleutian
Island chain under the GeoPRISM project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
propose to test hypotheses for changes in the plate tectonic system with a new
generation of geodynamic models and bring new observational constraints to bear
on the dynamics of plate motions. We will focus on changes in plate speed &amp;
direction and formation of new subduction zones because the observations will
allow us to constrain uncertain mantle and lithospheric properties.
Specifically, plate motions are likely strongly resisted by bending of the slab
in a subduction zone, a force that depends on lithospheric viscosity, but this
viscosity remains poorly known and we propose to place tighter bounds on it and
other uncertain properties by matching observations in the time domain -- in
much the same way that a combination of time-dependent and present day
observations of post-glacial rebound are used to constrain the background mantle
viscosity. First, we will use generic, fully dynamic 3D models to self-
consistently explore the balance between changes in plate motions and changes to
subduction and plumes. Second, we will use realistic models to better establish
the link between dynamics and detailed geological and geochemical observations
of specific examples of subduction initiation. Third, we will build detailed
structural models of the mantle and lithosphere in the geological past using an
approach that assimilates plate tectonic reconstructions into models of mantle
convection along with inverse methods that allow estimation of initial
conditions, density anomalies, and viscosity structures. Through these three
approaches, we aim to more fully establish the dynamic link between changing
plate motions and how they translate into and result from changes in subduction,
with specific linkages to geophysical and geological observations. The models
will be high resolution (e.g. locally 1 km or less where needed) and fully
incorporate the extreme variations in viscosity between the slab and mantle,
hinge zone and interface between subducting and over-riding plates.