* 1247503
* EARS: Novel Beam Steering Apertures and Waveforms for High Capacity Broadband Wireless Nodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Mohammod Ali, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 12/31/2017
* USD 539,955.00

Proposal Summary - Novel Beam Steering Apertures and Waveforms for High Capacity
Broadband Wireless Nodes &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand for broadband wireless has put existing
systems to their limits. In not so distant future mobile Gb/s portable and
wearable wireless nodes will be required which will necessitate significant
improvements in spectral efficiency. This work proposes an integrated research
concept which brings together innovations in beam steering antenna arrays and
interference immune waveforms and algorithms. To date most of the antennas and
arrays that have been developed for portable and wearable wireless applications
have fixed broad beams. This makes them very inefficient because much of the
radiated radio frequency power is absorbed by the head or the body resulting in
wasted battery power. In this work led by USC significantly smaller form factor
antenna arrays will be developed by exploiting the steerable parasitic array
concept. The dependency of the array gain and angular coverage on array
parameters will be studied to develop new design rules. From a systems
perspective, efforts have been devoted to maximize spectral efficiency within
heterogeneous networking strategies. However, conventional spectrum utilization
strategies which are developed for homogeneous networks are being integrated to
the heterogeneous networks, which stand as the bottleneck of the heterogeneous
network. To break that bottleneck the concept of enhanced partial overlapping
domains is proposed by the USF team. For the first time, beam steering
approaches at the mobile will be combined with time-frequency utilization
considering enhanced partially overlapped domains. A system level testbed will
be developed to evaluate the performance of the proposed arrays and waveforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this work includes its potential for new fundamental knowledge generation in the
field of beam steering antenna arrays and interference immune
waveforms/algorithms for future high capacity portable/wearable wireless
applications. This will have effects on commercial and military communication
domains. Immediate tangible outcome will be a system level testbed that will
provide results, outcomes, and design guidelines to prospective designers. This
research also involves a team from Benedict College, Columbia, SC, an HBCU
(Historically Black Colleges and Universities) Institution. The Benedict team
will conduct research and educational activities that will lead to the
development of demonstration modules that will enhance future outreach and
recruitment efforts of undergraduate students, high school students, and female
and minority studen