* 1247679
* CSU Alliance for Preparing Undergraduates through Mentoring towards PhDs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2021
* Helena Noronha, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project focuses on increasing the participation of highly qualified
underrepresented minority students in mathematical sciences doctoral programs by
providing a comprehensive training and research program at the undergraduate
level. It develops a network of eight campuses of the California State System
located in the Southern California area. These include Cal State Channel
Islands, Dominquez Hills, Fullerton, Long Beach, Los Angeles, Northridge,
Polytechnic Pomona, and San Bernadino. Built on the cornerstones of (a)
undergraduate research, (b) advanced course work and seminars, and (c) strong
mentoring and aggressive recruitment, the project will identify and prepare
selected talented and motivated underrepresented undergraduate students to
succeed in mathematical sciences careers through a series of high-quality,
personalized activities. These include (a) summer institutes that complement
courses and expand students' mathematical horizons; (b) at least one year of
undergraduate research projects for junior and senior math majors; and (c)
seminars and rigorous and advanced mathematics course work. Eight mathematics
faculty with experience in mentoring students from underrepresented groups will
co-direct the project with support of the chairs and fellow members of their
departments. With these activities and under the guidance of the faculty
involved in the project, students will grow mathematically and develop their
full intellectual potential. The project will provide them with a comprehensive
education and training program that emphasizes the rigor of mathematical
sciences and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By identifying talented and highly
motivated students from minority groups, by addressing critical choices they
face, and by providing a solid mathematical education to them, this project will
make a significant contribution to increasing the quantity, quality, and
diversity of the mathematical sciences workforce. The resulting increase in
numbers and quality of minority students from our region (particularly
Hispanic/Latino students) entering Ph.D. math programs will do much to lift
other students' aspirations and encourage them to pursue careers in mathematics
or with a heavy mathematical component. This change will positively impact the
quality of mathematical education offered in our institutions' undergraduate
program. In particular, this project will alter the intellectual atmosphere
among faculty and students in the involved institutions and will have beneficial
repercussions beyond the time-frame covered by the project itself.