* 1247861
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Some Assembly Required: Understanding the Emergence of Teams and Ecosystems of Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Marshall Poole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 52,304.00

This research project will develop a theoretical and computational framework to
understand and enable the socio-technical dynamics shaping the assembly of teams
in distributed global contexts. The main barrier to understanding and explaining
the role of human centered computing in team assembly is finding a suitable
research environment where (1) geographically distributed individuals from
potentially different cultures are assembling in teams of varying sizes to
accomplish a variety of tasks over varying durations; (2) their actions,
interactions and transactions are captured with precise time-stamps; and (3)
their outcomes would be recorded with well-defined metrics. Massively
multiplayer online role-playing games offer a research environment that meets
all of these requirements. EVE Online, a massively multiplayer online role-
playing game, offers a potentially suitable research opportunity to study the
assembly of teams and ecosystems of teams. It is notable for allowing as many as
tens of thousands of people to interact simultaneously on a single server
cluster, from around the world, through a well-developed economic system and
serious long-term coalitions, in a more flexible action framework than many
other popular games possess.

This high-risk high-payoff project will explore the feasibility of using data
from EVE Online to identify the socio-technical and cultural mechanisms that
explain the assembly of teams more generally. If successful, the study will
serve as a model for larger scale studies that, in addition to identifying the
assembly mechanisms also assess the impact of these mechanisms on the
performance of global teams. The most important and complex decisions in society
are made in teams. And yet, assembling effective teams is a daunting task. While
there is an awareness of how team collaborations can spearhead socio-economic
change, we still have sparse sociotechnical knowledge of how globally
distributed cross-cultural teams and systems of teams are assembled. This
project seeks to address this limitation. First, the proposed research offers
the promise to launch a new generation of theorizing and research on the
assembly mechanisms of teams and ecosystem of teams. The empirical data that
will be used to develop and test these theories will be a high risk effort but
with potential for unprecedented scale, size, and completeness. Second, the
research will arguably be the first effort in the field of social networks to
develop hypergraph techniques to study assembly of teams and ecosystems of
teams.

The knowledge and tools developed in this research will allow practitioners to
cultivate more effectively the emergence and performance of ad hoc teams in
business, science and gaming. It will also provide other scientific disciplines
with new computational statistical modeling methodologies and tools to model
hypergraphs.