* 1247658
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: DA: Distribution-based machine learning for high dimensional datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Aarti Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

Many applications call for representation and analysis of 'distributional' data
sets where each data point is a collection of samples from a high dimensional
distribution (as opposed to valuations of a typically vector valued random
variable). In this setting, each data point can be modeled by a collection of
distributions, one for each measured attribute. A concrete example of
distributional data arises in the context of brain connectivity mapping. The
human brain contains around a hundred billion neurons with several hundred
trillion physical connections. Neuroimaging approaches, like Diffusion Spectrum
Imaging attempt to visualize the underlying anatomical architecture of neural
pathways by creating 3D probability distributions of water diffusion along nerve
fiber bundles, called orientation distribution functions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop new statistical and
algorithmic approaches to natural generalizations of a class of standard machine
learning problems (where multi-dimensional vector valued data points are
replaced by distributions), including techniques for measuring distances and
inner products between distributional data points, estimating variants of
entropy, mutual information, conditional mutual information, clustering
distributional data, constructing low-dimensional embeddings of distributional
data, and learning classifiers and function approximators from distributional
data. The resulting methods will be evaluated on large diffusion scan imaging
data sets (where the data point for each patient consists of 500,000
distributions). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel machine learning approaches for
descriptive and predictive modeling of distributional data resulting from this
project are expected to benefit other scientific fields where data points can be
naturally modeled by sets of distributions, which is a common situation in
physics, psychology, economics, epidemiology, medicine, and social network-
analysis. New distributional data set to be obtained at CMU to augment the data
available from NTU are likely to allow other research groups to engage in
research on big data analytics from distributional data. Release of open source
software, video tutorials, research-training of graduate students contribute to
the broader impacts of the project. Additional information about the project can
be found at: http://www.autonlab.org/autonweb/20928.html.