* 1247685
* 2013 CSHL Computational Cell Biology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 03/31/2014
* USD 14,660.00

This award supports the biennial conference on Computational Cell Biology: The
Interplay between Models and Data, which takes place March 19-22, 2013, at Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL). This meeting brings together a diverse group of
scientists who study the molecular, structural, and functional aspects of
cellular processes by using computer simulations and mathematical models. The
interdisciplinary field computational cell biology is focused on the simulation
of molecular machinery that drives the physiological behavior of living cells.
To build useful quantitative models of these processes, computational scientists
must work closely with experimental cell biologists; in this partnership,
experimentalists collect data about cellular processes and how they change over
time, while mathematicians use the information to build and improve upon
computer models that accurately reflect the biology. The CSHL conference
advances knowledge in cell biology by providing a forum where scientists who
study all aspects of dynamic cellular processes, from data generation and
analysis to the development and validation of quantitative models, can interact
with each other and exchange ideas, information, and approaches. The conference
includes sessions on signal processing, noise, cell mechanics, development,
synthetic biology, imaging, evolution, and organizing principles of biological
systems. The 2013 meeting builds on the successes of prior CSHL meetings to
assemble an international gathering of scientists, discuss new developments in
the field, and catalyze innovative research collaborations.

The discipline of computational cell biology seeks to develop mathematical
models of living systems, such as molecular interactions during cell division in
both healthy cells and cancer. The goals for such models are twofold: 1) predict
outcomes from dynamical systems in the cell, thereby allowing scientists to 2)
explain how cellular processes go awry in disease. To build successful models,
mathematicians and computer scientists must work closely with experimental cell
biologists. In this partnership, experimentalists collect quantitative
information about cellular processes and how they change over time, while
mathematicians use the information to build and improve upon computer models
that accurately reflect the biology. The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
conference on Computational Cell Biology: The Interplay between Models and Data
advances knowledge in the field by bringing together scientists with expertise
in both experimental and computational techniques, thus catalyzing scientific
interactions that will ultimately accelerate the pace of discovery.