* 1247583
* EARS: Beamspace Communication Techniques and Architectures for Enabling Gigabit Mobile Wireless at Millimeter-Wave Frequencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Akbar Sayeed, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 09/30/2016
* USD 505,839.00

Beamspace Communication Techniques and Architectures for
Enabling&lt;br/&gt;Gigabit Mobile Wireless at Millimeter-Wave
Frequencies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The objective of this project
is to develop basic theory and design strategies for new wireless communication
architectures that are expected to deliver transformative enhancements in the
access to, and usage of, the electromagnetic spectrum at millimeter-wave
frequencies. The exploding bandwidth requirements imposed by the new data-hungry
mobile devices will soon outgrow the Megabits/sec speeds offered by current
networks. Additionally, there is simply not enough bandwidth available at the
currently used frequencies. Two technological trends offer new synergistic
opportunities: i) millimeter-wave systems with orders-of-magnitude larger
bandwidths, and ii) multi-antenna transceivers that can exploit the spatial
dimension for transformative gains at such small wavelengths. State-of-the-art
approaches fall significantly short of harnessing the opportunities because of
their failure to address fundamental performance-complexity tradeoffs inherent
at millimeter-wave frequencies. An integrated theoretical-experimental approach
is being pursued for developing new transceiver architectures that leverage the
concept of beamspace communication multiplexing data into distinct spatial beams
to fully harness the spatial degrees of freedom for enhanced power efficiency,
spectral efficiency, security, and reduced interference. The investigation is
anchored on two complementary architectures one based on conventional arrays and
digital beamforming and a new architecture that uses a novel lens array for
analog beamforming whose combinations offer a rich set of performance-complexity
pathways. The proposed research activities include optimized antenna array
design, propagation channel modeling, development of beamspace communication
techniques, and prototype-based evaluation. The results of the project are
expected to enable critical operational capabilities that are beyond the reach
of the state-of-the-art, including electronic multi-beam steering and tracking
in mobile point-to-multipoint links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project will provide an invaluable opportunity for multi-disciplinary training
of students at the cutting-edge of wireless communications. Research results
will be broadly disseminated through conference and journal publications,
research seminars, and via the internet. Research findings will be incorporated
by the PIs into existing courses through lectures and course projects. Under-
represented undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the project
through existing successful programs at the University of Wisconsin. Middle- and
high-school teachers will be engaged in the project for outreach in science and
engineering. In the longer term, the results of this project are expected to
spur new interdisciplinary research in wireless communication and sensing at
millimeter-wave and higher frequencies. Through proactive industrial
collaborations and technology transfer, the results of the project are expected
to impact the conception, development, standardization and commercialization of
emerging millimeter-wave broadband wireless technologies for delivering 10-1000
Gigabits/s speeds.