* 1247051
* INSPIRE: Robust Molecular Programming: Advances in the Design and Verification of Reliable Self-Assembling Nanosystems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Jack Lutz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 943,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the following NSF units: the Software
and Hardware Foundations Program in the Division of Computer and Communications
Foundations of the Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate;
the Bio Computing fund in the Division of Computer and Communications
Foundations of the Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate;
the Networks and Regulation Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences of the Biology Directorate; the fund for Biological and Computing
Shared Principles (BCSP) in both the Computer and Communications Foundations of
the Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate and the Biology
Directorate; and the Office of Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

Molecular programming, also known as DNA nanotechnology, exploits the
information-processing capabilities of nucleic acids to design self-assembling,
programmable structures and devices at the nanoscale. Research in the past few
years has shown how DNA tile self-assembly can implement algorithms; how DNA
strand displacement reactions can implement logic circuits, neural networks, and
molecular robots; and how DNA origami can create two- and three-dimensional
structures that can serve as targeted drug-delivery devices or "nano-
breadboards" to which devices can be attached at specified locations. Simply
stated, molecular programming is programming matter to do our bidding at
molecular scales, and it is programming in the literal sense of computer
science.

This project will combine methods from molecular biology with methods from
computer science, and especially software engineering, to begin the development
of a discipline of robust molecular programming. This will be a systematic
process for programming DNA nanosystems with a high level of confidence that
they will do what they are supposed to do, despite the probabilistic
vicissitudes of the chemical kinetics of their environments. The project will
develop this robust approach to molecular programming in concert with real,
cutting-edge wet-lab research in DNA nanotechnology. Methods developed by
software engineers for designing and verifying reliable, asynchronous systems
that scale and principles developed by theoretical computer scientists for
integrating randomness with computation will be applied specifically to a
fundamentally new approach to creating more complex yet more robust DNA
origamis, to applications of this approach to reliable biosensors, and to a new
method for modularizing computations at the nanoscale.

This project's unconventional application of software engineering methods
directly to DNA nanotechnology has potentially transformative benefits for
making DNA nanotechnology and its anticipated applications to medicine,
information technology, manufacturing, energy production, and other enterprises
of twenty-first century society more productive, predictable, and safe. The
project will also enhance interdisciplinary STEM education at Iowa State
University and contribute to a developing biotech corridor in central Iowa.