* 1247510
* Protein Folding and Embryogenesis in Antarctic Fishes: A Comparative Approach to Environmental Stress
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 570,301.00

Since the advent of Antarctic continental glaciation, the opening of the Drake
Passage between South America and the Antarctic Peninsula, and the onset of
cooling of the Southern Ocean ~40-25 million years ago, evolution of the
Antarctic marine biota has been driven by the development of extreme cold
temperatures. As circum-Antarctic coastal temperatures declined during this
period from ~20°C to the modern ?1.9 to +2.0°C (reached ~8-10 million years
ago), the psychrophilic (cold-loving) ectotherms of the Southern Ocean evolved
compensatory molecular, cellular, and physiological traits that enabled them to
maintain normal metabolic function at cold temperatures. Today, these organisms
are threatened by rapid warming of the Southern Ocean over periods measured in
centuries (as much as 5°C/100 yr), a timeframe so short that re-adaptation
and/or acclimatization to the ?new warm? may not be possible. Thus, the long-
term goals of this research project are: 1) to understand the biochemical and
physiological capacities of the embryos of Antarctic notothenioid fish to resist
or compensate for rapid oceanic warming; and 2) to assess the genetic toolkit
available to support the acclimatization and adaptation of Antarctic
notothenioid embryos to their warming habitat. The specific aims of this work
are: 1) to determine the capacity of the chaperonin complex of notothenioid
fishes to assist protein folding at temperatures between ?4 and +20°C; and 2) to
evaluate the genetic responses of notothenioid embryos, measured as global
differential gene transcription, to temperature challenge, with ?1.9°C as the
?normal? control and +4 and +10°C as high temperature insults.&lt;br/&gt;The
physiology of embryonic development of marine stenotherms under future climate
change scenarios is an important but understudied problem. This project will
provide valuable insights into the capacity of Antarctic fish embryos to
acclimatize and adapt to plausible climate change scenarios by examining
multiple levels of biological organization, from the biochemical to the
organismal. The results should also be broadly applicable to understanding the
impact of global warming on marine biota worldwide. The research will also
introduce graduate and REU undergraduate students to state-of-the-art
biochemical, cellular, and molecular-biological research relevant to ecological
and environmental issues of the Antarctic marine ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;