* 1247577
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Zeolite Membranes for Olefin/Paraffin Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,11/30/2013
* Zhong Tang, Bettergy Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2013
* USD 149,825.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
highly permeable inorganic membrane for olefin/paraffin separation. Zeolite
membranes have a number of advantages over polymer membranes and other inorganic
membranes, including greater chemical and mechanical stability, higher
selectivity and permeance, and longer operation life. The project aims to
develop, demonstrate and commercialize a robust, cost-effective, high
permeability and selectivity, excellent hydrothermal and chemical stable
olefin/paraffin membrane separation technology. The molecular sieving and
facilitated transport properties of the novel modified zeolite membrane will be
used more efficiently to separate olefin/paraffin mixtures from the down-streams
of steam cracker. This technology is an attractive alternative to replace
current high energy intensive cryo-distillation process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact/commercial potential of this project will
be realized by enabling a substantial saving in energy expenditure in
olefin/paraffin separations in the petrochemical industry with significant
capital cost savings compared to current energy intensive separation processes.
With yearly production in the US exceeding 25 million tons for ethylene and 16
million tons for propylene, respectively, ethylene and propylene are the most
commonly produced light olefins. It is estimated that over 120 trillion Btu of
energy per year is consumed by the current distillation processes for the
separation of ethylene/ethane and propylene/propane mixtures in the United
States. Even small improvements in these separations could results in
significant energy and cost savings. On the other hand, increasing worldwide
concerns about the environment protection, and energy security has been
demanding the production of commodity chemicals such as ethylene and propylene
in an efficient and economical way. Membrane separation technology has been
considered as the critical technology that must be developed in order to realize
this goal. Therefore, there is strong commercial market pull for developing a
cost-effective olefin/paraffin separation technology as a significantly more
energy efficient alternative to current practice.