* 1247996
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Change in lithic technology organization during the Middle & Late Stone Ages in East Africa: Implications for the evolution of human behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Philip Slater, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2015
* USD 24,434.00

The East African Middle and Late Stone Age eras, beginning 300 thousand years
ago (ka), span an important period in the evolution of modern human behavior.
Fossil, genetic and archaeological evidence show that anatomically modern humans
and many of the characteristic "modern" behaviors that are used to define them
appeared first in Africa. A significant dimension of the transition to modern
behavior is the evolution of planning capacities, with more frequent
communication about current environments and resource exploitation opportunities
facilitating strategic planning of stone (lithic) tool-using activities with
task-specific toolkits comprised of specialized, effective tools. Enhanced
technological planning and long distance intergroup cooperative social networks,
which apparently intensified after 100 ka, may have been crucial for the
dispersal of modern humans from Africa and contributed to factors leading to the
extinction of Neanderthals and other hominin species within and outside Africa.

This dissertation research by doctoral student Philip Slater (University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), under the mentorship of Dr. Stanley Ambrose,
tests the hypothesis that later Middle and Late Stone Age (~100 ka) lithic
technological organization reflects greater levels of planning, compared to the
earlier Middle Stone Age (100-300 ka). Testing of this hypothesis is
accomplished through analyses of stone tools from three archaeological sites in
Kenya, including artifact type classification, size and shape measurements,
combined with identification of microscopic traces of stone tool functions using
Scanning Electron Microscopy.

Results from this project will promote understanding of how humans make
strategic decisions regarding planning of technology based on information
acquired through social networks. The research has broad implications for
understanding the adaptive significance of cooperation and information sharing,
including contributions toward development of policies for mitigating risk in
increasingly uncertain future environments impacted by global social, political,
and climatic change. In addition, the research will support Kenya's national
scientific initiatives by advancing the education and training of University of
Nairobi student volunteers, museum staff, and local residents in archaeological
field methods, artifact curation, and technological analysis, as well as through
promoting understanding of paleoanthropology.