* 1247072
* Workshop: Emergent Trends in Heat Transfer Engineering, Research and Education - A Workshop Proposal, July 2013, Minneapolis, Minnesota
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Francis Kulacki, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 40,320.00

CBET - 1247072&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kulacki &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workshop grant
request is requested for assessing emergent trends in heat transfer engineering,
research, and education . The workshop will take place prior to the summer 2013
ASME Summer Heat Transfer Conference, marking the 75th anniversary of the ASME
Heat Transfer Division. Broad challenges and future trends will be solicited
from the technical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Heat Transfer
Conference will be held this year at the University of Minnesota, where the
field of heat transfer has long been a signature program in the Mechanical
Engineering program, where faculty have been widely recognized as international
leaders in the field. A similar workshop was performed during the 50h
anniversary of the heat division, and the PIs believe a similar analysis is
necessary to assess current challenges and trends in the field to orient the
next wave of young entrepreneurial scientists towards these nationally-relevant
heat-transfer problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are requesting the
financial support to conduct a pre-conference workshop on emergent trends in
heat transfer engineering, research and education. A detailed report on the
discussions and recommendations will be written and distributed to both US and
international segments of the heat transfer community. A report on the findings
of the workshop will be presented in either a session or forum at the 2013
International Mechanical Engineering Conference and Exposition. Concurrent with
the workshop and 2013 Summer Heat Transfer Conference, special issues of the
Journal of Heat Transfer&lt;br/&gt;and the Journal of Thermal Science and
Engineering Applications will explore some of the issues to be addressed in
workshop through focal articles and review papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will draw from a large cross-section of the community; the PIs propose
to draw from the community broadly a vision of the pathways forward in heat
transfer engineering, research and education, rather than develop a vision only
through the advice of experts. Active participation and dialog will be key to
this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the workshop would inform
industry, academia, and government on technology development, educational
reform, and broader societal investments. Due to the solicitations from a broad
community, a rich set of opinions to accurately and wisely guide the community
are likely to be obtained. The results immediately following and during the
workshop as well as a final report will be widely disseminated through
traditional mechanisms and be made available to the public at large. A clear and
logical project plan is provided.