* 1247778
* Collaborative Research: Design, Analysis and Implementation of Social Interactions in Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Robert Qiu, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 110,000.00

Cognitive radio is an efficient approach to access frequency spectrum. The
performance of cognitive radio networks is substantially determined by the
information on spectrum occupancies. Experiments have demonstrated the temporal
and spatial correlations of spectrum availability, which is of key importance in
the design and analysis of cognitive radio networks. Motivated by the
observation, this research studies the social interaction mechanism for
secondary users to fully exploit the correlations. A recommendation mechanism is
useful for secondary users to share correlated information about the spectrum.
Collaborative filtering can enhance the capability of better learning the
spectrum situations. For better understand and assist the design, analysis is
conducted for the social interaction mechanism, based on powerful tools in
social networks, such as master equation, mean filed dynamics and epidemic
propagation. Continuum model, such as partial differential equations for
diffusions, is also employed as the limit case of discrete cognitive radio
networks. Beacon based and packet based mechanisms are used for the
recommendation protocols. A 100-node hardware cognitive radio network testbed is
built to demonstrate the proposed mechanisms, algorithms and protocols. The
research involves aspects of wireless communications, networking, artificial
intelligence and physics; thus the inter-disciplinary essence of the research
also lends itself to cross-disciplinary education. New courses are devised,
which involve the topics of cognitive radio networks, machine learning and image
processing. This project also attracts traditionally underrepresented groups, as
well as outreach high school students.