* 1247873
* SBIR Phase I:  A Holistic and Robust Personal Financial Planner
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Georgia Mourtzinou, DYNAMIC IDEAS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,640.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
financial expert system that considers the totality of a household's current and
projected financial situation (income, taxes, expenses, assets, liabilities,
financing options) to automatically create a highly personalized multi-period
savings and spending plan designed to achieve the household's financial goals.
The proposed research is innovative in two fundamental ways: it takes a holistic
view of financial planning and explicitly addresses market uncertainty and the
risk of households falling short of reaching their goals. Based on state-of-the
art mathematical programming techniques and in particular recent advances in
robust optimization, the proposed system will make the appropriate use of
special tax treatment of different accounts, recommend new accounts to open
based on the client's unique needs over time, fund them and use them for
distributions, and finally determine robust asset allocation solutions across
all accounts. The resulting tool with its actionable comprehensive plan will
represent a substantial improvement over the current state of the art which
consists of illustrative calculators that do not propose strategies but merely
project the potential outcomes from plans supplied by the user, and tools which
solve one aspect of the interconnected planning problem in isolation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to develop an empowering and educational tool that can be marketed to
households through their employers or their financial service institutions. The
proposed technology will be able to serve a wide range of economic and age
demographics strengthening their financial future. Users will be able to apply
the tool throughout their life: from wealth accumulation years, to the years of
achieving home-ownership and funding education, and into retirement when they
will create a retirement paycheck. There is no such tool in the market today and
the need is urgent. Recent surveys show that retirement confidence has plateaued
at the lowest level in two decades, and less than half of parents who expect
their kids to go to college can fund their education. A well designed and
executed personal financial planning tool can enable people to see the long-term
effects of increased savings, and better evaluate the trade-offs between
different goals that occur during their life so that they stay in the path to
success. In the long term, it can lead to a population who is better prepared to
deal with financial complexities and as a result more confident in its future.