* 1247370
* International Workshop: Critical Zone Observatories for Sustainable Soil Development and Beyond
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Hailiang Dong, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2013
* USD 48,000.00

Earth's Critical Zone (CZ) refers to the thin layer of earth from the bottom of
the ground water to the top of the vegetation upon which humanity is so utterly
dependent for life support. This layer provides vital ecosystem services to
sustain our economy. With projected human population growth and associated
environmental change in the future, it is imperative to understand the impacts
of anthropogenic activities and climate change on CZ biogeochemical processes
and rates.

In response to this pressing global need, a global network of observatories,
called Critical Zone Observatories (CZOs), have been established over the course
of the past five years primarily in the United States and Europe. These
observatories are to provide an unprecedented intensity and scale of scientific
observations, where interdisciplinary scientists come together to test
hypotheses, identify ecosystem processes and measure their rates, develop
mathematical models, and make use of multiple sensors and sampling methods. By
now, 60 observatories are established in 25 countries and scientists from
diverse disciplines are now actively engaged in developing a concerted
international research effort that explicitly links CZOs and Critical Zone
research to the global sustainability agenda.

This proposal requests support to hold an international workshop on CZ processes
in China to promote collaboration between Chinese and US scientists. For this,
the meeting will also promote the CZO concept among Chinese scientists,
involving Chinese funding agencies in supporting the CZ research. The second
objective is to train young scientists and students in the CZ science. The third
objective is to identify possible CZO sites in China so that they can join the
international network. The principal investigator (PI) will work closely with
the Chinese counterparts to arrange logistics. Following 2-3 day plenary
sessions and small group discussions, the participants will visit a red soil
field site in Jiangxi Province, China. The PI and Chinese collaborators will
implement various methods to sustain the international activities for the long
term.

The workshop will address globally significant research questions and will
greatly advance our understanding of the complex interactions between the
atmosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and lithosphere. These topics are of
interest to geologists, microbiologists, geochemists, hydrologists, civil and
environmental engineers, and the general public with broad theoretical and
practical implications. The workshop is most likely to stimulate integrated
multidisciplinary research among the US, the European, and Chinese scientists.
The workshop report will be placed on the workshop website. The site will also
contain important information such as faculty and student exchange
opportunities, any new program announcements, job opportunities, joint proposal
opportunities, meeting announcements, etc.