* 1247008
* Impregnated Inorganic Nanoparticles at the Natrual Fiber-Thermoplastic Polymer Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Sheldon Shi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 116,881.00

The research objective of this award is to examine the functions of the
inorganic nanoparticles deposited on the natural fiber surface for the
improvement of the interfacial compatibility between the fiber and polymer, and
reduction of the manufacture defects for natural fiber-polymer composites. The
research will result in fundamental understanding on the efficiency and roles of
impregnated inorganic nanoparticles in the cellulosic fibers on the property
enhancement of composites. Advanced tools and techniques, such as X-ray computer
tomography scanning, transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy and contact angle analysis will be
employed to determine the void space and nanoparticle distribution, fiber
surface property characterization in terms of the surface energy polar and non-
polar components, chemical components, surface morphology and topography,
crystalline layer and nucleation study. Numerical simulations through molecular
dynamics (MD) modeling will be conducted to elucidate the functions of the
nanoparticles at the interphase of the fibers and polymer matrices. Deliverables
include an optimum process for the inorganic nanoparticle impregnation, property
enhancement of the natural fiber nanocomposites, and the mechanism for the
improvement of interfacial bonding from the inorganic nanoparticle impregnation
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
elucidate the functions of nanophase deposited on the fiber surface on the
improvement of the interfacial compatibility for the fiber reinforced polymer
composites, so that it will provide guidance to optimize processing parameters
of using the nanopaticle impregnation technology in the fiber reinforced
composites. Post-doctorate fellows, graduate and undergraduate students will
benefit through lab exercise and classroom instruction.&lt;br/&gt;