* 1247894
* Student Travel Support for 2012-2014 ASME Student Mechanism and Robot Design Competitions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,10/31/2013
* David Cappelleri, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 10/31/2013
* USD 45,000.00

This award provides travel funding for students (undergraduate and graduate)
participating as finalists in the 2012, 2013, and 2014 ASME Student Mechanism
Design Competition. The competition is featured at the Mechanisms and Robotics
Conferences, which is part of the ASME International Design Engineering
Technical Conferences (IDETC) and Computers and Information in Engineering
Conference (CIE). ASME IDETC/CIE is the premier international meeting in the
fields of Design Engineering and Computers and Information in Engineering. This
event is designed to showcase cutting edge research and accomplishments, and to
enrich the educational experience in these fields. The purpose of the Mechanisms
and Robotics conference is to advance the understanding of the base of knowledge
in mechanism design and robotics that all researchers and educators will
collectively draw upon in the years ahead to meet the challenges and realize the
opportunities of a globally competitive economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanism
design has been and will continue be one of the fundamental techniques that are
widely used and needed in industry. The objective of the ASME Student Mechanism
Design Competition is (1) to stimulate students' interests in mechanism design
and research and (2) to promote advances in research and education in the
theory, design and application of mechanisms. Finalists are invited to present
their work at IDETC each of the years of this grant. Finalists are judged on the
basis of creativity, practicality, integrity of analysis and design methodology,
quality of the fabricated prototype, quality of the final report and the
conference presentation.