* 1247079
* Value-Added Postdoctoral Research on the Scientific Workforce
* SBE,NCSE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Alan Karr, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
* Standard Grant
* John Gawalt
* 06/30/2016
* USD 224,903.00

This postdoctoral research program at the National Institute of Statistical
Sciences (NISS) comprises performing innovative research and creating usable
products that not only support the mission of the National Center for Science
and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) but also address the needs of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, the research is
framed by two statistical themes and two key societal issues. The first
statistical theme is characterization of uncertainties arising from novel
methods of integrating and analyzing data, addressing a critical need in an era
of declining data collection budgets and decreasing participation in government
surveys. The second theme centers on conducting experiments with real data,
simulating phenomena of interest in order to evaluate, and in some cases enable,
methodological advances. Key issues regarding surveys, such as how many times
and by what means to contact nonrespondents, are too complex to be treated
analytically, and infeasible to address with real world experiments; therefore
simulation is effectively the only laboratory available. Specific research
topics include data integration, prediction, model to design feedback, data-
quality-aware statistical disclosure limitation and cost data quality tradeoffs.
All Federal statistical agencies stand to benefit from the research, which will
produce innovative theory, novel, methodology and algorithmic implementations,
together with datasets, analyses, software and insights that inform future data
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The societal issues are labor
economics as it relates to the science, engineering and health workforce (SEHW).
Understanding phenomena such as salaries, fringe benefits, mobility and
training/job relationships is crucial to maintaining the United States'
competitiveness in a global economy, as well as to facing the challenges of
difficult economic times. The second issue is aging, because other than the role
of students born outside of the US, aging is the most important phenomenon
taking place in the SEHW (and, arguably, in society as a whole). For both
issues, understanding the dramatically increasing richness of observed behaviors
within the SEHW is a profound opportunity. New kinds of family structures,
shared positions, and an array of forms of post-first-retirement employment are
among the central social trends of our times. This project will generate new
insights that inform both future research and sound policy.