* 1247450
* EAGER:  Enhancements in Raman/Rayleigh Scattering Imaging in Turbulent Flames Using Multi-Pass, Optical Phase-Conjugated Scattering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Sutton, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 59,828.00

Intellectual Merit: This exploratory project will investigate the use of multi-
pass, phase-conjugated retro-reflection for enhancing low-signal, laser-based
processes such as Rayleigh and Raman scattering in turbulent flames. Currently,
the combined approach of spontaneous Raman and Rayleigh scattering is the most
accurate method for measuring instantaneous, spatially-resolved distributions of
the temperature and all major species concentrations (e.g., CH4, O2, CO, CO2,
H2O, H2) simultaneously in turbulent combustion systems. The measurement of all
major species (through the combined Raman/Rayleigh approach) yields direct
information of the thermo-chemical state of the system and allows the deduction
of the mixture fraction. The mixture fraction is perhaps the most important
scalar in non-premixed and partially-premixed combustion as it characterizes the
local state of molecular mixing as well as being a critical variable in a large
number of turbulent combustion models. However, spontaneous Raman scattering is
very weak and typically requires ultra-high laser pulse energies to achieve
sufficient signal-to-noise ratios for ?single-shot? measurements in turbulent
flames. This factor leads to some notable measurement limitations including the
fact that the majority of experimentalists do not have access to the requisite
high-energy laser systems, thus relegating the measurements to a few
laboratories in the world and the fact that the high pulse energies can be
problematic in realistic, confined systems where window and facility damage
become a concern. In this manner, Raman/Rayleigh measurements are largely
limited to unconfined, laboratory-scale experiments. Finally, it has been noted
that the high pulse energies simultaneous generate and excite species such that
their emitted fluorescence interferences with the very weak Raman signal. In the
current research program, the use of stimulated Brillouin scattering-phase
conjugate mirrors (SBS-PCMs) in a multi-pass arrangement will be investigated.
It is expected that the use of SBS-PCMs will increase the signal gain and
signal-to-noise ratios without degrading measurement spatial resolution; an
aspect that has not been possible with previous multi-pass arrangements. In
addition, it will be shown that ?single-shot? Raman/Rayleigh measurements can be
performed with reduced laser energies using the SBS-PCM multi-pass approach to
avoid many of the complications associated with ultra-high laser pulse energies.

Broader Impacts: The majority of power generation and propulsion platforms
involve turbulent combustion processes that are complicated by the coupling
between complex turbulent flow field and chemical reactions at numerous length
and time scales. The first step in improving the efficiency of such systems will
come from understanding the thermal and mass transport processes in turbulent
combustion environments with high-fidelity measurements. The current research
project has the potential for significant impacts on turbulent combustion
diagnostics, yielding an alternative methodology for measuring temperature and
major species concentrations in turbulent flames. Specifically, the combination
of lower pulse energies and SBS-PCMs in a multi-pass arrangement will allow the
extension of Raman/Rayleigh scattering diagnostics to many more researchers and
laboratories around the world and provide a means for making these measurements
in ?confined? test setups with realistic, high-temperature, high-pressure
thermodynamic conditions that are relevant to diesel, spark-ignited, rocket, and
gas turbine engines. Additional technical impacts include improved multi-scalar
measurements which will aid in the assessment and development of combustion
models. In terms of research-related education, the project will support the
honors research of an undergraduate student as well as partially support a post-
doctoral researcher, who will be given the valuable experience of participating
in the direct teaching and instruction of the undergraduate student. Our
technological future depends on developing both new methodologies and a new
workforce capable of tackling complicated problems. This project will allow
young researchers at various stages of their careers (undergraduate to post-doc)
to significantly contribute to a wide range of advanced topics including fluid
dynamics, combustion and energy conversion, and optical diagnostics.