* 1247290
* EAGER: Biodiesel / Ethanol RCCI Combustion Exploration at Multiple Engine Loads and Speeds
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Timothy Jacobs, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 60,000.00

Current combustion systems predominantly are ?single-fuel? devices. For example,
the ubiquitous spark ignition engine routinely uses gasoline as a fuel, while
the typical compression ignition engine uses diesel as a fuel. There are well-
founded reasons for this existing paradigm. In simple terms, the high volatility
of gasoline makes it amendable for pre-cylinder (or early direct-cylinder
injection) vaporization and subsequent premixing. Likewise, the high
ignitability of diesel fuel makes it appropriate for compression ignition. The
past century of engine development, however, has witnessed tremendous growth and
advancement of both spark- and compression-ignition engines. A reasonable
question becomes, what?s the best fuel for the advanced combustion engine? Some
preliminary efforts have suggested that the best fuel may in fact be a
combination of two fuels. Specifically, the Reactivity Controlled Compression
Ignition mode of combustion ? which is a type of low temperature combustion ?
uses both a highly volatile fuel (such as gasoline) along with a highly
ignitable fuel (such as diesel) in the same apparatus. This shift in the
paradigm requires exploration of other qualifying fuels, particularly
alternative fuels, in an effort to discern if this radically different approach
may yield the high payoff it potentially promises. Several research questions
exist regarding such science, including how the fuels? interactions may affect
chemistry of the reaction, how physical fluidic processes (such as penetration,
breakup, atomization, and vaporization) are affected by the presence of a
potentially reactive mixture, and how soot formation processes are affected by
the interaction with a reactive mixture. This research aims to explore the
viability of hydrous ethanol and biodiesel as fuels in dual-fuel reactivity
controlled compression ignition (RCCI) low temperature combustion mode in a
medium-duty diesel engine and to compare their response ? in terms of engine
power, efficiency, and in-cylinder processes (such as fluid processes,
chemistry, and emissions formation) ? with RCCI using conventional gasoline and
diesel fuels. The overarching benefit of RCCI seems to be that it can
simultaneously reduce NOx and soot from diesel engines while also maintaining
high efficiency and specific power. The research makes use of experimental
engine research facilities with controlled studies of the fuel and air mass and
rate of reaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research intends to improve the end
use efficiency of work conversion devices (such as combustion engines) while
maintaining environment quality (i.e., low emissions) and assessing the
viability of alternative fuels in combustion systems. Implementation of RCCI
results in high chemical-to-work conversion efficiencies while maintaining low
formation rates of nitrogen oxides and soot, both which contribute to poor
atmospheric quality and local SMOG. The attainment of high efficiency combustion
systems, particularly with the use of bio-based alternative fuels, allows
society to move toward carbon-neutrality. Additionally, the research will
further efforts to recruit and educate underrepresented students through hands-
on experimental research. Funds will be leveraged to support graduate and
undergraduate research to improve the number of students formally educated in
STEM disciplines.