* 1247473
* Collaborative Research: Profiling of Winter Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2016
* David Leon, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 91,793.00

Processes governing the spatial and temporal variability of precipitation within
the "comma head" sector of extratropical cyclones remain poorly understood. This
sector of baroclinic storm systems is often the focus of hazardous winter
weather including heavy snowfall, blizzards and ice storms that markedly impact
transportation and other human activities. This investigative team seeks to
improve our understanding of precipitation substructures within this zone by
addressing outstanding questions arising from the Profiling of Winter Storms
(PLOWS) field campaign, which was carried out during the winters of 2008-09 and
2009-10. Observations collected during PLOWS included extensive in-situ
microphysical data gathered by the NSF/NCAR C-130 aircraft, high-resolution
remote sampling of precipitation structures by the University of Wyoming Cloud
Radar and Lidar carried aboard the C-130, complementary views from ground-based
radars and profiling systems, and special serial rawinsonde launches. Additional
insights will be gained through high-resolution simulations suitable for
comparison with a wide range of observed precipitation substructures.

Planned investigations will center on: (1) The nature and source of instability
creating cloud top generating cells, including determination of updraft
magnitudes, origins and role supercooled water in the generation and growth of
ice particles near cloud top, ice particle concentrations within generating
cells and associated precipitation plumes, and processes leading to the rather
ubiquitous generating-cell structures observed during PLOWS; (2) the means by
which potential instability is generated within zones characterized by deep
upright elevated convection on the warmer side of comma-head regions, the
relationship between the "dry-slot" upper-tropospheric airstream moving over
warm-frontal surfaces, and determination of the role of synoptic-scale vertical
motions accompanying frontogenesis in triggering release of this instability;
(3) the origins of linear precipitation bands and their potential creation by
synoptic-scale deformation acting upon descending ice particle plumes issued by
elevated generating cells, as well as differing ice particle characteristics
within and outside these bands; (4) the relationship of polarization radar
signatures to measured in situ microphysical properties, and in particular
determination of whether supercooled water or its effects (e.g., rimed
particles) can be dependably detected via remote sensing; and (5) the nature of
stratiform- vs. convective-cloud region flows with attention to fine scale wave
features, frontal interfaces, their effects on microphysical processes, and
their relationship to isentropic surfaces, shearing instability, and low-level
fronts in the production of locally-enhanced precipitation rates.

The intellectual merit of this effort rests on full exploitation of the unique
and extensive PLOWS project dataset to address longstanding questions concerning
the nature and origins of precipitation within winter cyclones in more complete
and definitive ways than has heretofore been possible. Broader impacts of this
research will include a carefully designed mix of undergraduate and graduate
education and testing of improved operational strategies for remote sensing of
winter weather systems hinging on emerging observational assets including NOAA's
newly-upgraded dual-polarization network of WSR-88D radars. Anticipated longer-
term impacts include improved ability of numerical models to simulate
precipitation substructures in winter storms with direct application to
forecasts benefiting the public, as well as recruitment of new scientists
qualified to undertake atmospheric field research.