* 1247875
* Collaborative Research: Spectrum Efficient Waveform Design with Application to Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jie Wang, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

Spectrum efficiency refers to the information rate that can be transmitted over
a given bandwidth in a specific communication system. It is a measure of how
efficiently a limited frequency spectrum is utilized. In this project,
innovative spectrum efficient waveform designs are studied towards narrower
mainlobe and lower sidelobe in spectrum. It has been recognized that judicious
use of properly designed waveforms, coupled with advanced receiver strategies,
is fundamental to fully utilizing the capacity of the electromagnetic spectrum.
This project seeks innovative approaches on nested and co-prime samplers for
spectrum efficiency, and subsequently applies it to wireless networks. Different
waveforms designs and diversities are studied based on nested and co-prime
samplers. Co-prime samplers are used for Multi-Input Multi-Output communication
system. In the application to spectrum efficient wireless networks, nodes
exchange information over a common wireless channel. Under different traffic
scenarios and different constraints, e.g., bandwidth and signal to noise and
interference ratio, the amount of data exchanged among these nodes may vary. A
key question then is how the throughput capacity of wireless network improves
with the new waveform design schemes and different network setup and how it
grows with the number of nodes in the network. This project seeks to help reach
the nation's broadband goals and the larger objective of alleviating growing
pressure on limited spectrum resources. This project will attract minority and
woman students to participate in the project.