* 1247456
* EAGER: Interactive Reconstruction and Visualization of Metropolitan-Scale Traffic
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Ming Lin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2014
* USD 99,995.00

Traffic congestion is a global challenge. Besides the obvious energy and
environmental impacts, traffic congestion imposes tangible costs on society. It
is unlikely that traditional physically-centered mitigation strategies by
themselves will be successful or sustainable in the current economical and
environmental climate. Numerous strategies have been proposed to construct
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), by incorporating sensing, information,
and communication technologies in transportation infrastructure and vehicles. In
this EAGER proposal, we present an early-concept exploration to investigate an
innovative and transformative approach for ITS. We envision that this
exploratory research could advance the next generation of ITSs by introducing a
tightly-integrated real-time traffic simulation, estimation, and visualization
for traffic management. We are developing novel hybrid methods for real-time
flow estimation, traffic reconstruction and visualization, as well as designing
GPU and many-core algorithms to accelerate the overall
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research could enable
adaptive route planning for vehicle guidance and navigational aid to alleviate
traffic congestion through an algorithmic lens. The proposed unified framework
also has the potential to provide computational advances for diverse
applications, including regulating traffic, improved urban planning,
transportation system design, virtual tourism, education, entertainment,
surveillance, and emergency response. The set of pedagogical and outreach
activities complement and extend the research impact through integrated
education-research programs and effective dissemination of research results.