* 1247469
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: DCM: A Formal Foundation for Big Data Management
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2017
* USD 2,966,667.00

The ability to analyze massive-scale datasets has become an important tool both
in industry and in the sciences and many systems have recently emerged to
support it. However, effective methods for deep data analytics are currently
high-touch processes: they require a highly specialized expert who thoroughly
understands the application domain and pertinent disparate data sources and who
needs to perform repeatedly a series of data exploration, manipulation and
transformation steps to prepare the data for querying, machine learning or data
mining algorithms. This project explores the foundations of big data management
with the ultimate goal of significantly improving the productivity in big data
analytics by accelerating the bottleneck step of data exploration. The project
integrates two thrusts: a theoretical study, which leads to new fundamental
results regarding the complexity of various new (ad hoc) data transformations in
modern massive-scale systems, and a systems study, which leads to a multi-
platform software middleware for expressing and optimizing ad hoc data analytics
techniques. The middleware is designed to augment and integrate existing
analytics solutions in order to facilitate and improve methods of interest to
the community and compatible with many existing
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will make it easier
for domain experts to conduct complex data analysis on big data and on large
computer clusters. All research results will be released in a middleware package
layered on top of existing big-data systems. The middleware includes all the new
algorithms, optimization techniques, fault-tolerance and skew mitigation
mechanisms, and generalized aggregates developed during the project. In
addition, the project develops and deploys a Web-based query-as-a-service
interface to the new middleware. The project Web site
(http://myriadb.cs.washington.edu) provides access to the software, additional
results and information. Project results will be included in educational and
outreach activities in big data analytics, including new curricula at the
undergraduate, graduate, and professional levels.