* 1247427
* INSPIRE:   Dynamic Regulatory Modeling of the Iron Deficiency Response in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2019
* Joel Ducoste, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 999,758.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Networks and Regulation Program in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biology; the Advances in Biological Informatics Program in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biology; the Chemical,
Biochemical, and Biotechnology Systems Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering; and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure. Multicellular organisms such
as plants react to abiotic stress with a multitude of physiological and
molecular responses orchestrated by key regulatory proteins, or transcription
factors. The activity of these transcription factors allows the plant to adapt
to environmental change and maintain homeostasis. Experimental datasets, such as
transcriptional profiles, are currently analyzed by computational tools that are
inadequate to uncover novel stress response regulatory proteins. The objective
of this project is to develop a novel computing and modeling paradigm with
sufficient power to identify previously uncharacterized regulatory components
involved in the control of iron homeostasis in A. thaliana across multiple cell
types. INTELLECUTAL MERIT: The interdisciplinary approach proposed by these PIs
presents a new paradigm that unifies novel genomic experimental techniques,
engineering modeling approaches, and parallel computing to clarify the role of
known regulatory elements involved in iron homeostasis within and across
different cell types. The integration of systems engineering, plant biology, and
computer engineering will help create new solutions to existing problems and
encourages a vision for addressing challenging issues that remain intimidating
using traditional approaches. BROADER IMPACTS: The investigators will develop
novel tools to help map the regulatory control points that enable plants to
respond to biological and non-biological stressors. A project website will serve
as a conduit to the research community, making available repositories of
microarray data, computer codes and the computing frameworks. The proposed
multi-disciplinary approach will streamline resources and expertise with the
goal to increase crop yields under stress conditions. This will be necessary to
meet the grand challenge of feeding 9 billion people by 2050. North Carolina
State University is a natural place to develop this interdisciplinary
integration due to historical success of the institution in engineering and
plant biology. Through this project, the PIs will support the interdisciplinary
education of four PhD students. The investigators also plan to integrate
concepts from the proposed research into an outreach initiative to expose
students from 8th and 9th grades to the idea that plant can deal with stress
through selective and targeted gene expression mechanisms. The goal is to expand
on current relationships establish by these PIs with local middle (Leesville
Middle) and high school (Wakefield High) science teachers through the Kenan
Fellows program (http://kenanfellows.org/)to incorporate targeted lesson plans
into their biotechnology learning modules.