* 1247476
* NEON Satellite Site Award: Training Plan
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Henry Loescher, National Ecological Observatory Network, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2014
* USD 429,945.00

Since 2008, the Science and Engineering Alliance (SEA) has been assisting NEON,
Inc. with inclusion of minority serving institutions in the planning of the
National Ecological Observatory (NEON) science and education. The SEA-NEON, Inc.
partnership has helped broaden the awareness and increase the capacity of the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Minority-Serving
Institutions (MSIs) to conduct and participate in NEON ecological, engineering,
cyberinfrastructural, and social science research and development (R&amp;D)
opportunities. Through workshops, institutional outreach, and coordination
activities; SEA has been a leader in conveying the opportunities NEON provides.
This award will continue the ongoing partnership to increase the capacity of the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Minority-Serving
Institutions (MSIs) to conduct and participate in NEON ecological, engineering,
cyberinfrastructural, and social science research. Currently this demographic
lacks experienced individuals with the detailed knowledge in NEON
infrastructure, construction, deployment, and operation of NEON resources. For
the past four years SEA has worked closely with NEON, Inc. in developing a
series of documents known as the Satellite Site Framework. These documents
provide a detailed overview of the NEON infrastructure capabilities that would
allow institutions to build research capabilities similar to NEON sites. This
phase of the SEA-NEON partnership will focus on transfer of NEON, Inc.'s
knowledge and technical designs through intensive training of two individuals
that will serve as resources for implementation of site based infrastructure and
NEON research by MSIs and HBCUs. As such, NEON, Inc. is using the ?train the
trainer? model for enabling research capabilities within this research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEON is a complex Observatory that will consist
of geographically distributed field and lab infrastructure networked via
cybertechnology into an integrated research platform for regional to continental
scale ecological research. Cutting-edge sensor networks, instrumentation,
experimental infrastructure, natural history archive facilities, and remote
sensing will be linked via the internet to computational, analytical, and
modeling capabilities to create NEON's integrated infrastructure. As a
continent-wide research instrument, NEON will support a large and diverse group
of organizations and individuals; foremost are the scientists, educators, and
engineers who will use NEON infrastructure in their research and educational
programs. Building enhanced accessibility for all institutions will broaden the
impact of NEON science and education to the next generation of scientists and
educators. For this inclusive vision of NEON to be realized requires active
engagement and partnerships with underserved communities to ensure awareness of
NEON's research opportunities, education and training in NEON scientific and
technical capabilities, and technology transfer in key infrastructure areas.