* 1247928
* EARS: Paving the way to dynamic spectrum sharing: Understanding regulatory and enforcement mechanisms
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Michael Marcus, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 12/31/2015
* USD 323,670.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to help eliminate key
barriers to implementing new spectrum sharing policies though the development of
regulatory and enforcement mechanisms that protect incumbents users. The
proposed research develops needed enforcement mechanism though developing
algorithms for rapid identification and location of users, developing metrics
appropriate for enforcement systems, and determining fundamental limits for
density of nodes to achieve reliable detection for enforcement. The technology
development will be guided by considering legal issues surrounding privacy and
whether the technology requires changes to existing telecommunication
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is the discovery of novel approaches to transmitter identity and location
verification, and the development of metrics that regulators can use to help
determine compliance of future spectrum sharing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
are elimination of roadblocks to spectrum sharing mechanisms. The President?s
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology identified nearly 1GHz of spectrum
that can be shared to spur the economy and establish the United States as the
leading technology innovator for dynamic spectrum access. Understanding the
technical viability, legal feasibility, and system costs of spectrum sharing
enforcement will eliminate fear, uncertainty, and doubt on the part of spectrum
owners about moving into a spectrum sharing mode. Our approach also proactively
reaches out to the regulatory community and educates them on the new regulatory
approaches and enforcement mechanisms made possible by this research.