* 1247958
* EARS: Enabling local spectrum markets for enhanced access and flexible service
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Aparna Gupta, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,342.00

Licensed spectrum services today are offered by a few large providers with a
national presence, and market competition is realized only at the national
scale. Typical provider-customer contracts are relatively long term with few
standard contract choices, which does not lead to the best value realization for
the customer. Furthermore, mobile users are often restricted to using long range
communication to the provider's base stations, even when they are in the range
of access points of other users that are currently under-loaded but closed for
public use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project attempts to address those
limitations. Firstly, it studies the viability of regional wholesale spectrum
markets, and the role that should be played by regional spectrum providers with
secondary licenses and localized operation. Secondly, it investigates the design
and pricing of flexible provider-customer spectrum service contracts that would
enable both contracting parties to operate at their desired risk-return tradeoff
points. Thirdly, this project studies access, security and incentive mechanism
design questions that can enable users to serve as micro-providers, or share
their spectrum contracts with others in their "community". These explorations
are conducted using economic/business theories of investment analysis, financial
engineering, risk management, control and optimization, and network game theory,
as well as small-scale user surveys and simulation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader goal of the project is to
facilitate a more layered market structure that will increase the number of
regional players in the spectrum service contracting business, and also involve
the users in providing spectrum services to others. More local competition would
allow more competitive prices for spectrum usage, better local expansion and
coverage, and therefore better access for users. Sharing of unused spectrum by
users with each other would enable better spectrum access and rates, and revenue
to users who share their unused spectrum. Spectrum service innovations that this
project explores, along with presence of regional providers, would allow users
to have individualized spectrum contracts with more flexible terms and
conditions than what exist today.