* 1247904
* EAGER: Pickering Emulsions for Hydraulic Fracturing Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Brian Grady, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 58,170.00

In hydraulic fracturing high pressures are applied to induce fractures within
shale&lt;br/&gt;formations. Sand and other solid particles (known as proppants)
are then injected to&lt;br/&gt;prevent the collapse of the fractures once the
pressure is released.These propped&lt;br/&gt;fractures ease the extraction of
natural gas/oil. Sand has the disadvantages of not&lt;br/&gt;distributing evenly
within the fractures, and of not reaching fractures far from
the&lt;br/&gt;wellbore. This limits the amount of natural gas/oil that can be
extracted from a given&lt;br/&gt;shale formation. Research is being conducted in
materials sciences to produce&lt;br/&gt;proppantsthat are uniform in size (so
that they will not clog the fractures),&lt;br/&gt;small (so that they
canpenetrate narrow fractures), mechanically strong (to maintain the fractures
open even&lt;br/&gt;when exposed to high subsurface pressures), and light (to
diffuse farther from the&lt;br/&gt;wellbore, allowing the extraction of larger
amounts of natural gas/oil from one fracture).&lt;br/&gt;This proposal intends
to explore whether Pickering emulsions could be used to prevent&lt;br/&gt;the
collapse of the hydraulic fractures once the pressure is released. Pickering
emulsions&lt;br/&gt;e.g., water in oil) are stabilized by solid particles. They
find numerous applications in&lt;br/&gt;areas as diverse as food preparation,
cosmetics,drug delivery, and catalytic processes.&lt;br/&gt;The results obtained
so far in the PIs laboratory,summarized in the narrative, have
been&lt;br/&gt;obtained for bulk Pickering emulsions.Such studies have
quantified the effect of solid&lt;br/&gt;particles on the water-decane
interfacial tension, and the mechanism of dropletcoalescence.&lt;br/&gt;Current
research is being conducted to clarify the interfacial structure anddynamical
&lt;br/&gt;properties for systems composed by mixtures of different solid
particles.This proposal stems from the hypothesis that emulsions might allow for
a bettercontrolled distribution of the proppants within a fracture, possibly far
from the wellbore.&lt;br/&gt;In the systems of interest the proppants will have
the dual role of fracture stabilizers and&lt;br/&gt;emulsion formers.It is
anticipated that once the emulsions are destabilized because
of&lt;br/&gt;particle-rock interactions,the proppants will adsorb onto the rock
surface.By controlling&lt;br/&gt;the emulsion stability within different sub-
surface formations it will be possible to design shale-specific
proppants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research
consists in the evaluation of a new&lt;br/&gt;method to inject proppants within
hydraulic fractures (Pickering emulsions instead of&lt;br/&gt;aqueous
dispersions). If successful, this exploratory research could lead to
the&lt;br/&gt;exploitation of larger amounts of the natural gas/oil stored in
shale formations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. One post-doctoral
researcher will conduct this exploratory research&lt;br/&gt;over a period of one
year. The results obtained will be used to test our hypothesis.
If&lt;br/&gt;successful, the proposed research could bring enormous economical
advantages to the&lt;br/&gt;nation because the hydraulic fracturing stage
constitutes one of the most expensive stages&lt;br/&gt;in the well drilling, and
because more natural gas will be produced from a single
well.&lt;br/&gt;Potential impacts are also expected on other technologies (e.g.,
cosmetics and drugdelivery),&lt;br/&gt;as our research will lead to better
fundamental understanding of Pickeringemulsions. &lt;br/&gt;The research results
will be integrated in teaching and outreach activities,&lt;br/&gt;following our
track record.