* 1247126
* EAGER: Embodying Visual Semantic Information Composition to Stimulate Sensemaking and Ideation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Andruid Kerne, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2017
* USD 344,000.00

This project synthesizes techniques from interaction design, creative cognition,
visual design, programming languages, and information retrieval and
visualization to help people draw on big data to stimulate innovation.
Sensemaking is the process of understanding a collection of information
resources. Ideation means the process of generating new ideas. In performing
information-based ideation tasks, people use information for developing new
ideas, such as planning a paper, thesis, or invention. This project will provide
new tools for presenting information visually. "Information composition" is a
medium for representing each information collection as a connected whole. To
better support innovation and creative visual thinking, this research brings
diagramming, along with collection curation, to information composition. Pen,
touch, and in-air sensing will transform interaction into an extension of the
body, helping people express, understand, and remember. Embodied interaction
will be based on the Interface Ecology Lab's ZeroTouch, a novel multi-finger
sensing technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The objective of
this proposal is to develop "Embodied InfoComposer", a toolset that uses pen,
touch, and other modalities for authoring visual semantic information
collections. The principal hypothesis is that embodying interaction, making
representations visual, and connecting rich metadata semantics will stimulate
sensemaking and ideation, helping people collect, reflect, create, and invent.
This research will result in significant outcomes in important areas of human
centered computing, including: (1) new understanding of how integrated
diagramming and information composition promotes creative visual thinking; (2)
new fluid embodied interaction techniques; (3) new methods for measuring
reflection, ideation, and sensemaking; and (4) new implications for design of
embodied creativity support environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
This research will transform how people work with information, leading to
greater innovation in a variety of domains including business and education. The
work is likely to have broad societal impact because innovation is a key factor
leading to job creation and economic success. The project will also have
educational impact through the training of graduate students and by the use of
Embodied InfoComposer to foster creative visual thinking by undergraduate
students from diverse majors in a design process course. Undergraduate computer
science students in capstone senior design will use resulting technologies as
building blocks in innovative projects. Recruitment of female and minority
student researchers at the graduate and undergraduate levels will be sought.