* 1247838
* EAGER: Printed Photonic Crystal-Based Tandem Polymer Solar Cell
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Jayan Thomas, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 02/28/2015
* USD 110,000.00

Currently, a major issue limiting the solar energy conversion efficiency of
polymer solar cells (PSC) is the inefficiency in harvesting the entire solar
spectrum. This is mainly due to two reasons: incomplete light absorption and
small bandgap of the active polymer materials used. The objective of this
proposal is to address these issues by developing a PSC capable of efficiently
harvesting solar energy over a wide spectral range by employing (1) light
trapping printed photonic crystal architecture, and (2) plasmonic field assisted
energy upconversion. Accomplishing light trapping and upconversion
simultaneously in a tandem PSC will be a transformative approach.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research is the first example of
combining photonic crystal and plasmon assisted light upconverting structures in
a tandem PSC. The device developed will be capable of harvesting a broad solar
absorption spectrum. A systematic study on the dependence of photonic crystal
architecture and the energy conversion efficiency will be performed based on
modeling. The success of the proposed printing technology will open up new
avenues for developing plasmon assisted upconverting tandem
PSC.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The subject of this proposal involves
nanotechnology, optics and material science and therefore the graduate students
involved in this research will be exposed to cutting edge research projects in
the state-of-the-art laboratories. PI desires to integrate the subject of the
proposal into the graduate curriculum currently offered in The College of Optics
and Photonics at the University of Central Florida. This will be beneficial to
develop a workforce in the energy conversion realm.