* 1247508
* I-Corps:  A Novel Surgical Simulator for Evaluating and Training Force-based Laparoscopic Skills
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Timothy Burg, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Laparoscopic surgery is a minimally invasive surgical technique wherein surgeons
insert long tools through small incisions made in the abdomen and perform
surgery via camera images relayed on a monitor. Due to its desirable advantages
to patients, there is an enormous demand for medical students (residents) to
learn this surgical technique. However, acquiring the skills needed for
proficient laparoscopy is extremely challenging because of the surgeon's
"remoteness" to the surgical site. Due to this, most surgical errors during
laparoscopic procedures are caused by the application of excessive forces on
tissues. This project focuses on a new method to train surgery residents to
apply controlled forces via a novel surgical simulator for force-based (or
haptic) laparoscopic skills. Based on perceptual task decomposition from
previous studies, three surgical tasks were identified where applying precise
and controlled forces was crucial for successful surgical outcomes: grasping
tissue, probing tissue, and sweeping tissue. Three prototypical simulators were
initially developed as a proof-of-concept and were later integrated into a
single "Core Haptic Skills" simulator. Initial studies with experienced surgeons
and novices have demonstrated the efficacy of the simulator in both evaluating
and training haptic skills of users.

According to a recent report, approximately 100,000 people die every year as a
result of medical errors. Other studies show that a majority of surgical errors
are caused due to misapplication of force. The technology presented here could
significantly reduce patient morbidity and mortality caused due deficiencies in
surgeons' skill. Surgical simulators also efficiently prepare novice surgeons
for the operating room by equipping them with a certain level of skill
competence. As a result, expensive operating room training time is minimized and
training costs are significantly reduced. If training time in the operating room
can be reduced, then the number of animals used in the first phases of training
is also reduced. Beyond training, surgical simulators could be used for
objective skill assessment and certification.