* 1247885
* Spectral Tweets: A Community Paradigm for Spatio-temporal Cognitive Sensing and Access
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jarvis Haupt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,379.00

Advances in wireless communication, networking, and computation using
miniaturized devices have come to a confluence that has greatly improved
productivity even in traditionally "low-tech" sectors of the economy. The flip
side is that demand for radio spectrum is on track to outpace advances in
spectral efficiency. Innovative and pragmatic dynamic spectrum sensing and
measurement-based spectrum access modalities are needed to bridge the gap, and
support demand and the national economy in the not-so-distant future. It is now
widely accepted that effective spectrum sensing must be a collaborative
endeavor, involving many sensors taking relatively sparse measurements across
space, time, and frequency. The vision and starting point of this project is
that today's smart phones and tablets are ideal platforms for crowdsourcing
spectrum sensing, and this is a viable way to create a spectrum sensing web that
spans across much of our living and working space. But can all these devices be
coordinated to produce local spectrum maps, reveal transmission opportunities,
and enable intelligent dynamic access? An appealing idea is to employ Twitter as
a service model to multicast short "spectral tweets." Devices will hook up to
local communities based on GPS information, and set up "bots" to follow tweets
from other devices in the neighborhood.