* 1247499
* EAGER - feasibility study in reconstructing Holocene drought history from sediment cores in Fallen Leaf Lake, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Paula Noble, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,993.00

Work in the western US indicates that profound, long-term shifts in patterns of
drought throughout the past 10-13,000 years (the Holocene) have had both
historic and prehistoric impact on ecosystems and on humans. This grant will
develop a long-term drought record from sediment cores in the northern Sierra
Nevada, a climatically sensitive region. The project will focus on the alpine
portion of the watershed where the effects of winter precipitation deficits are
more directly measurable than in terminal lake basins. These effects include
lowered lake levels during drought stages, warmer lake temperatures, variations
in strength and depth of thermal stratification, and altered biotic structure.
In particular, fossil diatom communities in lake sediments are expected to vary
in response to drought, and may be used as a indicators of climate change and
long-lasting droughts. An excellent diatom record potentially exists in
sediments of Fallen Leaf Lake in the Lake Tahoe watershed for use as
paleoclimate indicators, with expected multi-decadal to centennial resolution.
Preliminary age models on cores taken in 2010 show great promise for developing
a detailed chronology. The cores contain a continuous record extending back
13,300 yrs, with sedimentation rates averaging 1.4 mm/year. The team will test
whether diatoms in sub-alpine lake sediment can serve as indicators of changes
in winter precipitation, and whether changes in diatom, sedimentologic, and
selected geochemical indicators can be related to drought conditions during the
Medieval Climatic Anomaly and other Holocene long-term droughts. The lake is a
good choice because it records large precipitation-driven lake level shifts, and
the area's water balance and hydrologic response to drought is measurable.
Preliminary data indicates shifts in the number of diatom species associated
with a well documented multi-hundred year drought. The team will investigate
diatom response to drought conditions by looking at organic geochemistry from
discrete samples (% organic matter and C, N isotopes), compound specific
geochemistry, and pollen analysis. In addition, the team will conduct X-ray
fluorescence scans for biogenic silica and organic matter content at high
resolution (0.2-0.5mm). All core proxy data will be cross-correlated using a
variety of multivariate and cross spectral techniques. Regional tree-ring
climatic records will be used as an independent means of validating hydrological
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has larger impacts to
society, and this data should be of interest to aquatic ecologists, natural
resource managers, and climate scientists concerned with the long-term response
of fresh-water aquatic systems to climatic change. The timing and effects of
prolonged drought will also be of interest to anthropologists reconstructing the
migrations of Native Americans in response to drier conditions, including the
ancestors of the Northern Paiute, the Maidu, the Washoe, the Yokuts, and the
West Mono. Further, this effort to better establish diatoms as indicators of
climate variation could add to the number of tools used to interpret regional
climate change, and its associated impacts on human activities. This project
will provide ages and scanning XRF analyses needed to build a quality age model,
and establish the basic sedimentologic framework for this set of Holocene cores.
This framework is a necessary first step for all of the ongoing paleontologic
and geochemical work that is underway with these cores by various graduate
students and faculty members. It will also provide the discrete samples needed
for the various specialized indicators (diatoms, organic geochemistry, pollen
analysis) and analyses necessary for the diatom work. At present, 5 graduate
students rely on these cores for their thesis and dissertation research, and
will benefit greatly by additional age control, geochemical data, and samples.
Cores and data will be archived at the National Lacustrine Core Repository,
Minnesota.