* 1247003
* RAPID: Continuous Measurement of Sediment Transport and Hydraulic Conditions in a Mountain Stream Prior to Wood Placement
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Stephen Lancaster, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 06/30/2013
* USD 25,620.00

This project will study river bedload transport dynamics prior to and following
placement of large woody debris (LWD) in the Siuslaw National Forest in the
Oregon Coast Range. The team will instrument bedload with passive integrated
transponder tags and track their movements prior to emplacement of the LWD.
Recent news that no other such projects are currently scheduled or proposed in
this National Forest, in addition to the accessibility of the site, creates
urgency and opportunity to capture the pre-emplacement sediment dynamics under a
range of conditions. The study will (a) provide fundamental, and rare,
information regarding bed material sediment transport in field conditions,
information that will serve as a valuable reference point for evaluating
sediment transport relations based on flume and engineered-stream studies; (b)
address the sensitivities of mountain stream sediment transport to downstream
debris characteristics and upstream supply limitations; and (c) determine
whether grain-size dependence of transport is accentuated or dampened by debris
and other channel irregularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
rarely obtained data that will inform not only theoretical understanding of
sediment transport in mountain streams, but also stream restoration
practitioners about the impacts of LWD placement. One application of LWD is for
managing salmonid habitats. The team will interact with National Forest
scientists and practitioners in the Pacific NW.