* 1247319
* Collaborative Research:  Social Movements and Policy Impact
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Kenneth Andrews, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 81,149.00

How do social movements build broad popular support and secure sweeping policy
changes? This study focuses on demographic, economic, and institutional factors,
as well as movement-specific organizational dynamics, to examine under which
conditions movement support thrives and results in policy changes. Moreover,
this study examines whether movement support and policies diffuse across
neighboring states and counties, and how these trends shape one another. As a
case in point, this project focuses on the U.S. Prohibition movement, which was
one of the largest, longest-lasting, and most successful movements in U.S.
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis involves an original dataset that
contains information about the legal status of prohibition at the county and
state level between 1890 and 1919, the year the 18th Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution was enacted. The dataset includes measures regarding population
change, urbanization, economic trends, and interest groups. In addition, the
dataset incorporates information from archival materials regarding relevant
social movement organizations and activity, electoral context, and media
communication that may have shaped movement growth and success. These data allow
us to examine the organization and outcomes of the movement both across space
and at the state and local level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
training and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at
two institutions. Undergraduate research assitants at Christopher Newport
University, primarily a teaching college, will be trained in data collection and
coding. At UNC, graduate student training will revolve around systematic data
collection, coding, and spatial modeling. In addition, the project will result
in a large, publically available dataset of use to social scientists and
historians. Findings from this study may be of interest to multiple
stakeholders, such as legal experts, non-profit organizations, policy makers,
and the general public, in addition to an interdisciplinary group of
researchers.