* 1247285
* Workshop:    Strategies for Developing and Innovating Living Stocks Collections - August 20-21, 2012, Washington, D.C.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Clifford Duke, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 91,455.00

Many fields of biological research, for example, genetics and cellular biology,
biofuels development, plant ecology, and human disease transmission, depend on
collections of living organisms that have documented origins and genetic
histories. Maintaining these "living stocks collections" while providing for
their innovation and enhancement over time requires strategic planning for long-
term financial sustainability. An award is made to the Ecological Society of
America to host the workshop "Strategies for Developing and Innovating Living
Stocks Collections," to bring together principal investigators of NSF-supported
living stocks collections to explore current and future needs, discuss existing
sustainability strategies, enhance understanding of strategic planning as a tool
for achieving collection sustainability, and discuss opportunities for
continuing information exchange and collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this workshop consists in helping make sustainability
planning a formal, core element of living stocks collections management. The
broader impacts of the workshop are its contributions to ensuring collections'
long-term viability and capacity to innovate, and consequently the long-term
sustainability of a wide range of biological research important to energy
development, human health, and other areas of direct societal concern.