* 1247565
* MEMS Reconfigurable Radios: System Development and Entry Costs in Wireless Phones
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Jeremy Fox, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

The radio spectrum facilitates a wide variety of applications and services but
has become overly crowded, especially in the past two decades. With advances in
communications, more and more services rely on high data rate spectrum access.
These critical services include banking, social security, telemedicine, and the
exchange of technical information. Spectrum resources are in ever-greater demand
as new applications emerge and existing ones continue to grow. Unfortunately,
acquiring nation-wide broadband access for a new wireless carrier is costly in
part because there are only a limited number of spectrum licenses per territory.
This project investigates one set of innovations to make national-scale entry
less costly. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The US wireless phone service industry is
dominated by four large, national providers. According to the FCC's Wireless
Competition Report, market shares in the wireless industry are concentrated to a
degree that would provoke antitrust investigation in other industries. It is in
the public interest to encourage the entry of new, nationwide competitors into
this industry. A major hurdle for a new entrant is assembling a nationwide
footprint of wireless licenses, i.e. one or more licenses in each territory. The
cost of assembling such a nationwide coverage area is quite high using current
technologies as current radios require mobile devices to operate using a similar
set of spectrum bands in each territory. If future radio technologies allow an
entrant to assemble a nationwide footprint from many different frequency bands,
one or more for each territory, the cost of acquiring the needed licenses may be
lower. This lowering of entry costs may encourage new national providers to
enter the market, increase competition, and lower costs to consumers. Future
radios are thus required to support a wide range of frequencies to be able to
select different bands in different territories. That calls for multi-standard
reconfigurable radios. Such radios can also mitigate the problems associated
with limited spectrum availability and limited open bandwidth by tuning to the
frequency and standard that is least heavily used at any given time. It is the
purpose of this research to develop the most necessary components of a
reconfigurable radio and to evaluate the ability of such radios to reduce
spectrum acquisition entry costs for new competitors in wireless
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing solutions for multi-standard radios
support a maximum of five standards and work based on switching between a number
of filters for selecting different bands. This method is not scalable. Also,
existing radios cannot be reconfigured to select newly opened bands, such as
VHF/UHF TV bands. This research addresses the above mentioned issues by 1)
developing miniaturized micromachined tunable filters as well as hard-contact
high-power micromachined transmit/receive switches to minimize the overall
system complexity and cost, 2) implementing new flexible wireless transmitter
and receiver integrated circuit schemes to reduce the cost by leveraging CMOS
scaling and enhancing the flexibility of the transceiver, and 3) producing
empirical estimates and interpreting them in the context of market entry costs
based on the proposed reconfigurable radio technology. This research will have
transformative impacts on the national economy. It enables nationwide broadband
access to the radio spectrum at lower costs and increases competition between
wireless service providers. An increase in competition can occur through the
entry of new firms that compete with the four incumbent, national firms.
Consumer welfare will be higher with lower prices and the higher consumption
from increased competition.