* 1247303
* SBP: 2012 Science and Technology Policy Gordon Research Seminar
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Susan Cozzens, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 07/31/2013
* USD 33,418.00

The Gordon Research Seminar on Science &amp; Technology Policy is a unique forum
for graduate students, post-docs, and other scientists with comparable levels of
experience and education to present and exchange new data and cutting edge
ideas. Junior scholars and practitioners in economics, science and engineering,
science and technology policy, and science and technology studies will present
their work. This year's GRS-STP is the first ever, organized by graduate
students to accompany the successful series of Gordon Conferences on Science and
Technology Policy; its theme is "The International Context of Science and
Technology Policy". It will take place on the two days preceding the main GRC in
Waterville, NH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRS is designed to strengthen the
community of science and technology policy scholars, which it accomplishes in
several ways. First, junior scholars in the several disciplinary areas of STS,
economics, and science and technology policy have a chance to see what each of
these perspectives has to offer the others and to make professional contacts
that can help reinforce those connections as they develop professionally.
Second, several senior figures in the field play mentor roles, including two
economists and two policy scholars. The seminar includes a career panel of
recent graduates who have gone into science and technology policy research or
practice. Finally, this seminar represents a significantly higher level of
diversity and inclusion than most Gordon Conferences, including multiple
organizers and speakers who are African American and Latino and women, who are
still under-represented in science and technology policy as a field. The
organizers have reached out actively to HBCU campuses to maximize the
participation of underrepresented groups and to build research capacity in the
areas of science, technology, and society; economics; and the science of science
and innovation policy.