* 1247997
* SBIR Phase I:  Use of Automated Multiparametric Strain Analysis Technology (MPS) as a Diagnostic Test for Heart Disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Geoffrey Dalbow, CardioWise, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop in-clinic proof of concept for fully automated cardiac multiparametric
strain analysis (MPS) technology capable of identifying left ventricular (LV)
contractile injury. The innovation in this technology is centered not in MRI
tissue tagging (which has been clinically available for decades), but rather in
the post-processing cardiac MRI files. Post-processing analysis of cardiac MRI
tissue-tagging displacement information is based upon the comparison of three
systolic strain components to the normal average and standard deviation
established in our normal human strain database. The strain values are
"normalized" and combined into novel and powerful multiparametric strain
indices. Because cardiac MRI can capture transmural and not just wall
contractility over the course of a cardiac cycle, MPS post processing can
identify the erratically functioning loci through the ventricular wall.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
the development and commercialization of a reliable metric that provides insight
into accurate timing of surgery. Many heart failure programs have adopted a very
low threshold for early highly invasive intervention. The associated yearly cost
of caring for heart patients has risen above $300 billion. Heart failure is
currently the most rapidly increasing clinical manifestation of cardiac disease
in the United States. A better understanding and the ability to monitor
contractile injury distribution over time could lead to more precise surgical
referral. This would represent a major improvement in diagnostic and therapeutic
heart failure care and have the potential to profoundly impact U.S. health care.