* 1247931
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Guan River Valley Regional Full-Coverage Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Stephen Kowalewski, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2013
* USD 25,200.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Stephen A. Kowalewski, Yanxi Wang will conduct an
archaeological survey in the Middle Guan River valley in Nanyang, China. This
study will map, describe, collect and date artifacts from the earliest human
occupation, at least 8000 years ago, up to historic time. The ground surface of
the Guan River valley is stable and free of vegetation in the winter months,
which allows the project to find and date most of the ancient cities, towns,
villages, and temporary camps occupied during its long history. The goal is to
reconstruct the settlement and population history. Ms. Wang wishes to understand
how China's agricultural system and rural and urban life developed. This is
relevant for understanding the origins and later development of agriculture,
urbanization, and land-use and landscape history in the region

The study area is situated at the geographical transition of millet-growing
North China and rice-growing South China. The Middle Guan River valley has
received little archaeological attention, considering its rich cultural heritage
and its geopolitically strategic location in the development of Chinese history.
In contrast to some of the archaeologically better-known parts of China, with
loess plains and broad river valleys, the Guan River and its nearby upland hills
has a more diverse natural environment, which probably played an important role
especially in the early development of the Neolithic way of life - the first
villages and the development of an economy based on domesticated plants and
animals.

The project will use full-coverage pedestrian survey as the major data
collection method to achieve the research goal. Regional survey, which is much
less costly and more protective of cultural heritage compared to excavation,
will help record archaeological sites and environmental conditions, and produce
collections of ceramics, stone tools, and other artifact types. This information
will be used to create settlement pattern maps by time period. Combined with
documentation of historic and modern population, agriculture, and other land-use
practices, the survey will provide data measuring prehistoric population size,
and assess the temporal changes in the relationship between community,
environment, and agricultural economy. The survey will provide information at
the appropriate long-term and broad spatial scale necessary to address how human
societies responded to the impacts generated by agriculture and maintained
agricultural systems from incipient to more intensive and developed stages.

Results will be published as a report in Chinese and English, and then a more
detailed report in the form of doctoral dissertation. The project will provide
valuable but unfamiliar Chinese archaeological data to Western audiences. It
will bridge the gap between the research methods and theories in Chinese
archaeology and North American archaeology and enhance communication between
research institutions. More importantly, it will also help the Chinese and
English public learn about the diversity and complexity of ancient China and the
past of human society.