* 1247441
* Thematic Program on Calabi-Yau Varieties: Arithmetic, Geometry, and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Mark Gross, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 29,999.00

This proposal will help support the workshop on "Modular forms around string
theory", scheduled for September 16-20 2013 at the Fields Institute in Toronto,
Canada. The workshop is part of the thematic program on Calabi-Yau varieties at
the Fields Institute. The NSF support will complement the existing funding and
will be used to cover some of the travel expenses of the participants based in
the United States. The Fields Institute is a major international research center
with extensive experience in organizing similar events. The workshop in question
focuses on the appearance of modular forms in many different contexts: in the
physics of Calabi-Yau manifolds, such as generating functions for certain
physical quantities; in the arithmetic of Calabi-Yau manifolds, as part of the
general Langlands philosophy in the study of Galois representations of Calabi-
Yau varieties defined over number fields; in the structure of geometric
invariants on Calabi-Yau varieties, such as Donaldson-Thomas invariants. All of
these represent extremely active topics of research, and the workshop aims to
synthesize the different points of view brought by each of these
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calabi-Yau manifolds play a vital role at the
crossroads of mathematics and physics. While they first arose as important
objects in geometry, Calabi-Yau manifolds really came to prominence after they
appeared naturally in string theory. String theory replaces the traditional
notion of the point particle with a small loop of string, moving through space-
time. To make string theory compatible with quantum mechanics, space-time must
be ten-dimensional. Since space-time appears four-dimensional, one expects six
of these dimensions to be a very small "curled up" geometric object. These
objects are Calabi-Yau manifolds. Their introduction into physics led to a great
deal of new mathematics. A crucial property of Calabi-Yau manifolds is that they
both have very delicate flatness properties (satisfying so-called Ricci
flatness) and they can be defined using systems of polynomials equations. As a
result, they can be viewed as both algebro-geometric and arithmetic objects, the
latter if the polynomial equations have coefficients in a number field. Intimate
connections have been found between the physical, algebro-geometric and
artihmetic features of Calabi-Yau manifolds. The goal of this workshop is to
explore these relationships, making new connections between researchers with
these three different perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded
by the Algebra and Number Theory and the Geometric Analysis programs.