* 1247944
* EARS: Providing Predictable Service and Spectrum Access With Realtime Decision in Cognitive Multihop Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2017
* Peng-Jun Wan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 09/30/2017
* USD 506,122.00

The objective of this project is to design real-time temporal-spatial spectrum
sharing, trading and accessing schemes to improve the network performances by
fully exploiting the channel availability (e.g., spatial, temporal, and
spectral) and quality (e.g., signal to interference plus noise ratio and data
rate) diversities. PIs focus on 1) designing a rigorous mathematical model for
spectrum sharing; 2) designing efficient auction-based real-time spectrum
allocation methods; 3) studying the schedulability of periodic channel usage
requests, and the robustness of the designed protocols; 4) designing effective
distributed real-time channel sensing, probing, accessing and routing strategies
using online optimization techniques for multihop cognitive radio networks; 5)
evaluating and testing the performances of proposed algorithms and methodologies
using cognitive radio network testbeds.

The intellectual merit is that the proposed research offers both theoretical and
systematic methods to address some not well-understood key problems (e.g., zero-
regret online spectrum sensing and accessing, robustness of protocols), and
propose novel approaches (e.g., networked multi-armed bandit) to tackle these
challenging problems. This project further enhances the understanding and
designing of efficient real-time algorithms for multihop cognitive radio
networks using resources opportunistically with unpredictable online requests
and external disturbances.

The broader impacts are that solutions proposed in this study alleviate the
spectrum shortage problem and take advantage of the remarkable strength of
cognitive radio technology. The proposed research rigorously integrates and thus
sheds light on theory, algorithm design and analysis, protocol design and system
implementation of cognitive radio networks.