* 1247523
* I-Corps:  HealthSmart Technical Development Plan
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed I-Corps activity brings together an interdisciplinary team of
investigators from engineering, health sciences, and human sciences, to explore
pathways to commercialize HealthSmart technology resulting from PIs? ongoing
research. The team has been collaborating and pursuing innovative biomedical
research activities for over 7 years. Central to the proposed technology is a
multi-sensor platform that has evolved from prior NSF TiE CMMI grants for the
collection, high-speed wireless transmission, and visualization of multiple
heterogeneous physiological signals continuously and synchronously at sampling
rates that permit advanced clinical diagnostics and prognostic procedures. The
team plans to concurrently pursue two major objectives, (a) development of
wearable multi-sensor garments for continuous, synchronous acquisition of
hemodynamic signals, and (b) implementation of personalized prediction and
prognostic approaches previously developed by the team. The wearable sensor
development will be unique in that (a) the wearability (from a patient?s
perspective) of the garment among the targeted population would be acquired and
assessed based on behavioral studies and customer/user feedback, and (b)
multiple microelectromechanical system (MEMS) sensors will be synchronously
acquired to track dynamic couplings among physiological processes. The
prognostics approach combines key ideas in nonlinear/nonstationary dynamic
systems theory with physiological dynamics treated to discern both the short-
term health variations (i.e. sleep apnea) and long-term transitions between
chronic conditions (i.e. cardiovascular disease). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; If
successful, the proposed project has the potential to attract a breadth of
customers who are interested in a HealthSmart garment for at-home or in-hospital
cardiovascular (CV) disease monitoring and event prediction. A potential first
adopter of this technology would be sleep-apnea diagnostic providers who are
interested in the cost savings of at-home diagnostic testing of Obstructive
Sleep Apnea (OSA) using the proposed HealthSmart garment.