* 1247198
* EAGER: Prototype Tool for Visualizing Online Polarization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Vetria Byrd, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 262,654.00

This study will use the 2012 election cycle as a testbed for examining and
developing techniques to analyze the implications of the social web for national
elections. The social web - broadly defined as the array of technologies that
allow individuals to post their thoughts, pictures, and comments in a public
forum - has profoundly changed the way in which political candidates, elected
officials, and government agencies engage with potential supporters. As an ever-
growing number of people join the plethora of available social networks
(including Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, Tumblr, Flickr, and Instagram),
politicians across the world sought to develop increasingly sophisticated social
web strategies that maximize their ability to engage directly with the public.
At the same time, the social web has facilitated the ability of individuals to
share ideas, form communities, and coordinate their actions and responses to
political campaigns across time and space. Yet the sheer volume of data produced
daily through this online civil discourse is overwhelming for researchers and,
until recently, has defied our ability to collect, analyze, and comprehend in
its entirety.

This research will develop a prototype visualization tool that will allow
researchers to explore the online discourse surrounding elections. This tool
will capture social media posts related to selected races in the 2012
Congressional election, both incumbent districts and open seats. Monitoring and
analyzing the conversations relative to these races, this study will seek to
determine any correlation between social media strategies employed by political
candidates in the United States and any increase in polarization in the online
discourse. To analyze this discourse, the research will explore the extent that
those participating in an online discourse move towards a group polarization
with more extreme policies and platforms. Group Polarization is a subset of
research on Choice Shifts, which reflect instances where individuals alter their
opinions based on commonality, unique information surfacing, or other outside
influences. Experimental research suggests that group polarization occurs
because the individual has had interaction with a group of like-minded peers.
The theory suggests that, after discussion among the group, the individuals will
come to a consensus opinion together. Thus, when competing groups form and
engage in discourse separately, we are more likely to witness increasingly
polarizing opinions between the two groups. This study is relevant for computer
scientists, who need to develop strategies for managing, archiving, and
providing access to large and dynamic datasets, and is particularly important
for social scientists because this online social discourse reflects the moods,
values, and attitudes of citizens towards participating in offline civil
society. Moreover, scholars need to study how the new social media affect the
democratic process of elections.

This study will provide an opportunity to explore strategies for collecting,
aggregating, visualizing, and storing data culled from the social web. It will
develop a prototype visualization tool that can be connected via APIs to
visualize polarization as manifested through the social web and that will be
made available to other researchers interested in studying conversations,
sentiment, and the social web. Moreover, this tool will act as a first step in
developing a deeper understanding of how to visually map sentiment, political
action, and civic discourse over time and space. Additionally, the data
collected through this project will provide the basis for future research that
will enable a more detailed analysis of the data collected during the election
and congressional session.