* 1247914
* Collaborative Research: Cog-TV: Business and Technical Analysis of Cognitive Radio TV Sets for Enhanced Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Eylem Ekici, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2016
* USD 177,639.00

Today's wireless networks are facing an emerging spectrum crisis due to
increased demand. FCC has recently allowed non-licensed devices to operate in
the TV spectrum band, leading to cognitive radio networks (CRNs). It is argued
that CRNs result in a technical and economical conflict with the TV broadcast
companies, which own licenses to the TV spectrum. In this project, CRNs are
considered as a business opportunity for broadcast companies. The answer to the
following question is sought: "Is it economically and technically viable for
broadcast companies to utilize TV white spaces for low-cost Internet provision
and web-enabled TV services?" To facilitate the involvement of broadcast
companies in the cognitive radio business, the concept of cognitive radio-
enabled TV set (Cog-TV) is considered. Cog-TV provides low-cost access to the
Internet and local area network capabilities. Cog-TVs are assigned optimal
spectrum sensing schedules to provide service differentiation capabilities
through a novel neighborhood watch concept. Dynamic pricing techniques are
developed with the objective of distributing the peak-time demand load.
Moreover, the cost of building the Cog-TV infrastructure in urban and rural
areas is analyzed to determine its economic feasibility. Through this
architecture, broadcast companies can leverage their channel ownership to create
a competitive advantage.

The results from this research are expected to enable transformative and
economically viable CRN development and management approaches. The Cog-TV
concept has the potential to bring affordable Internet service to a large group
of American households and impact consumer market by creating a niche market in
new TV sets.