* 1247940
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Spectral Access via Directional Spectrum Sensing Employing 3D Cone Filterbanks: Interdisciplinary Algorithms and Prototypes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Habarakada Madanayake, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,894.00

NSF Proposal No. 1247940&lt;br/&gt;Dr. A. Madanayake
(PI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This NSF EARS project
proposes a new spectrum sensing architecture combined with joint link scheduling
and routing to significantly enhance access to the radio spectrum. Traditional
non-directional sensing algorithms do not offer information about the direction
of primary and secondary signals, directional information on interference, and
information on network node location, and hence significantly limit the
potential of cognitive radio technology in terms of spectrum utilization. This
project envisions a generalized framework leading to the determination and
subsequent utilization of spatio-temporal vacancies in time, frequency, position
and direction. New mathematical, hardware, and software algorithms and
techniques will be pioneered toward enabling low-complexity digital radios.
Multi-dimensional sensed information will drive the innovation of cross-layer
link scheduling and routing schemes aimed at boosting the cognitive radio
network performance. The proposed innovations will be accomplished through
mathematical formulation and modeling of directional sensing algorithms based on
multi-dimensional signal processing concepts. The project will also investigate
low-complexity fast algorithms for enabling real-time realization leading to new
types of (i) digital integrated circuits, (ii) new design techniques for
cognitive radios, and (iii) highly agile radio frequency component models all
leading to an integrated directional spectrum
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This proposal entails
tightly integrated research and educational activities at four universities
including an HBCU and an undergraduate institution. Spectrum-aware education is
pursued as one of the key components of the project because wireless system
designers and policy makers alike urgently need this knowledge for pioneering
new innovations in this upcoming area of technology. Scientific findings enabled
by the proposed research in the cognitive radio networks will serve as a
tangible tool-box for engineering transformational technologies such
technologies could, in turn, lead to mushrooming of businesses and services that
directly benefit from intellectual property (e.g. patents). This research will
foster startup firms manufacturing new devices that will potentially improve
today's wireless infrastructure. Distinct and diverse applications in education,
energy, environment, healthcare, infrastructure, and public-safety will be
studied from a unified perspective, i.e. spectrum scarcity, with the objective
of maximizing the untapped economic potential of such scientific findings. The
project will involve minorities, underrepresented groups, and women in research,
while inspiring spectrum-aware educational concepts through new laboratory
modules. Participation of underrepresented groups and women will be encouraged
and promoted through mentorship and outreach, aimed at inspiring them to take up
graduate studies in engineering and computer science.