* 1247360
* SBIR Phase I:  Data-Driven Guiding Technology: Transforming Training and Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* John Nosek, SenseMaking Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation is an agent-based, data-driven guiding technology that will
augment the human facility to evaluate task performance by overcoming human
limitations to recall complex processes that require high expertise. The cloud-
based, mobile technology will assist teams of varying expertise and capabilities
to more effectively instruct, coordinate, and assess learning progress of
students, especially those with developmental delays. The technology will
provide natural, hands-free support for the instructor who guides the student in
each attempt within a complex program of study. The technology will 1) select
the task, 2) provide pre-evaluation guidance on setup, prompts, target response
and instructions, 3) using speech recognition, record task performance
evaluations, 4) provide post-evaluation guidance on what reinforcement to
provide, if any, and 5) select the next task. The enabling of automatic capture
of rich, high quality data for each task attempt will facilitate the use of
advanced artificial intelligence techniques, such as associative data mining, to
provide more customized programs of instruction. This project will overcome
instructor expertise and process complexity barriers and eliminate data
collection burdens while increasing data and program fidelity that will result
in better, faster learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact
of this innovation will occur in both Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) and non-
ABA areas. Initially it will help tackle the crisis in providing cost effective,
quality therapy to individuals with autism. Autism affects more than 1% of the
world?s population. ABA is the gold standard in treating autism. Up to fifty
percent of children with autism who undergo early treatment improve their IQs
and developmentally progress so they can mainstream into standard classrooms
with no educational assistants. Without early intervention, there is almost no
chance. ABA is most effective when the team of certified ABA analysts, non-
certified ABA therapists, educational assistants and family members coordinate
instruction. However, expertise and process complexity barriers experienced by
instructors, coupled with the burdens of data collection, limit its
effectiveness, while the shortfall of trained therapists and its high costs
(60K/child/year) limit its availability. The technology will increase available
ABA therapy by 1) accelerating training, 2) enabling team members to instruct
more easily and effectively with greater data and program fidelity and 3)
lowering costs. This innovation will accelerate the availability of
transformational, affordable technology that will improve the lives of many and
ameliorate a major world health problem.