* 1247760
* RAPID:  What Model for Public-Private Partnerships?:  Lessons from Existing Consortia for Administration of the U.S. National Network for Manufacturing Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Erica Fuchs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 83,974.00

This project analyzes existing U.S. consortia models, in particular, at the
Semiconductor Research Corporation, to inform governance of and success metrics
for the U.S. National Network for Manufacturing Innovation (NNMI). It prepares
insights in time to inform governance and success metrics for the Pilot
Institute for Manufacturing Innovation just launched on May 8, 2012 and the 2013
expansion of NNMI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Past research has
consistently found a positive impact of consortia on the research productivity
of participants in the technological areas they target. This research, however,
has largely failed to provide insights into successful consortium governance.
Arguably one of the most famous examples of a government-industry research
consortium, and one with widely-touted success, is SEMATECH. The example of
SEMATECH, however, leaves much to be desired. Perhaps most importantly, its
focus is primarily on short-term (1-3 year) R&amp;D in the context of vertical
collaboration to support the advancement of equipment suppliers. Thus while
successful on certain axes, SEMATECH fails to provide an example of
collaborative R&amp;D for long-term horizontally-collaborative research efforts;
as a matter of fact, in this specific context, SEMATECH provides an example of
early failure. And yet, it is precisely this type of horizontal coordination of
long-term technology development that may be particularly crucial to advancing
innovation effectively across a multitude of institutions in a vertically
disintegrated supply chain, as can be critical when introducing emerging
technologies into established industries and helping them develop industries of
their own -- issues central to revitalizing U.S. manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: With the decline of corporate R&amp;D
labs and the globalization and vertical disintegration of the supply chain, the
United States innovation ecosystem faces unprecedented challenges in maintaining
its economic and technological predominance, increasing jobs throughout the
economy, and supporting long-term technical and economic growth. For these
challenges to be met, managers in industry, government, and academia must find
ways to work hand-in-hand toward meeting the common challenges facing each of
them as well as the nation as a whole. In this new environment, research
consortia (as intermediate forms of organization, between a single firm and the
overall market) hold tremendous potential opportunities to achieve improved
innovation policy outcomes.