* 1247818
* SBIR Phase I:  Fiber Optic Distributed Acoustic Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Bo Dong, Sentek Instrument, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2013
* USD 149,688.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
distributed acoustic emission monitoring technology. The new technology will
provide real-time acoustic monitoring using a single fiber optic cable,
distributed temperature information will also be generated simultaneously. The
low physical profile renders it embeddable and minimally intrusive. The
technology is designed to be low-cost, which ensures its wide-scale
commercialization potential. In this Phase I research, a prototype sensor system
will be built and applied to demonstrate highly sensitive acoustic detection.
The focus will be on feasibility proof of the technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
includes the development of a sensor technology that is highly desired in
multiple industrial sectors. The potentially low-cost technology will enable
large-scale deployment of the sensor to revolutionize the sensing methodology
used in a number of applications. Accurate locating and quantifying of acoustic
signatures will directly benefit seismic oil &amp; gas exploration. Distributed
acoustic monitoring will seek immediate implementation in multi-zone production
in gas wells, heavy oil steam-assisted gravity drainage operation surveillance
and flowline hydrates, scale and corrosion monitoring. Long-span, real-time
acoustic monitoring also provides a viable means for pipeline health monitoring.
Another beneficiary of the technology will be distributed partial discharge (PD)
detection within power transformers. It is hoped that the new sensing technology
will dramatically improve the operation safety while reduce the overall cost of
such industries. Successful demonstration of the proposed sensing principle will
also shed light on a number of other sensing applications requiring high-speed,
densely-multiplexed operations.