* 1247226
* RAPID:   The Eclipse Megamovie Project
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Laura Peticolas, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 182,829.00

The team intends to exploit an upcoming total solar eclipse that will traverse
the entire continental United States, from Oregon to South Carolina, on August
21, 2017. The team will use this event as a unique research and educational
opportunity, creating a final product they refer to as the "Eclipse Megamovie
Project" (hereinafter EMP). The team's leadership notes that their "Eclipse
Megamovie" will provide unprecedented information about the physics of the solar
atmosphere in slow-motion. Never before has a total solar eclipse been tracked
seamlessly with high time resolution for intervals longer than a few minutes
(which is all that is possible from a single observing station's view of
totality). The EMP team's planned 2017 event will be unique in this
regard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a prelude to the EMP effort, the team will use
the imminent total solar eclipse of November 13, 2012 that will cross the Coral
Sea and North-Eastern Australia as a proof-of-concept. The swift approach of
this eclipse event over Australia is the primary justification of this activity
as a RAPID project. After careful review and analysis of their 2012 Australian
eclipse experience, the team will then plan the EMP in order to assemble a large
number of solar images, obtained by US student and amateur observers along the
2017 eclipse path, into a continuous record of solar chromospheric and coronal
evolution the hour and a half that totality will endure over the continental US.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting "Eclipse Megamovie" will provide a fantastic
opportunity for public education and outreach. The EMP team will reach out to
K-12 students, to universities, and to amateur astronomy groups (primarily in
those US states over which the eclipse will pass) through internet webcasts,
social media sites, and hard-copy posters which will be widely distributed. The
team note that many amateur solar astronomy groups have already heard of the EMP
effort through a preliminary description of the concept published on the
internet. Where possible, EMP team members would build on this initial
excitement and help promote the project by visiting interested groups and
potential observing sites. This effort will stimulate STEM education among K-12
students and at universities, as well as reach a wide swath of the general
public worldwide. The EMP team's educational materials and subsequent potential
TV documentaries will ensure significant impact for many years after the 2017
event.