* 1247451
* I-Corps:  Sustainable Nanocellulose-based Organic Aerogels for Thermal Insulation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Shaoqin 'Sarah' Gong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Inorganic aerogels such as silica, clay, and metal oxide have been extensively
studied during the last 70 years. One major disadvantage of inorganic aerogels
is that they are brittle. Organic aerogels generally are more flexible, but
their mechanical moduli and strengths tend to be lower. The uniqueness of the
team's nanofibrillated cellulose fiber (NFC)-based organic aerogels is that with
optimized material formulations and processes, they can be both flexible and
strong. The specific mechanical properties of the team's polyvinyl alcohol
(PVA)-NFCgraphene oxide (GO) aerogels are favorable in comparison with the
specific mechanical properties of other types of aerogels reported in the
literature. Furthermore, NFCs are made from sustainable and abundant biomass,
thus making it a more environmentally friendly material than petroleum-based
products. In addition, these NFC-based aerogels are prepared using a freeze-
drying process, which uses water instead of organic solvents. Freeze-drying has
the potential to allow for easy scale-up.

Aerogels have drawn significant attention due to their unusual and interesting
material properties, including a high porosity (typically 90% to 99%), ultra-low
density, high specific surface area, and very low thermal, acoustic, and
electrical conductivities. The sustainable NFC-based aerogels the team
fabricates using an environmentally friendly and scalable process in the lab
have excellent flexibility and specific compressive strength, extremely low
thermal conductivity and water absorption, and good thermal stability. As such,
they can be used for a wide range of thermal insulation applications such as
homes and buildings, industrial equipment, and clothing. This I-Corps project
will help the team deepen their understanding of the aerogel density and
material property relationship, which can provide a guideline, if successful,
for material selections for various applications.