* 1247550
* CAREER: Development of a teretoxin neuropeptide array for investigating neuronal circuits
* MPS,CHE
* 04/20/2012,06/30/2016
* Mande Holford, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2016
* USD 388,866.00

The proposed research project is designed to identify, synthesize, and
characterize novel neurotoxins from the venom of terebrid marine snails
(teretoxins) in a high throughput manner. A biodiversity centered toxin
discovery strategy, coupled with innovative mass spectrometric techniques, will
be used to expedite the discovery of novel teretoxin peptide sequences.
Identified teretoxins will then be immobilized via an oligosaccharide
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) linker on solid support to form a teretoxin-
GPI microarray. The ability to access teretoxins in a microarray format
facilitates the discovery of ligands for probing the mechanics and functional
activity of ion channels in neuronal circuits. The specific objectives of this
research proposal are to: 1) Discover novel teretoxins using charged-enhanced
electron-transfer dissociation mass spectrometry techniques. 2) Synthesize
teretoxin-GPI chimeras using several chemical synthesis strategies, and 3)
Develop a teretoxin-GPI neuropeptide microarray to do high throughput screening
of ion channel ligands. The successful completion of these research objectives
would produce a systematic approach, with broad appeal for identifying cysteine-
rich neurotoxins from the enormous peptide toxin libraries of scorpions, snakes,
and spiders, in addition to marine snails, and develop a neurotoxin microarray
for high throughput screening of ion channel ligands, a fundamental advance in
the characterization of the neuronal circuit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
proposed education initiative will develop and implement an undergraduate
laboratory research program termed, RAISE-W (Research Assisted Initiatives in
Science Empowerment for Women) that is geared towards increasing and retaining
the number of women, especially underrepresented women, engaged in scientific
research in STEM disciplines. Key barriers for retaining women in STEM fields
are perceived stereotypes and a lack of skills for successfully balancing
career/family pressures. RAISE-W will build the foundation for overcoming these
obstacles. The components of the RAISE-W program are to: 1) Identify and recruit
qualified undergraduate women at The City University of New York (CUNY) who will
be paired with CUNY faculty to engage in scientific research projects. 2)
Provide a "coaching regime" that teaches program participants skills in time
management, achievement, and career development. 3) Support graduate school
activities via a research proposal award, ensuring the participants stay on the
STEM track.