* 1247985
* RUI: Unsolicited WPMS: Enhancing Career Opportunities - Integrative Mathematical Program for Analyzing Coastal Systems (ECO-IMPACS)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* William Lutterschmidt, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,833.00

Enhancing Career Opportunities - Integrative Mathematical Program for Analyzing
Coastal Systems (ECO-IMPACS) is a workforce program in environmental mathematics
at Sam Houston State University (SHSU) and the Texas Research Institute for
Environmental Studies (TRIES). The ECO-IMPACS program will provide students from
mathematical and biological sciences the opportunity to collaborate on a cutting
edge research program to study how recent environmental fluctuations have
impacted coastal marsh ecosystems at the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge
(ANWR). Specifically, students will examine how hydrologic, nutrient and
physical drivers affect key food resources of the endangered whooping crane
(Grus americana). ECO-IMPACS students will learn about the biology of ANWR,
travel to ANWR to collect field data, and analyze their data in a TRIES
laboratory. ECO-IMPACS students will be instructed on the fundamentals of
dynamical model building in the environmental sciences and basic theories of
applied mathematics. Informed by their classroom, field, and laboratory work,
ECO-IMPACS students will create and analyze mathematical models of hydrologic
fluxes, algae population dynamics, and aquatic vegetation growth. Students will
investigate agent based and nonlinear differential and difference equation
models and analyze model behavior utilizing techniques such as non-
dimensionalization, computation of the local and global stability of steady-
states, exploration of the existence of periodic solutions, perturbation
methods, bifurcation analysis, simulation and numerical computation of
solutions, and parameter sensitivity analysis. Graduate students will not only
facilitate each stage of the learning process, but also incorporate more
advanced mathematics such as stochastic modeling. Community partners will
communicate their research objectives and student efforts will be focused on
these objectives throughout the modeling process. ECO-IMPACS students will be
asked to clearly and practically present their results to community partners and
demonstrate that their mathematical models can be used as effective tools to
guide community partner research and better understand the ANWR ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of integrative modeling and computational
solutions within the biological sciences has motivated many universities to
create and support programs in environmental mathematics. The ECO-IMPACS program
is a collaborative and educational program that is rooted in ongoing research on
ecosystem dynamics of coastal marshes in the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge.
The heterogeneous nature of the ANWR ecosystem and wide range of both natural
and anthropogenic influences in the system provide multiple opportunities for
collaboration between students in mathematical and biological sciences. In the
ECO-IMPACS program, students will construct mathematical models based on data
collected in the field and in the laboratory, perform theoretical and numerical
analyses of these models, and report their results in terms that are immediately
applicable to the objectives of our community partners (e.g., Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department and the International Crane Foundation). The involvement of
mathematics and biology students in all phases of the scientific method will
produce a more unified perspective about the use of modeling, simulation,
laboratory procedures, and field methods in an integrative setting. The primary
goals for ECO-IMPACS are to provide undergraduate and graduate students with a
summer internship that develops their ability to successfully integrate
mathematics and biology to complete entry level assignments in the field of
environmental mathematics. Students will develop critical skills that U.S.
employers desire of their employees (e.g., environmental sampling techniques,
mathematical modeling, oral and written communications, teamwork, critical
thinking, and problem solving) as they receive feedback and guidance from
faculty members and community partners. Thus, ECO-IMPACS participants will be
better prepared for both mathematical and environmentally oriented careers in a
green economy. This award is jointly supported by the Workforce and Mathematical
Biology programs within the Division of Mathematical Sciences.