* 1247316
* Data and Software Preservation for Open Science (DASPOS)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Robert Gardner, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,065,046.00

Scientific data is being collected at a higher rate than ever. A striking
example is in elementary particle physics (EPP) experiments, where
collaborations of thousands of scientists collect huge amounts of data at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC), but other disciplines have and are continuing to
observe similar growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity and time frame of
these experiments is such that the full scientific potential can only be
realized when the data remains accessible and analyzable through extended
periods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The possibility of successfully meeting this goal
for the necessary long term data preservation requires a novel approach that
will make the data and necessary software management more solid and survivable.
The long term data preservation will become an even more critical issue as
present experimental efforts evolve and the Big Data paradigm develops. The
initial efforts of the US community to analyze the large volume of LHC data is
being satisfied by the Open Science Grid project, designed to facilitate such
large and distributed experiments. DASPOS provides an opportunity to continue to
study today's analysis over the long term. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DASPOS
project incorporates the present state-of-the-art knowledge in working with data
in EPP. This project aims to provide a generic technological framework where the
basic difficulties are identified and solved with the aim of advancing these
goals simultaneously for several disciplines, which should facilitate the
emergence of commonalities and standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The milestones
and the work plan are well structured and adapted to present knowledge. Intense
communications via workshops is planned and is a natural path for the goal of
inclusion of the various disciplines. The intention to document these workshops
is a valuable component of this project, as are concrete goals such as
prototypes and software challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DASPOS project is
not only sound but also timely. The recent dynamics in data preservation and
large data management is now reaching several countries and funding agencies. In
fact, several projects at national levels are now installed, including for
instance, the PREDON project, financed by CNRS-France in 2012 to prepare a
multidisciplinary novel approach to big data management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other similar initiatives are under study in Germany and
Italy. It is no question that synergies will emerge at an international scale,
and is also clear that DASPOS will play a pioneering and leading role in this
context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conclusion, the impact and merit of the DASPOS
proposal is innovative and potentially transformational. This can be an
historical opportunity to make a significant advance in the scientific data
management in the context of the "Big Data" challenge.