* 1247119
* Future Directions in Composite Strengthening Applications - International Travel Support
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Lesley Sneed, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 9,450.00

This award provides travel support for three US researchers to attend a two-day
workshop held in Bologna, Italy. The workshop will be organized by the US
researchers in collaboration with leading Italian research groups. The
objectives of the workshop are: 1) to explore new research opportunities in
composite strengthening technology to advance current knowledge in fundamental
theory, 2) to study new generations of composite materials, and 3) to establish
new international lines of collaboration, with particular emphasis on student
exchange opportunities. Repairing and strengthening of aging structures is
becoming the only sustainable and economical solution to preserve the quality of
the nation's infrastructure. Composite strengthening technology has demonstrated
to be an effective and viable solution to repair and retrofit reinforced
concrete and masonry structures. Fundamental aspects of this technology are yet
to be understood in order to employ it effectively, while new composite
materials are under development. The workshop will explore and identify new
directions for research related to three topics: 1) fiber reinforced
cementitious matrix composites, 2) steel reinforced grout composites, and 3)
fatigue response of composite-strengthened structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be structured to foster interaction between the participants, with
presentations and discussions led by key researchers in their respective fields.
Participants will include a diverse group of researchers with different cultural
backgrounds and expertise. Graduate students will also be encouraged to
participate, giving these next-generation researchers the opportunity to share
international insights and benefit from cutting-edge research in their fields.