* 1247512
* EAGER: A Novel Experiment to Study Interfacial Processes between Droplet and Patterned Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* K.  Jimmy Hsia, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 151,336.00

Hsia CBET - 1247512

The proposed exploratory EAGER project aims at the first quantitative
measurement of interfacial interactions between a droplet and a patterned
substrate. A novel experimental technique is developed to quantitatively study
the interaction forces as a function of the geometry and defect characteristics
of the micropatterns. The system provides a quantitative testbed for long-
standing theories of interfacial processes such as contact-line pinning under
different geometric and chemical conditions for the first time, thus benefitting
a huge variety of fields, including solid state physics, surface chemistry, and
microfabrication.

Intellectual Merit

Substrates with micropatterns, particularly those with a "forest" of
micropillars interacting with small-scale droplets, have garnered enormous
interest in recent years for their versatility and unusual properties, including
wettability, adhesive energy, conductivity or capacitance. These patterns have
potential applications in widespread industrial processes that rely on non-
wetting surfaces that reject dirt, have low adhesive energy, reject water (e.g.
coatings for windshields), resist condensation (e.g. in refrigeration devices),
or are useful in pore filtration of gases (e.g. in micro fuel cells).
Nevertheless, a quantitative understanding of droplet shapes and dynamics lags
behind a large number of proof-of-principle experiments. In particular, very
little is known about the effect of pattern and pillar geometry on the dynamics
of contact line motion and the forces needed to sustain (or arrest) such motion.

The proposed work will apply novel experimental techniques for simultaneous
quantitative measurements of droplet shape and contact-line pinning forces, both
with a spatial resolution at the single-defect level and capable of fast time
resolution. The interaction of isolated defects of defined shape with contact
lines has long been the subject of pinning theories, perceived as an
idealization of the description of real contact line behavior. With high-speed
photography and sensitive force sensors, forces and deformations of droplets and
substrates in relative motion will be determined simultaneously by making
crucial measurements for an accurate description of dynamical contact angle
hysteresis as well as droplet repulsion, fragmentation, and coalescence on
hydrophobic surfaces. The experiments can access and analyze a wide range of
speeds beyond current experiments, in a regime highly relevant for applications.

The proposed EAGER research proposal has the following objectives: (i) to seek
an accurate understanding of contact line pinning and depinning from isolated
defects, in an experimental system that can serve as a paradigm for defect
pinning in broader contexts of interfacial processes; (ii) to acknowledge the
effect of defect distribution and defect interaction on the contact line as a
whole; (iii) to explore an innovative combination of experimental techniques,
promising an improved set of tools for analyzing contact line motion on the
microscale.

Broader Impacts

The Broader Impacts of the proposed work include those on the societal, group,
and individual scales. The research provides fundamental insight in fields of
great societal need: clean water, refrigeration, energy, and advanced
manufacturing. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in the project
will be trained in the areas of microfabrication, soft lithography, surface
patterning, and other processes that are of great importance. The PI will also
incorporate research results in existing courses and demonstrations. The PI has
plans in place to boost the participation of members from under-represented
groups by proactively participating in several on-campus/off-campus programs,
including Women in Engineering Program, the Minority Engineering Program, and
the McNair Scholar Program.