* 1247750
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: DCM: Collaborative Research: Eliminating the Data Ingestion Bottleneck in Big-Data Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2017
* USD 406,000.00

Big-data practice suggests that there is a tradeoff between the speed of data
ingestion, the ability to answer queries quickly (e.g., via indexing), and the
freshness of data. This perceived tradeoff lies, for example, at the heart of
the historic division between OLTP (online transaction processing) and OLAP
(online analytical processing). In an OLTP database, data gets ingested quickly
and the data available for querying is fresh, but analytical queries run
prohibitively slowly. In an OLAP data warehouse, data is buffered for off-line
indexing so that analytical queries run quickly, but by the time the data gets
indexed, it is stale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This tradeoff has manifestations in
the design of all types of storage systems. For example, some file-systems are
optimized for reads and others for writes, but workloads generally involve a
mixture of reads and writes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PIs show
that this is not a fundamental tradeoff, but rather a tradeoff imposed by the
choice of data structure. The PIs use write-optimized structures, an alternative
to traditional indexing methodologies, to build storage systems in which this
tradeoff is significantly mitigated or alleviated altogether. The performance
promise of such indexing schemes follows from the PIs previous work establishing
that write-optimized data structures can speed up both inserts and
queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the remaining obstacles in
the deployment of write-optimized indexes within big-data file-systems and
databases. Big data imposes a new set of constraints on any storage system, and
the PIs will show how write-optimized indexing can yield order-of-magnitude
performance improvements at scale. In particular, this project will show that
such techniques are not only applicable today but that they will scale with
hardware trends, including the widespread adoption of solid-state disks (SSDs).