* 1247137
* INSPIRE:  Understanding Spatiotemporal Extent and Structure of Large Wind Farm Footprint on Weather and Climate by Combining Observational Analysis with Numerical Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by Physical and Dynamic Meteorology
program in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the Directorate
for Geosciences, Climate and Large-scale Dynamics program in the Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the Directorate for Geosciences, and
Environmental Sustainability program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global wind industry has experienced a
remarkably rapid expansion of capacity in recent years and this fast growth is
expected to continue in the future. While converting wind's kinetic energy into
electricity, wind turbines modify surface-atmosphere exchanges of energy,
momentum, mass and moisture. Given the current installed capacity and the
projected installation worldwide, wind farms (WFs) are likely becoming a major
driver of manmade land use change on Earth. Hence, understanding WF-atmosphere-
environment interactions and assessing potential environmental impacts are of
significant societal importance. However, recent studies of WF impacts on
meteorology have been primarily in the modeling domain using simplified wind
turbine parameterizations (WTPs) due to the lack of observations. Given the
availability of high resolution radar and remote sensing data, we believe it is
time to begin systematically assessing WF impacts in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a process-based observational
and modeling study to investigate possible impacts on weather, climate and
environments due to the rapid development of wind farms (WF) in the Great Plains
and Midwest. Specifically, the study will involve analyzing a variety of
observational data (near-surface meteorological variables, radar and remote
sensed), detecting, quantifying and attributing such impacts over the 17 biggest
U.S. WFs, and then performing a series of high resolution mesoscale simulations
to evaluate wind turbine parameterizations (WTPs). The investigations will
unveil how operational WFs influence the diurnal, seasonal and interannual
variations of atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) structures and phenomena, near-
surface hydrometeorology, and crop/vegetation growth, and how these changes vary
under various meteorological and surface conditions and WF configurations (e.g.,
elevation, land cover, wind patterns, local
climate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;This research can
potentially bridge scientific knowledge gap of (a) atmospheric boundary layer
dynamics and thermodynamics within and downwind of operational wind farms and
(b) physical processes and mechanisms of wind farm impacts on environment. It
will also generate knowledge about the performance of the wind turbine
parameterizations and identify model refinements required to simulate wind farms
in mesoscale models. It is potentially transformative by providing a
comprehensive picture of wind farm footprint on weather and climate, a
fundamental step toward projecting the future impacts at large scales, and by
challenging conventional wisdom with far more complicated wind farm-atmosphere-
environment interactions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Wind
power supports environmental sustainability and is likely to be part of the
solution to the climate change, air pollution and energy security problem.
Assessing potential WF impacts is critical for developing efficient adaptation
and management strategies to ensure long-term sustainability of wind power. The
study will lead to improvements in numerical weather prediction and projection
of WF impacts on weather, climate, environments, water cycle and agricultural
practices. The obtained knowledge and approaches can be generalized to other
studies. In addition, this project has important education and outreach
components and will provide learning and training experience for undergraduate
and graduate students.