* 1247945
* INSPIRE: Concentrated Dispersions of Equilibrium Protein Nanoclusters that Reversibly Dissociate into Active Monomers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Keith Johnston, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE award to University of Texas at Austin by the Interfacial Processes
and Thermodynamics program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport (CBET) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) is
cofunded by the Particulate and Multiphase Processes in the CBET-ENG; and the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate
for the Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Protein-based drugs represent some
of the most promising therapies for a wide range of diseases, including cancer.
Subcutaneous injection is the preferred method of delivery, but its usefulness
is currently limited by unwanted outcomes such as protein aggregation and
gelation that occur for high doses. Previous attempts to address these problems
by modifying the amino-acid sequence of potential therapeutics have been
expensive and often unsuccessful. The investigators have recently reported a new
method for creating highly concentrated, low-viscosity dispersions of stable
protein nanoclusters that are not only of great fundamental interest but also
could provide a basis for an unconventional means for solving major challenges
in the protein-based therapeutics. However, at present, the answers to basic
questions about the origins of the nanoclusters are lacking. Furthermore, the
relationships between specific nanocluster characteristics and physical
properties of the resulting dispersions are currently
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The aqueous protein
nanocluster dispersions to be studied in this proposal represent an entirely new
form of soft condensed matter. The goal of the proposal is to explore and
develop a fundamental understanding of how the protein nanoclusters form, why
they stabilize the folded state of the proteins, and the impact of the clusters
on the physical properties of dispersions. The investigators will use
experiments, statistical mechanical theory, and computer simulations to test the
hypothesis that clusters spontaneously form due to an equilibrium, self-assembly
process where the addition of a small molecule ?crowder? molecule induces
attractions between proteins that are balanced by weak electrostatic repulsions
near the protein?s isoelectric point. In doing so, they will also address key
open questions about the pathway dependence of nanocluster dispersions, the role
and design of novel molecular crowders in nanocluster assembly, and the
structure and dynamics of the nanoclusters. Since protein nanocluster
dispersions are inherently multiscale (clusters, proteins, crowders, and solvent
each introduce characteristic length scales), they are challenging to
characterize experimentally. The PIs will determine the extent to which light-
scattering, cryo-SEM and TEM, neutron scattering, and x-ray scattering can be
used provide insights into the structure, dynamics, and stability of self-
crowded proteins in the nanoclusters. They will also investigate appropriate
multiscale strategies for modeling&lt;br/&gt;these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
proposed research will provide resolutions to important fundamental questions
about the possibility of forming aqueous dispersions of equilibrium nanoclusters
with tunable size that dissociate to monomers upon dilution. Anticipated
outcomes include a general method for creating (and tuning the properties of)
aqueous nanocluster dispersions of interest for technologies that range
from&lt;br/&gt;drug delivery to biofuel production, as well as a theoretical
understanding for why previous attempts using alternative strategies were only
able to produce nanoclusters that were small, dilute, and short lived. In this
grant, both undergraduate and graduate students will have the opportunity to
work on important fundamental research with unusually strong interdisciplinary
and technological components. In addition to other outreach efforts, the PIs
propose to integrate the science on protein stability and crowding from the
project into an undergraduate course on biological physics through a series of
interactive, simulation- and theory-based modules.