* 1247287
* Studio STEM: Engaging Middle School Students in Networked Science and Engineering Projects
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Christine Schnittka, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 07/31/2015
* USD 110,498.00

Studio STEM employs active, inquiry-based learning through engineering design
activities to promote conceptual change and problem solving techniques using
information and communications technology (ICT). The project aims to engage and
encourage rural Appalachian middle grade students to pursue STEM using
fundamental concepts in energy conservation and sustainability through an
informal design-based studio. This setting allows students to creatively explore
and share problems and solutions by documenting their experiences using personal
blogs. The project builds on a previously piloted interdisciplinary curriculum,
Save the Animals, developed in partnership with the Virginia Middle School
Engineering Education initiative and focuses on solving energy-related problems
that explore relevant environmental issues affecting animals and
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, four curriculum modules are
presented and grouped in themes by year. Students explore and design around
energy transfer in Save the Penguins (energy efficient dwellings), alternative
energy generation in Save the Fish (hydroelectric dams) and Save the Bats (wind
turbines), and alternative transportation in Save the Seagulls (solar cars). All
modules incorporate the 5-E learning cycle (engage, explore, explain, elaborate,
and evaluate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants interact with selected
undergraduate volunteers from the College of Engineering at Virginia Tech, and
industry/community partners. At completion, Studio STEM will have served over
300 students in grades 6-8 and trained over 200 middle school teachers and
undergraduate volunteers to implement the design-based curriculum through a
series of professional development workshops. External evaluation consists of
both formative (using a mixed methods approach) and summative assessment,
utilizing online surveys, observations, and focus groups designed specifically
for the project.