* 1247764
* EARS:  SAVANT - High Performance Dynamic Spectrum Access via Inter Network Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jennifer Rexford, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2016
* USD 455,000.00

This project is aimed at achieving significant spectrum efficiency gains through
inter network collaboration in radio resource management. The proposed SAVANT
(spectrum access via inter network collaboration) architecture is based on a new
protocol interface for dissemination of spectrum usage information, policies and
algorithms between neighboring networks to enable spectrum coexistence
algorithms that reduce interference and improve spectrum packing efficiency. A
new inter-domain spectrum coordination protocol (ISCP) is being developed to
enable independent networks to negotiate radio resource management policies and
optionally merge radio resource controllers for joint
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of research to be conducted
includes ISCP protocol design/validation, evaluation of alternative algorithms
involving network collaboration, prototype implementation and performance
evaluation. The methodology for the project involves a mix of analysis,
simulation and experimental prototyping. Generalized analytical models for radio
localization, propagation and interference are developed and incorporated into
simulation studies of inter-network cooperation using the ISCP protocol
framework. These simulation models are expected to provide insight into the type
of collaborative radio resource optimization algorithm to be used along with
quantitative evaluation of ISCP overhead, complexity and performance. The
project also includes an experimental prototyping track in which emerging
software-defined network (SDN) technology is used to develop a proof-of-concept
system with multiple collaborating networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
ISCP inter-network protocol has the potential for large gains in wireless
spectrum utilization, and could thus influence future industry standards. The
project will also produce educational materials for training of graduate
students in software-defined networking and wireless systems.