* 1247608
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:   A New Approach to Imaging Mantle Discontinuity Structure with USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Nicholas Schmerr, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 02/28/2015
* USD 76,207.00

The goal of this project is to develop new methods of analyzing seismic data
from densely spaced seismometer arrays, such as EarthScope?s USArray. A key
seismological tool for answering the fundamental question of how the mantle
circulates is the imaging of seismic discontinuities that are sensitive to the
thermal and chemical properties of the mantle. The wealth of data provided by
EarthScope allows geoscientists to study the structure of seismic
discontinuities on a scale and at a level of detail that have never been
possible before. The first phase of this project is funded by the EArly-concept
Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) program, bringing together a team of
seismologists with a broad range of expertise that is led by Dr. Nicholas
Schmerr at the University of Maryland and Goddard Space Flight Center. The team
is developing a new algorithm and suite of computational tools to analyze
seismic energy that reflects from the topside of a seismic discontinuity,
providing detailed upper mantle discontinuity structure at scale lengths of
several hundred kilometers or less. This tool requires the use of array
methodologies enabled by the dense station spacing of the USArray. Development
of this new data analysis methodology should stimulate fundamental advances in
understanding of the mantle in the fields of mineral physics, mantle petrology,
seismology, and geodynamics, adding to the richness of information on the
geological history of the mantle beneath the North American continent. The
project is providing next-generation open-source scientific research tools,
datasets, and measurements made freely available to the scientific community to
empower a broader cross section of scientists to handle large datasets such as
those provided by EarthScope. These newly developed seismological tools and
discontinuity models are being disseminated to the scientific community through
the PI?s website.