* 1247632
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: DA: Collaborative Research: Big Tensor Mining: Theory, Scalable Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* George Karypis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2017
* USD 866,846.00

Tensors are multi-dimensional generalizations of matrices, and so can have non-
numeric entries. Extremely large and sparse coupled tensors arise in numerous
important applications that require the analysis of large, diverse, and
partially related data. The effective analysis of coupled tensors requires the
development of algorithms and associated software that can identify the core
relations that exist among the different tensor modes, and scale to extremely
large datasets. The objective of this project is to develop theory and
algorithms for (coupled) sparse and low-rank tensor factorization, and
associated scalable software toolkits to make such analysis possible. The
research in the project is centered on three major thrusts. The first is
designed to make novel theoretical contributions in the area of coupled tensor
factorization, by developing multi-way compressed sensing methods for
dimensionality reduction with perfect latent model reconstruction. Methods to
handle missing values, noisy input, and coupled data will also be developed. The
second thrust focuses on algorithms and scalability on modern architectures,
which will enable the efficient analysis of coupled tensors with millions and
billions of non-zero entries, using the map-reduce paradigm, as well as hybrid
multicore architectures. An open-source coupled tensor factorization toolbox
(HTF- Hybrid Tensor Factorization) will be developed that will provide robust
and high-performance implementations of these algorithms. Finally, the third
thrust focuses on evaluating and validating the effectiveness of these coupled
factorization algorithms on a NeuroSemantics application whose goal is to
understand how human brain activity correlates with text reading &amp;
understanding by analyzing fMRI and MEG brain image datasets obtained while
reading various text passages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given triplets of facts
(subject-verb-object), like ('Washington' 'is the capital of' 'USA'), can we
find patterns, new objects, new verbs, anomalies? Can we correlate these with
brain scans of people reading these words, to discover which parts of the brain
get activated, say, by tool-like nouns ('hammer'), or action-like verbs ('run')?
&lt;br/&gt;We propose a unified "coupled tensor" factorization framework to
systematically mine such datasets. Unique challenges in these settings include
&lt;br/&gt;(a) tera- and peta-byte scaling issues, &lt;br/&gt;(b) distributed
fault-tolerant computation, &lt;br/&gt;(c) large proportions of missing data,
and &lt;br/&gt;(d) insufficient theory and methods for big sparse tensors.
&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this effort is exactly the solution to the
above four challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact is the derivation
of new scientific hypotheses on how the brain works and how it processes
language (from the never-ending language learning (NELL) and NeuroSemantics
projects) and the development of scalable open source software for coupled
tensor factorization. Our tensor analysis methods can also be used in many other
settings, including recommendation systems and computer-network
intrusion/anomaly detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KEYWORDS:&lt;br/&gt;Data
mining; map/reduce; read-the-web; neuro-semantics; tensors.