* 1247334
* EAGER: High-Speed Imaging Studies of Fuel-Spray Physics for Low-Temperature and Low-Density Ambient Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Brian Fisher, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 59,383.00

Increasingly, engines and power-generation systems are employing spray-based
methods to introduce fuel into the combustion chamber. Sprays and spray
combustion involve both physical processes (e.g., fuel vaporization, fuel-air
mixing) and chemical processes (e.g., ignition, pollutant formation), neither of
which are fully understood. In addition, vaporization and mixing set the initial
conditions for combustion, and thus directly influence combustion efficiency and
emissions. The purpose of this research is to investigate the physical processes
involved in fuel sprays, particularly for conditions where fuel is sprayed into
relatively low-temperature and low-density surroundings. Such conditions are
characteristic of advanced engine combustion strategies, such as early direct-
injection, which are increasingly being used to enhance efficiency and lower
unwanted emissions. Research will be conducted in a spray chamber designed with
extensive optical access, and through which an inert gas will flow continuously
during experiments to allow fundamental studies of spray physics in the absence
of the complicating effects of combustion. Studies will focus on penetration,
dispersion, and turbulence of both the liquid and vapor phases of fuel sprays.
These data will be sought using novel high-speed imaging techniques that will be
developed as part of this project. The investigator will attempt to develop a
technique to obtain both liquid- and vapor-phase information simultaneously
using a single high-speed camera. Experimental results could lead to development
of improved and more-flexible models that are likely to challenge conventional
wisdom about fuel sprays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a direct
and tangible effect on participation from underrepresented groups by providing
support for the research activities and graduate education of an
underrepresented student. In addition, the project will benefit undergraduate
education in the Mechanical Engineering Department at The University of Alabama,
as the investigator will incorporate the subject matter and results of the
research into both the lecture and laboratory portions of an existing course in
combustion engines. More broadly, the work will contribute to improvement of
predictive spray and combustion models, which in turn will contribute to the
development of cleaner and more-efficient combustion devices. This research,
therefore, has the potential to impact the energy security and energy
independence of this nation.