* 1247260
* 2012 Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical Behavior GRC/GRS
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

The Gordon Research Seminar and Conference (GRC) on "Thin Film and Small Scale
Mechanical Behavior" will be held July 22-27, 2012, at Colby College in
Waterville, Maine. This conference will be accompanied by the Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS) on the same topic, to be held July 21-22, 2012 and aimed at
enhancing active participation by graduate students and postdoctoral scientists.
Financial support will help defray the conference fees and travel costs for
invited speakers and discussion leaders as well as graduate students, post-docs
and junior faculty members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
conference and seminar includes its highly trans-disciplinary nature, involving
scientists with backgrounds in materials science and mechanics as well as
colleagues from neighboring areas including condensed matter physics, electrical
engineering, and biology. It is well established that the mechanical behavior of
materials changes when they are geometrically confined to a small scale in at
least one dimension. This may affect elastic, plastic and time-dependent
deformation as well as degradation mechanisms such as fracture, fatigue, and
wear. The fundamental mechanisms and scientific understanding of these changes,
however, require continued investigation and are the subject of many research
projects. The study of small scale mechanical behavior has benefitted from
fundamental studies of physical mechanisms linked to materials science and
engineering, reaching towards modern applications ranging from optical and
microelectronic devices and nano- or micro-electrical mechanical systems
(NEMS/MEMS) to devices for energy production and storage. This research area has
always taken advantage of recent progress in atomistic and micromechanical
modeling, as well as materials characterization and in-situ measurements at
small length scales. As such, the study of small-scale mechanical behavior has
fertilized many aspects of research in the fields of materials science and
applied mechanics. Previous meetings have always led to intense discussions of
new and unexpected results and observations, and in many cases new research and
collaborations between attendees have been initiated. The 2012 Conference will
continue to cover topics of lasting significance to the field such as
deformation and fracture in small structures, advanced testing and
characterization of materials at small length scales, and mechanical behavior of
biological materials. In addition, it will highlight topics of growing
importance. Particularly, emerging topics in the area of nanomechanical behavior
of battery materials, will be highlighted.&lt;br/&gt;This GRC will have a broad
impact on knowledge dissemination, stimulation of new ideas, and research
collaborations. At previous GRC meetings on this topic, more than 100
international experts on the subject came together, with backgrounds in the
areas described above and with a large portion of participants coming from
Europe and Asia. Typically, more than half of the participants are students or
young researchers from academia, national laboratories, and industry. The
meeting brings these young scholars into direct contact with experts in the
unique atmosphere of a GRC, stimulating not only their specific research
interests, but even more importantly integrating them into a scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers have made a strong effort to
invite speakers and discussion leaders and to support students who are diverse
in background, gender, and race. Almost all of the invited speakers will be
presenting for the first time at this GRC. The speakers will review the
background and state-of-the-art for their subject and then present their newest
and predominantly unpublished results. After all lectures, there will be ample
time for questions and in-depth discussions. For this, the discussion leaders
are very important and have been carefully chosen. They are either speakers from
previous GRC meetings who can provide an overarching perspective and/or very
experienced people who have done distinguished work and are adept at posing
stimulating questions. It is further planned to have summary discussions at the
end of each session.