* 1247426
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Experimental Determination of Tooth Mineralization Patterns in Ungulates for Application to Paleoseasonality Reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2014
* Tanya Smith, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2014
* USD 33,555.00

Scholars have been debating the conditions that led to the evolution of humans'
large brains and unique behaviors, including complex stone tool use and
language, for more than a century. One influential theory proposes that these
features emerged in response to seasonal resource availability in Africa over
the last five million years. Geological and paleontological data suggest that
changing rainfall patterns might have produced more arid African ecosystems and
novel foraging behaviors, although approaches for documenting ancient
precipitation patterns remain rudimentary. Under the direction of Dr. Tanya
Smith, Daniel Green aims to improve methods of seasonal reconstruction with new
laboratory techniques and experimentation, facilitating research on ancient
climate change during key periods in human evolution.

Climatic patterns may be reconstructed through chemical analysis of teeth, which
record environmental chemistry during formation and remain unchanged after death
and fossilization. Tooth increments, analogous to rings in trees, form every day
during childhood from ingested minerals that are in equilibrium with local water
sources. As seasons pass, the composition of isotopes (atomic variants) change,
and teeth record these changes. Importantly, isotopes in teeth record seasonal
changes that can be related to time markers, facilitating precise estimates of
environmental change. This project will improve climate reconstruction by
precisely mapping the geometry and timing of tooth mineralization. A combination
of cutting-edge synchrotron imaging and scanning electron microscopy of
developing sheep teeth will yield mineral density change over time. This project
then tests these results using animals subject to an isotopic water switch,
experimentally demonstrating the relationship between tooth chemistry and
changes in water that approximates seasonal variation.

Ultimately, a concrete understanding of how environmentally sensitive minerals
are added to teeth will improve seasonal reconstruction, and will allow one to
investigate if marked climatic change accompanied the development of unique
human anatomy and behaviors. This project will train graduate and undergraduate
students, and enhance collaborations with scholars in Europe and Africa. Results
of this research will be broadly disseminated in professional journals and
meetings, and presented to public audiences.