* 1247020
* Crust-mantle boundary contraints from ambient noise autocorrelations in North America
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Ileana Tibuleac, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2016
* USD 85,462.00

The mantle lithosphere and asthenosphere hold a key to tectonic processes in the
Sierra Nevada (SN) and the adjacent provinces. Although addressed by many
innovative studies, the causes of differences in the mountain range uplift
(higher in the southern SN compared to the uplift in the northern SN), the cause
of dramatic variations in SN crustal thickness from east to west, of crustal
layering and local "brightness", and the mantle wave speeds relation to
topography and surface geology are still under debate. New, independent
constraints on crust-mantle boundary (Moho) would help answer these questions,
however, Moho depth and properties are often difficult to resolve seismically
because of the lack of favorable spatial distribution of source and receiver
geometries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to apply a new
method for crust-mantle boundary analysis, which, in contrast to receiver
functions, does not depend on large recorded seismic events. Also, in contrast
to current reflection/refraction seismic studies, the new method is applied
locally at all available seismic sensors, providing unprecedented resolution.
The investigators aim to estimate and interpret new, independent models of the
depth of the crust ? mantle boundary (Moho discontinuity) across the Sierra
Nevada, through analysis of the body wave component (P and S) of Green's
Functions extracted from ambient noise autocorrelations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will use ambient-noise seismic interferometry to
extract the crust-mantle boundary Green's Function reflection component. Our
activity consists of three stages, as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1) Update an existing,
comprehensive seismic database in the study area, including P/S seismic velocity
models and receiver functions, from publicly available information; 2) Apply
ambient-seismic noise autocorrelations to each available sensor in the study
area, with the purpose to identify, extract and analyze the P/S reflection
component of the Green's Functions. 3) Estimate to the first order the new
crustal models using waveform modeling; statistically compare with receiver
function estimates and interpret the results in terms of the tested hypotheses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project they are applying an innovative data
processing method named seismic interferometry to estimate the crust-mantle
boundary depth and properties. The study is expected to provide new, independent
seismic crustal model constraints for western North America, with focus on the
Sierra Nevada and the adjacent regions. In contrast to other currently used
procedures, such as receiver function estimates, our method does not depend on
large recorded seismic events. This new method also has unprecedented
resolution, when applied at all available seismic sensors