* 1247437
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: A New Approach to the Analysis of the Risk of Hydrofracking Fluid Migration from Unconventional Shales to Groundwater Reservoirs
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2013
* George Pinder, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2013
* USD 51,850.00

1247338/1247437&lt;br/&gt;Mouser/Pinder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancements in
horizontal hydraulic fracturing technologies combined with the exploration of
vast unconventional shale resources have led to an energy boom that is rapidly
transcending economics of the Appalachian region. Unfortunately, shale
development activities are progressing at a rate that is driving new regulatory
policies before the possible detrimental effects of these techniques on water
resource sustainability are understood. The biological, physical, and chemical
properties of the hydrofracking fluids will govern their interaction with pore
structures and formation fluids. Understanding the fate and longevity of these
fluids is critical to framing our understanding of the risks of these activities
to potable water supplies. The objective of this research is to better
characterize the biophysiochemical properties of fluids relevant to
unconventional shale development, and formulate a risk-based flow and transport
model for solving their spatiotemporal distribution in the subsurface. The
investigators will examine the physical properties and biodegradability
potential of fracking and flowback fluids, and measure the governing physical
characteristics of rock cores from unconventional shale and surrounding
formations in order to quantitate the constitutive relationships that describe
how fluids move through media. The investigators will combine experimentally-
derived properties with industry knowledge and a probabilistic fracture
hydraulic conductivity to formulate a risk-based flow and transport model
capable of predicting fluid movement from shale formations to groundwater
aquifers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help quantify the likelihood
that hydrofracking processes occurring at depth could migrate to shallower
groundwater aquifers that serve industrial, commercial, or domestic water
supplies within a foreseeable time frame. It should also provide insight into
how long the fracking fluid compounds would persist in the subsurface
environment if they were mobilized from the unconventional shale formations. By
integrating experimentally-derived properties with expert knowledge and a
transport modeling approach, this research will both advance our understanding
of fluid properties used during energy development activities and provide a new
tool for practitioners to assess migration risk under a range of hydrogeologic
scenarios. The research undertaken in this project will be communicated to a
broad range of stakeholders through participation in extension meetings and
ongoing workshop forums on shale energy development in the Appalachian region.