* 1247874
* EAGER: Layered two-dimensional nanostructures as building blocks for high frequency nano-electronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Arnold Guloy, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 07/31/2014
* USD 136,915.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to create nano-devices using single-
and few-layer forms of selected crystalline layered semiconductors as building
blocks for the next-generation nano-electronic components that work at high
frequencies above 10 GHz. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit
is this program will conduct exploratory studies on the design and construction
of novel two-dimensional nanostructures for high-frequency nano-electronic
applications. If successful, the proposed work will develop suitable layered
materials, elucidate electron transport mechanisms in these two-dimensional
materials, develop device schemes for high-speed electronics, and establish the
foundation for their future integration in industry. The outcome of the research
will shed light on both the fundamental research and technological applications
at the nanoscale. The transformative nature of this project includes the
potential to provide new materials platforms and novel device schemes which may
change the landscape of future high-speed integrated nano-electronic industry.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impacts are: (1) the program will open
new avenues for interdisciplinary research with significant technological and
fundamental impact, thus benefiting the society at large through research
breakthroughs and knowledge dissemination; and (2) the program will boost the
participation of many underrepresented groups in science and technology, through
integrated education and dissemination efforts at the University of Houston (the
second most ethnically diverse research university in the nation): student
training, outreach to local K-12 students and teachers, and knowledge
dissemination to the scientific communities and the general public.