* 1247696
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: ESCE: Collaborative Research: Discovery and Social Analytics for Large-Scale Scientific Literature.
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Paul Kantor, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,004,784.00

Big data analytics is, fundamentally, the problem of bringing the massive
amounts of data produced today down to human scale. In particular scientists,
engineers, physicians, and many others in knowledge-intensive professions face
data that is beyond human scale. This data is in the repositories that collect
the data and the reports or results in their fields. This project will address
the problem of bringing all this knowledge under control by using even more
data, namely the individual and social patterns of how these repositories are
accessed and used, and user-specific judgments (valuations) of the data. The
proposed research will develop novel algorithms and an open-source
infrastructure for improving discovery within and access to data repositories.
These algorithms will aggregate and analyze the social analytic data, gathered
from professional communities of data users, and will motivate them to
participate by providing recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transformative goal is to develop methods for organizing, and operationalizing
the access and preference patterns of users of large repositories, and for
integrating those valuations to accelerate discovery within the collections.
Diverse human minds interacting with data collections, as they carry out their
own research or operational activities, provide a powerful source of information
about the value of the data itself. Those data items may be textual documents,
numerical datasets, or other kinds of media content. The novel methods for
representing, aggregating, organizing and valuating interactions between the
users and the items can reveal structures within data collections, which were
previously invisible to any individual. This discovery of interrelations within
data, driven by the capture of human intelligence, will accelerate the processes
of scientific discovery. Users who are permitted to valuate data, and who are
motivated by receiving valuable recommendations in return, reveal more about
their own interests. This makes it possible to discover relations among the data
items and among the users themselves. The educational goals are to: (a)
contribute to the education of specific graduate students supported by the
project, and undergraduates via the REU mechanism; (b) generate new educational
materials related to algorithmic innovations, and to research findings; and (c)
improve access to and discovery within specific collections of materials.
Research findings will be included in courses at all three collaborating
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional information about the project
(including publication, software, data sets) will be made available through the
project web site: http://arxiv_xs.rutgers.edu/.