* 1247362
* RAPID:   Elevated in Utero Temperature: A Suppressor of Fetal Development and Ruminant Fitness?
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Geoffrey Dahl, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 138,386.00

A series of studies using the bovine calf as a model was recently completed to
exame the impact of in utero heat stress on ruminant fitness during the
immediate post-natal period. The studies indicate that calves that experience in
utero heat stress are smaller at birth and weaning, have reduced passive immune
transfer, and depressed innate immune function. A project designed to further
examine the health and performance of cows that experience heat stress during
the final 60 days of gestation is currently underway. The availability of calves
that experience in utero heat stress under such defined conditions during late
gestation presents a unique opportunity to gain further insight into
environmental factors that alter neonatal health and development, and possibly
induce life-long differences in immune function that alter fitness. RAPID
funding of this application is essential to capitalize on this unique
opportunity to gain insight into the fundamental biology of heat stress. The
first proposed objective is to tease apart the cellular mechanisms responsible
for the observed differences in immunoglobulin uptake, and to determine if in
utero and early-life differences in immune status persist in later life.
Intestinal capacity for immunoglobulin absorption could be reduced by heat
stress in utero. That hypothesis will be tested by measuring tissue and cellular
levels of IgG absorption and relative levels of apoptosis in neonatal calves
from dams that experience heat stress or cooling during late gestation. To more
fully assess the long-term impact of in utero heat stress, functional immune
endpoints and growth in calves from heat stressed and cooled dams will be
compared. Immune suppression observed in heat-stressed cows and/or their calves
may also result from differences in their immune cell subsets compared to those
that are cooled. To address this possibility, peripheral blood of cows 8 weeks
pre- and post-partum and peripheral blood, spleen and thymus of calves
sacrificed to address the first objective above will be evaluated by flow
cytometry for the frequency of different types of immune cells including B
cells, T cells, monocytes, macrophages and granulocytes. A broad understanding
of the cellular mechanisms of immune function following in utero heat stress,
and the impact on growth and survival to puberty, as an indicator of overall
fitness will therefore be developed as a result of this project. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the proposed study include enhanced understanding of heat
stress biology, and the potential to develop management interventions for farmed
and captive ruminants with improved capacity to thrive under higher ambient
temperatures. To accomplish these goals, continued graduate educational support
is necessary. There is also a need to expand the diversity of those trained in
the field of animal biology to better represent the general population. Two
outstanding young women scientists of Hispanic ethnicity will work on this
project as graduate students. The University of Florida also has a significant
population of undergraduate students of Hispanic descent and two of those
students have been recruited to introduce them to basic research methods,
techniques in immunology, and data summary and presentation. The undergraduates
will assist with all aspects of the animal care, sample collection, and conduct
of immune function assays. Thus the proposal will add significantly to the
capacity and diversity of students trained in animal biology at the University
of Florida.