* 1247821
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Enhancing Data Discovery and Usability for Inquiry in Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Philip Myers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

A number of research and education projects are working to bring real data into
biology classrooms to build active, inquiry-driven learning opportunities so
that students can discover patterns on their own through exploration, analysis
and synthesis. This RCN-UBE project will bring together two communities critical
in expanding student access to authentic science experiences: managers of data
repositories and education specialists. Representatives from at least 15
organizations will participate in a two-day workshop to discuss strategies for
enhancing data discovery and usability, to propose standards for data sharing,
and to make recommendations for incorporating authentic data in inquiry-based
teaching in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
meeting will bring together education and technical leaders from participating
projects to 1) explore opportunities and solutions for integrated data-sharing
and accessibility solutions among projects, and 2) explore common education and
outreach goals to maximize the impact of each project through collaboration.
Participating projects represent leaders in biological database management,
structure, and sharing, and leaders in promoting authentic scientific
exploration opportunities in undergraduate biology classrooms. At the proposed
meeting these groups will tackle the following specific questions. 1) What
challenges are associated with data sharing across biological databases? 2) What
are potential and practical solutions to enable data sharing across databases?
3) How can datasets be enhanced to facilitate their discovery and usability in
educational contexts? 4) How can education organizations best share practices
and experiences to enable authentic inquiry and enhance their
effectiveness?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed meeting will
bring together communities critical to enhancing the accessibility and use of
real data in undergraduate biology education. At the conclusion of this meeting
a set of recommendations will be published online for community feedback, then
compiled as a published resource for data management and education communities.
Other outcomes include a coordinated network to continue exploring solutions for
improved accessibility of real data in education, data sharing across
organizations, further publications reflecting resolutions reached by
participants, and research on automated solutions for sharing
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts towards
support of Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.