* 1247396
* INSPIRE:   Executive Function and Conceptual Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Susan Carey, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2017
* USD 799,862.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Developmental and Learning
Sciences Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, and by the Research
and Evaluation on Education in Science and Engineering Program in the Division
of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal Settings in the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources.

This project explores the effects of Executive Function on the child's
developing understanding of biology and mathematics. Executive Function refers
to a suite of mechanisms that underlie flexible thinking and higher-order
cognition. Among these functions are Working Memory, the ability to hold
information in memory and actively manipulate it (for example, to listen to a
string of words and then say them out loud in backwards order); Inhibition, the
ability to suppress a strong and well-learned response in favor of a weaker or
novel response (for example, in a game where you must say "moon" when presented
with a drawing of the sun, and "sun" when presented with a drawing of the moon);
and Set shifting, the ability to switch from one task goal to another (for
example, to sort a deck of pictures one way (say, by shape), and then another
(say, by color). Recent findings suggest that Executive Function tests strongly
predict children's success in school in every year from kindergarten through
high school, but researchers still don't know why. Using newly developed methods
of manipulating the individual child's available Executive Function resources
over brief durations (either increasing or decreasing the available capacity),
the investigators will measure the effects of these manipulations on performance
in biological and mathematical reasoning. The researchers will examine EF's
effect on two independent abilities: first, the ability to express knowledge one
already has; and second, the very ability to learn a theory to begin with; that
is, the ability to undergo conceptual change.

Research in education, developmental psychology, and neuroscience have all
converged on the importance of Executive Function in learning and reasoning.
Specifying just how these mechanisms influence conceptual change, how they allow
learning to take place, could prove transformative to both cognitive development
and math/science education. Moreover, this research could have far-reaching
importance to populations with particularly weak EF: children with ADHD (a
population included in the present project), poor children, the elderly,
patients with Alzheimer's disease, and many others. The relationship between EF
and conceptual change appears to be powerful. The goal of this investigation is
to begin to discover why.