* 1247357
* EAGER: Bridging Campus Resources via GENI and OpenFlow
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Mario Gerla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 03/31/2016
* USD 309,578.00

This Project establishes a live OpenFlow (OF) test bed on the UCLA campus, which
researchers in different disciplines will use to run experiments requiring high
volume data exchange, intense processing, and/or seamless mobility as a
production level service on the campus network. UCLA will link the campus OF
network to national OF fabrics via the regional CENIC OF network. This pilot
deployment will support four key applications from the domains of eScience, GENI
and smart transportation, health care, and manufacturing. The campus
implementation support the above applications will consist of a 10Gbps OF-
enabled hub switch connected to CENIC and multiple second-tier OF switches
associated with the four projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although software-
defined networking (SDN) technologies are currently being widely discussed and
are key elements in the GENI architecture, there is little operational or
campus-level architectural experience with using them. The project will explore
the issues associated with deploying SDNs and connecting them to real-time
information sources. The work will rework current UCLA network engineering
practice where extensive hardware reconfiguration is required to support the
sophisticated processing and efficient storage of data by several of the
research centers. Flexible reconfiguration is a new paradigm for campus
networks. The PIs will report on their experience in technical papers. Travel
budget is included for presentation of findings at the GENI Engineering
Conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide an opportunity to gain experience with architectural,
deployment, administrative and operational issues of OpenFlow in campus networks
and will disseminate the findings via GENI Engineering Conferences. The project
will provide opportunities for undergraduate students to work with advanced
networking technologies. Societal impacts outside of the campus will include the
work on vehicular traffic monitoring, health monitoring for mobile patients and
support for improved manufacturing practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;