* 1247518
* Collaborative Research:  POLENET-Antarctica: Investigating Links  Between Geodynamics and Ice Sheets - Phase 2
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Robert Smalley, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 266,768.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to continue and expand GPS and
seismic for ANET-POLENET Phase 2 to advance understanding of geodynamic
processes and their influence on the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. ANET-POLENET
science themes include: 1) determining ice mass change since the last glacial
maximum, including modern ice mass balance; 2) solid earth influence on ice
sheet dynamics; and 3) tectonic evolution of West Antarctica and feedbacks with
ice sheet evolution. Nine new remote continuous GPS stations, to be deployed in
collaboration with U.K. and Italian partners, will augment ANET-POLENET
instrumentation deployed during Phase 1. Siting is designed to better constrain
uplift centers predicted by GIA models and indicated by Phase 1 results. ANET-
POLENET Phase 2 builds on Phase 1 scientific, technological, and logistical
achievements including 1) seismic images of crust and mantle structure that
resolve the highly heterogeneous thermal and viscosity structure of the
Antarctic lithosphere and underlying mantle; 2) newly identified intraplate
glacial, volcanic, and tectonic seismogenic processes; 3) improved estimates of
intraplate vertical and horizontal crustal motions and refinement of the
Antarctic GPS reference frame; and 4) elucidation of controls on glacial
isostatic adjustment-induced crustal motions due to laterally varying earth
structure. The PIs present a nominal plan to reduce ANET by approximately half
to a longer-term community "backbone network" in the final 2 years of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Monitoring and
understanding mass change and dynamic behavior of the Antarctic ice sheet using
in situ GPS and seismological studies will help improve understanding of how
Antarctic ice sheets respond to a warming world and how will this response
impacts sea-level and other global changes. Seismic and geodetic data collected
by the backbone ANET-POLENET network are openly available to the scientific
community. ANET-POLENET is integral in the development and realization of
technological and logistical innovations for year-round operation of
instrumentation at remote polar sites, helping to advance scientifically and
geographically broad studies of the polar regions. The ANET-POLENET team will
establish a training initiative to mentor young polar scientists in complex,
multidisciplinary and internationally collaborative research. ANET-POLENET will
continue the broad public outreach to the public about polar science through the
polenet.org website, university lectures, and K-12 school visits. This research
involves multiple international partners.