* 1248362
* SBIR Phase I:  Preclinical Development and Mechanical Testing of a Load Transfer Implant (LTI) for Knee Joint Arthroplasty
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jessee Hunt, 4-Web Spine Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase I project is focused on a novel knee
replacement technology that employs leading edge manufacturing processes that
enable production of unique device structures designed to improve bone-device
interaction and eliminate the need for revision procedures. This technology
utilizes engineering principles such as load transfer and truss design to
improve bone integration with a Total Knee Replacement (TKR) implant. Additive
layer manufacturing technology, or computer aided fused titanium rapid
prototyping, can be used to produce an innovative TKR implant that incorporates
innovative web truss geometries for the bone interface component. It is
anticipated that the web structure will provide improved initial fixation,
reduce micro motion, and eliminate aseptic loosening. This project is designed
to further optimize and measure the operating parameters and durability of the
device through mechanical testing outlined in the FDA'S Guidance Document for
TKR implants. Experiments will include fatigue testing, constraint testing,
contact area testing, kinematic modeling and fixation testing. It is anticipated
that this device design will represent a significant advancement in knee
replacement technology that is substantially more stable and resistant to
failure as compared to existing devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project are evident in that Knee Arthritis
is a debilitating condition that leads to over 600,000 TKR?s per year. The TKR
currently represents approximately 8% of all Medicare spending. Total hospital
charges for this procedure are expected to approach $40 billion by 2012.
Revision rates for TKR's are significant; 10% at 10 years and 20% at 20 years.
Moreover, with an aging population, the number of TKR's and revisions is
steadily increasing; of which, a majority will be completed under Medicare
coverage. This project will accelerate production of an innovative device that
employs state-of-the-art manufacturing processes and structural engineering
design principles to substantially improve the bone/TKR implant interface. The
design of the device has been optimized to address the problems associated with
initial and long-term fixation and could thereby reduce or eliminate the need
for revision procedures. This would benefit the healthcare economy and the
quality of life for those that require knee replacement therapy. Furthermore,
this project is part of an educational initiative that includes researchers at
Texas A&amp;M University that are employing this technology in providing unique
educational experiences for graduate students in advancing engineering
principles in medical device design.