* 1248945
* An Effective and Time-efficient Approach to Solving Linear Discrete Optimization Problems using Discretized Network Flow
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Shantanu Dutt, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

Discrete optimization finds widespread use in almost all areas of human endeavor
ranging from science to technology to business, and encompassing diverse
applications such as chip design, power system design, robotics, bioinformatics,
transportation, financial computing and industrial engineering. However,
currently there is no general discrete optimization solver that can solve hard
problems near-optimally in tractable runtimes (fast to moderate runtimes). To
rectify this, this project will explore developing novel and efficient
techniques for solving the class of 0/1 integer linear programming (ILP)
problems that can be used to model a wide range of discrete optimization
problems (DOPs). The approach used for this purpose is a solution technique
termed discretized network flow (DNF), in which classical network flow (that
solves a class of continuous linear programming problems), is constrained by
special discrete requirements on the flow to yield valid solutions to 0/1
ILPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful completion of this project will yield
algorithms and a software tool for solving large 0/1 ILP problems near-optimally
and much faster than current techniques. This will represent a significant
advance in the state-of-the-art of such solvers, and can be used to solve large
DOPs more accurately and faster in many application areas ranging from genomics
to chip design to robotics. This can help in answering fundamental issues in
these application areas that have not been attempted so far, and also lead to
better products and services in these areas. For example, in the area of chip
design, the use of our solver can lead to much lower power and higher quality
chips (e.g., with good performance and reliability) than are possible with
current CAD tools, and thereby result in better and greener electronic products
in several consumer and commercial application areas.