* 1248379
* SBIR Phase I:  All Solid-State Lithium Battery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Brian Larsen, Solid Power, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,978.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will further
develop an all solid state lithium battery comprised of a sulfur-based solid-
state electrolyte, a high capacity nanostructured cathode and a metal lithium
alloy anode. The proposed program is based on research performed at the
University of Colorado at Boulder where preliminary stable cycling of this
lithium-ion system has been demonstrated. The proposed technology addresses the
stability issues experienced by previous efforts in utilizing a lithium metal
anode in combination with conventional liquid electrolytes. Further, the
proposed technology also addresses the conductivity and rate capability issues
experienced by previous effort in utilizing a lithium metal anode in combination
with a solid-state electrolyte. Thus if successful, the proposed technology will
result in ultra high energy batteries with specific energy and power at or above
600 Wh/kg and 1 kW/kg, respectively. Further, the proposed technology also
eliminates all safety concerns associated with conventional lithium-ion
batteries due to the inherent safety and stability characteristics of solid-
state electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is considerable as virtually all battery powered products in the
commercial and military marketplace share the need for greater energy per unit
mass and/or volume. If successful, it is anticipated that the proposed
technology will result in lithium-metal batteries having specific energy and
power greater than or equal to 600 Wh/kg and 1 kW/kg, respectively (note:
specific energy and power for current state-of-the-art lithium-ion batteries:
200 Wh/kg and 1 kW/kg, respectively). Further, the use of a solid-state
electrolyte-based lithium-ion system gives rise to vastly improved safety,
reduced system complexity and cost (by eliminating or minimizing safety
electronics and some packaging), improved cycling stability and excellent shelf
life as compared to conventional technologies. Thus if proven technically and
commercially viable, the proposed technology could have considerable commercial
impact within the multi-billion dollar annual rechargeable battery market.
Potential product applications include electric vehicles, consumer electronics
(cell phones, computers, etc.), aircraft and aviation and military power among
several others.