* 1248873
* SBIR Phase I:  Widefield 3D Superresolution Microscopy Module
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Ginni Grover, Double Helix Optics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project
investigates the feasibility of a ground-breaking three-dimensional (3D) optical
microscope with single-molecule sensitivity suitable for live cell studies and
nanometer scale sensing. Several methods have recently shown resolution well
beyond the optical diffraction limit, which restricts imaging to features larger
than about 200 and 500 nm in the transverse and axial dimensions respectively.
To date, these super-resolution techniques have been demonstrated in specialized
labs but new developments are required to reach the fundamental limits on a
regular basis at the typical biology lab. Therefore, this project focuses on
fundamental technological developments to address the upcoming need for
pervasive 3D superresolution single-molecule capabitlities. The instrument is
based on a joint design of the illumination, optical response, data collection
approach, and reconstruction algorithms for fluorescence imaging. The instrument
makes use of tailored point spread functions that enable the determination of
the 3D position of emitters with great precision, leading to better resolution
and depth of field than competing methods. Preliminary laboratory experiments
have shown 3D capability with resolutions below 20nm, which corresponds to one
order of magnitude enhancement over most optical microscopes presently in use.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses a major
opportunity in an expanding biological instrumentation market. If successful, it
will enable 3D superresolution imaging capability to many biological
laboratories currently limited by past technologies. The feasibility plan opens
up opportunities for an accelerated commercialization path by implementing a
cost-effective flexible solution compatible with existing microscopes. The
extensive availability of superresolution imaging will impact several fields of
science and engineering including 3D biophysical and biomedical optical imaging.
During the project the company will generate synergistic relationships to
rapidly transfer the technology into applications. The company has established
partnerships for testing the instrument in significant biological problems that
are expected to contribute to a better understanding of diseases. From a broader
perspective, this project will increase scientific technical capabilities by
providing nanoscale optical imaging for everyday biological research, thereby
strengthening US presence in the worldwide optical microscopy industry.