* 1248895
* SBIR Phase I:  New and Improved Zinc-Air Battery System and Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Igor Barsukov, American Energy Technologies Company
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,970.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a series of
primary and rechargeable Zinc-Air batteries of new generation. Individual cells
will use a new and improved interior design, as well as will incorporate in
their composition a host of novel materials and innovative technological
solutions. A complete revision of the bill of materials for the battery is
planned. The latter will seek to enhance practical Specific Energy of cells,
dramatically boosting operational service life, increasing rate capability,
preventing in-cell gassing due to corrosion of the anode, and making cells that
can better resist the effects of humidity. New product concepts shall be
assembled into three standard cell sizes (e.g. LR2450, AA and D) of uniquely
modified interior design, and tested against their reference counterparts, so as
to conclude on their performance advantages, and to establish grounds for
prototyping and commercialization. The ultimate goal is to build cells that will
demonstrate Specific Energy of 550+Wh/kg (achieving this value would put this
technology at 25% improvement over industry leading
brands).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to commercialize new and improved Zinc-Air Batteries and cells. They
hold a tremendous potential for successful adoption by the market. The projected
demand is driven by a number of factors, with the major one being a substantial
installed base currently populated by the conventional Zinc-Air batteries. The
latter is the technology of choice in the hearing aid medical devices. Driven by
the aging population in the developed countries, the adoption of hearing aid
devices is due to increase at a rate, which is forecasted to drive the market
for Zinc-Air systems to $400M worldwide by 2017. Also, Zinc-Airs will continue
to be used in some niches with the military. Three other lucrative opportunities
identified for the specific battery is in the energy storage for utilities,
unattended RFIDs, autonomous health monitoring systems and stationary power
supplies.