* 1248121
* RCN-UBE:   Northwest Biosciences Consortium (NWBC): Implementation of Vision and Change in the Introductory Biology Curriculum
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Stasinos Stavrianeas, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 499,025.00

This project is developing a Northwest Biosciences Consortium (NWBC), a
community of biology faculty of all ranks, diverse pedagogical experiences and
scientific training who adopt a "bottom-up" approach to the Vision and Change: A
Call to Action initiative. We are creating a series of learning outcomes and
customizable modules that can be incorporated into any first-year or
introductory biology sequence that reflects our commitment to scientific
literacy for majors and non-majors alike. We are especially interested in
developing course descriptions to facilitate curriculum design and student
transition, especially from the 2-year to 4-year institutions. The NWBC also
fosters professional development, provides support, promotes dissemination, and
facilitates curricular reforms at our institutions. The development of a
comprehensive framework to advance evidence-based STEM pedagogies for all
students, and the attention to faculty mentoring and support are the hallmarks
of this proposal. The development of commonly used (and evidenced-based)
instructional strategies based on the Vision and Change core concepts and
competencies will facilitate discussions on curriculum development and credit
transfers at institutions in our region and beyond. This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part
of their efforts towards support of Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education.