* 1248127
* Solar Wind and Illumination Control of Plasma Irregularity Production in the Polar Cap
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Roman Makarevich, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 238,233.00

This project seeks to improve our understanding of ionospheric irregularities,
building on recent work at high southern latitudes that demonstrated a clear
connection between the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) and irregularity
production in the auroral E-region. The fundamental issue to be addressed is
solar control of irregularity production via indirect IMF effects versus direct
effects of solar-induced ionization. This study will focus on evaluating the
extent of IMF control of small-scale irregularities and the relationship to
other scales. The project will address the question of whether the presence of
the polar patches is a necessary condition for irregularity production, and
whether solar illumination suppresses or enhances irregularity generation.
Inter-hemispheric differences will be investigated to determine the relative
importance of solar wind drivers versus solar
ionization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier studies of small-scale plasma
irregularities have analyzed local observations using rockets and/or radio
techniques. This project will analyze irregularity production in the polar cap
in context of its global drivers focusing on observations from the first US
Antarctic HF (SuperDARN) radar at McMurdo, Antarctica and complementary
instrumentation. The polar cap ionosphere is directly connected to the solar
wind; hence, one can expect IMF effects on small-scale irregularity production
to be even more pronounced than in the previously studied auroral region. The
polar cap also has reasonably uniform solar ionization conditions near solstices
and sharp contrasts between seasons, so solar illumination effects can be
revealed more clearly. In addition, the polar cap appears to be especially rich
in irregularities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage data from
the NSF-funded Antarctic facilities, providing essential support for a newly-
established faculty researcher in the US, and expand a graduate student training
program in the geosciences area in Alaska.