* 1248442
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost, High-Power, Ultra-Low-Noise Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Paul Morton, Morton Photonics Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Program (SBIR) Phase I project will create a
semiconductor-based laser with high power and the ultimate in low-noise
performance besting all current semiconductor based lasers, and providing
equivalent or better noise performance than the best fiber and solid-state
lasers, which are more complex, less efficient, and much higher cost. The
program will take advantage of Quantum Dot (QD) and advanced Multiple-Quantum-
Well (MQW) active regions with novel device structures to create state-of-the-
art high power, low alpha-factor gain chips; integrated with an innovative fiber
Bragg grating (FBG) utilizing tailored dispersion characteristics to form an
external cavity laser (ECL) with excellent stability, high output power and
extremely low noise performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to significantly reduce the cost
of systems requiring a high power, low noise laser, in applications including
sensing, communications, imaging, and testing, promoting widespread deployments.
Applications include many sensing systems; in the energy sector sensing stress
in wind turbine blades and for safer oil and gas exploration, sensing harmful
gases or molecules, and sensing stress and crack formation in vital
infrastructure such as bridges, nuclear power stations, aircraft and ships.
Applications in optical communications include free space communications for
disaster recovery, advanced digital communication systems and back-hauling
analog signals from base stations for wireless mobile internet systems. There
are biophotonics applications for lasers at appropriate wavelengths to improve
medical imaging. This program will provide a step forward in fundamental laser
research, also providing a low-cost tool for spectroscopic experiments. The wide
range of applications provides for a significant improvement in the quality of
life, health, safety, and the environment for all US citizens. Producing the
laser at 1/10 the cost of alternate technologies will create a major disruption
in the market, taking market from existing products, and more importantly
dramatically expanding the market place for system level applications.