* 1248428
* SBIR Phase I:  A Collaborative Aerospace Vehicle Design Game in Support of Engineering Curricula for Grades 9-12
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Christopher Whitmer, VSI Aerospace, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 154,782.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the
development of the Design environment for Aerospace Vehicles in Classroom
Interaction (DAVinCI). DAVinCI is a collaborative, guided inquiry environment
and game targeted for grades 9-12. This concept will integrate aerospace vehicle
design and simulation tools with a design challenge-based game inspired by real
world engineering problems. The environment is intended to be a hybrid of self-
directed informal learning and software that can support in-class projects and
topics and/or be utilized by students outside of class. Students will be guided
through the required background in science, mathematics and engineering
principles and encouraged to explore and utilize these principles in vehicle
design. Engaging pre-college students with engineering design methodology is one
way to advance Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
education and increase the number of STEM college graduates. Aerospace vehicle
design in particular is a powerful, versatile exciting platform to expose
students to many facets of science and engineering, as it is truly a
multidisciplinary endeavor. The anticipated Phase I results are beta tests of a
proof-of-concept engineering design game containing a full chapter of content
and design challenges.

The broader impact and commercial potential of this project is a game that fills
a niche for Grade 9-12 for engineering education. There are a number of planned
avenues for initial commercialization, including sales to schools, parents, and
of auxiliary features such as expansion packs and hobby kits. Future commercial
opportunities will include stand-alone design-based games, design environments
for hobbyists, and model generation tools for flight simulators. Engineering
design promotes added interconnectivity and enrichment in STEM education.
Improved connection to practical applications could also improve student
performance in the sciences, technology, and mathematics. If successful, DAVinCI
would be an excellent way to inspire students to consider careers in the
sciences and engineering at formative points in their education. While there are
numerous commercial software products to assist with the learning and teaching
of science, technology, and mathematics, there are few products that attempt to
address engineering education, and even fewer that attempt to do so in a largely
informal manner that integrates game mechanics and design methodology. The tight
integration of the design and game environments maintains the engagement of
students to support classroom activities and continue reinforcement of concepts
outside of class.