* 1248815
* SBIR Phase I:  Computing-Assisted Zoning Optimization and Service
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Bonan Li, ZillionInfo
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 174,067.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to establish
the foundation for developing a computation-assisted redistricting product.
Redistricting or zoning is the process of dividing space into districts or zones
while optimizing a set of criteria under various spatial constraints.
Redistricting is an extremely challenging task that is commonly needed in many
real-world problems, such as political/school redistricting, emergency zone
design, service management, and business planning. Existing redistricting tools
in the commercial market all employ a manual approach, which relies on the user
to optimize various criteria in a trial-and-error manner. These manual tools are
ineffective and extremely time-consuming to use. This project will build a
prototype redistricting product based on a newly developed redistricting
optimization algorithm and visual controls, which is much faster and more
superior in optimization quality than existing algorithms, and for the first
time offers the potential to meet end user requirements in an automated or semi-
automated manner. The proposed project will (1) design a flexible architecture
to systematically integrate a variety of optimization criteria in the new
algorithm to address different needs; (2) significantly improve the
computational scalability for handling large data set; and (3) evaluate the
prototype product with real-world applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it could
fundamentally change the way redistricting is performed in practice. Existing
automated redistricting methods reported in academia do not meet practical
needs, which is the reason that there is no product in the market that employs
automated methods. With existing commercial tools, which are based on a manual
approach, completing a redistricting task usually requires one or more full-time
technicians working for months at a time. With the product being created from
this project, even a non-technical user may generate a professional plan within
minutes. Potential clients include governments (cities and counties), school
districts, consulting firms who provide redistricting services, private
businesses that need to optimize service delivery, and even general citizens who
are interested in participating in redistricting decision making. The product
targets the U.S. and international market, including both public and private
sectors.