* 1248056
* INSPIRE: Signals to Symbols: From Bio-inspired Hardware to Cognitive Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Shihab Shamma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2015
* USD 619,200.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Science of Learning Centers
Program in the Division of Behavioral, Cognitive and Social Sciences in the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences; the Perception,
Action, and Cognition Program in the Division of Behavioral, Cognitive and
Social Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences;
the Energy, Power, and Adaptive Systems Program in the Division of Electrical
Communication and Cyber Systems in the Directorate of Engineering; and the
Applied Mathematics and Mathematical Biology Program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
This research project draws on knowledge from many disciplines (neuroscience,
cognitive science, computational science, mathematics and engineering) to create
cognitive systems capable of interpreting observed, complex human movements and
actions. New design methodologies will be developed for the integration of
sensory modalities (vision, audition, touch) and their support of higher
cognitive function (language, reasoning). In contrast to existing approaches
which tend to be assemblies of modular components each solving its task in
isolation, this team takes a novel approach called Active Cognition which has
the following features: 1) Instead of modeling the different perceptual
processes (vision, audition, and haptics), cognition, and motor control in
isolation, the modules are integrated and capabilities co-developed in the
tradition of dynamical systems theory to obtain a reasoning system where "the
whole is greater than the sum of its parts"; 2) instead of segregating the low
level processing of signals from the processing of higher level symbolic
information, they will interact in a continuous dialogue, such that high level
knowledge will leverage perception; and 3) instead of separating physical
embodiment from algorithmic considerations, biologically inspired real-time
hardware will be developed that implements complex functions by integrating
signals and symbols. The project is organized in two working groups. The first
group will develop a cognitive robot that can recognize complex human activities
using visual and auditory signals captured by biological-inspired hardware. The
second group will study attention in humans by measuring human response to
audition and vision through EEG and MEG, and subsequently implementing the
findings in robots. A yearly three-week, hands-on workshop will educate
students, serve as testing ground for the team's ideas, and stimulate new
collaborations. This workshop will also engage the involvement of the
interdisciplinary research community that has formed around the goal of building
biologically inspired cognitive systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in
integrating different components of a cognitive system (hardware, sensors, and
software) has the potential to catalyze a new industry of biologically-inspired
cognitive systems, including household and service robots, and systems for
intelligent transportation and smart manufacturing. In addition, this
interdisciplinary project will play a significant role in building capacity for
a new emphasis area in engineering and training of cognitive systems engineers
who need combined expertise in computer science, electrical engineering and
cognitive neuroscience.