* 1248744
* SBIR Phase I:  3D Correlative CT/XRF Microscopy with Sub-micron Resolution and PPM Elemental Sensitivity
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Michael Feser, Xradia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project aims at
developing the technology for a correlative x-ray imaging and analytical
microscope that is able to produce 3-dimensional images with sub-micrometer
resolution of samples and subsequently probe points or areas of this volume
selectively for elemental (chemical) information. While commercial solutions
(x-ray micro-tomography) already exist to obtain the high resolution 3-D images,
these images only show a grey-scale mass density representation of the sample.
No information about which compounds and elements the sample is made out of is
available. The research focuses on demonstrating the ability to add an x-ray
fluorescence capability to the x-ray imaging to unambiguously identify the
elemental makeup with very high ultimate sensitivity (parts per million) with a
focus on correlating exactly the elemental measurement with the location in the
3-D x-ray image of the sample. There is a growing need for this complementary
capability both in the academic research area and in industrial use for targeted
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to enable the development of more energy efficient
and environmentally friendly extraction and processing techniques for the
natural resource sector. The first set of customers, directly contributing to
the research by providing relevant samples and helping in defining the ultimate
system requirements and specifications, come from the mining R&amp;D and
industrial market segment. These customers have adopted high-resolution x-ray
imaging very rapidly in the past few years, realizing the inherent advantage of
imaging ore samples at various stages during the process of extracting and
purifying the valuables. While this capability is already helping to develop
better, more efficient extraction processes, an analytical capability to get
elemental and chemical information is becoming essential for continued progress.
Obvious benefits from the availability of the new technology will be energy
savings in the extraction processes by increasing efficiency and better use of
available resources by not allowing valuables to enter the waste stream. As an
indirect consequence, this leads long term to lower commodity prices and a
general higher living standard. But the relevance of the research extends much
further into areas of life science, material science and all areas requiring
imaging and analytical capabilities.