* 1248736
* SBIR Phase I:  GraphSQL: Powering Relational DBMS with Fast and Easy-to-Use Graph Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Ruoming Jin, GraphSQL INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,993.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
novel technologies and a software system which adds fast, and easy-to-use graph
analytics to the relational database system (RDBMS). Querying and analyzing
massive graph data (graph analytics) not only can enrich and enhance business,
social and government intelligence, but also can help significantly advance
scientific and technology discovery. However, most of the existing graph data
(business, financial, governmental, and social networking data) are stored in
the traditional RDBMS that provides little fundamental support for graph
analytics. This is because graph analytics requires extensive recursive and
traversal operations, which are hard to represent and prohibitively expensive to
execute in RDBMS. To address this fundamental challenge, this project will
develop a powerful graph engine and transparently connect RDBMS with the graph
engine. The anticipated results of the project include novel techniques for
building a graph processing engine and connectors between RDBMS and the graph
engine, and a beta-version software system, which will be tested and employed by
two or three early adopters/customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be to help deliver better
insights into the complex nature of relationships between people, their
decisions and their interactions with others in all areas of businesses and
intelligence, such as online social networking, marketing and advertisement,
banking and finance, logistics and transportation, telecommunications,
healthcare and hospitals, homeland security, bio-engineering and drug discovery,
etc. The technologies and software developed in this project can also directly
contribute to the five major analytics segments (end-user query and reporting
analysis, data warehouse management, financial performance and strategy
management applications, custom relationship analytics applications, and data
warehouse generation), each with the global revenue of more than one billion
dollars.