* 1248962
* SBIR Phase I:  Self Aligned Hydrogenated Selective Emitter for N-Type Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Douglas Hutchings, Silicon Solar Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project provides the lowest cost
selective emitter (SE) for solar photovoltaics and will help lower costs towards
grid parity. Selective emitter technology for solar cells has so far involved
complex processes with at least two or more steps in addition to a standard
solar cell process flow. Current SE processes also require increasing the number
of grid lines on the front of the solar cell which results in light being
blocked. The proposed self-aligned selective emitter (HSE) process represents
the simplest, one-step approach to creating a selective emitter for n-type wafer
based solar cells. This will be a high throughput process with a cost of less
than $0.01/Wp. Efficiency increases in excess of 1% absolute are achievable
unlike other selective emitter technologies which are limited to about 0.6%
absolute efficiency increases.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project has global, national,
and local significance. The price of solar modules has decreased drastically
over the past several years in response to technological improvements,
manufacturing efficiencies and innovative balance-of-systems approaches. This in
turn has created exponential market demand. As the price continues to drop, each
incremental cost savings becomes more challenging. The proposed technology
provides an elegant solution to reducing the cost of solar and is easy to
implement for existing manufacturing lines. The production of HSE equipment
would help domestic solar PV producers reach grid parity in additional markets.
In the local community, an additional job will be created, and an undergraduate
and four graduate students will be exposed to entrepreneurship,
commercialization of federally funded research and cutting edge energy research.
Additionally, collaboration with university professors will strengthen the ties
to the surrounding community and help foster discussions about commercialization
of academic research. Publications will be used to rapidly disseminate the
results of this work and foster a deeper understanding of selective emitters and
their role in photovoltaics.