* 1248388
* EAGER: A System Identification Based Metabolic Flux Analysis and its Application to Production of Advanced Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Jin Wang, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 117,049.00

1248388&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the availability of the genome-
scale metabolic network models, computational procedures that identify mutant
strains for over production of biofuels and other valuable chemicals are widely
in use. However, there is a significant gap between the complicated results
generated from large-scale computational models and biologically meaningful
knowledge that can be easily appreciated and directly utilized by biologists.
Such a gap limits the potential impact of genome-scale models on metabolic
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will advance the state-of-
the-art in systems metabolic engineering through the development of a new
systems identification based metabolic flux analysis tool. Such a tool will not
only enable us to bridge the aforementioned gap, but also help infer cellular
regulatory mechanisms. It is worth noting that although system identification is
a well-established field and has been widely used in many areas, its proposed
application to metabolic engineering is the first due to the lack of quality
data required by the system identification tools. By combining the specially
designed in silico perturbation experiments with system identification tools,
biologically meaningful information contained in the complex network structure
will be extracted and presented in the form that is easily interpretable by
biologists. The proposed approach will be validated using E. coli and S.
cerevisiae as the model systems with the focus on the production of advanced
biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will be the first to extend
the system identification techniques to study genome-scale metabolic networks.
The extracted biological information will not only provide insights on cellular
regulatory mechanism, but also enable the validation of metabolic network models
using existing biological knowledge that are often qualitative in nature. By
validating the proposed approach with E. coli and S. cerevisiae on advanced
biofuels production, valuable knowledge on how mutant strains regulate their
cellular metabolism will be obtained and will serve as part of the foundation
for a future regular proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach can be
applied to study cellular metabolism of various microorganisms as well as other
living cells, such as cancer cells, as long as their metabolic network models
are available. The discovered knowledge on cellular regulation mechanisms will
have significant impact on metabolic engineering, advanced biofuels, applied
microbiology, drug discovery and other areas. In addition, the basic idea of the
proposed approach can be extended to study other cellular networks, such as gene
regulatory networks and signal transduction networks, to extract valuable
information from massive amount of data generated through in silico experiments.