* 1248553
* Melting Temperatures of Iron and MgO Using a New Flash Laser Heating Technique
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Guoyin Shen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 360,482.00

One of the major constraints on the temperature at the center of the Earth is
the melting temperature of iron at the pressure conditions of the inner core
boundary (ICB) (330 GPa, or 3.3 Mbar). Despite intensive research in this field
over the last two decades, the data available from shock compression and laser-
heated diamond cell experiments and from theory show considerable disagreement
ranging from 4800 K to 7600 K for the ICB. Similarly ill constrained is the
melting behavior of the lower mantle where one of its main components (Mg,Fe)O
plays a key role for the upper bound of the melting temperature and the chemical
composition of a possible partial melt. We have developed new techniques to
improve the accuracy in melting experiments by combining pulsed laser-heating
techniques in the diamond cell, recently developed in our laboratory, with new
X-ray diffraction techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A more accurate knowledge of
the temperature of the Earth's interior will have a profound impact on all
geophysical research related to mantle geodynamics, thermal history models of
the Earth, heat flux and radioactivity in the core and will put constraints on
poorly known quantities such as thermal conductivity, viscosity and melting of
the lowermost mantle. The technical improvements will provide new opportunities
to research other physical and chemical processes in extreme environments. The
development of new laser heating and synchrotron X-ray techniques will not only
enlarge the scientific community in geophysics and geochemistry, but also in
material science. In-situ structural and chemical analysis of matter at extreme
high pressure and temperature conditions is essential for the scientific
progress in these fields. Our work will help to reduce many of the previous
technical problems and make these methods more easily accessible.