* 1248972
* SBIR Phase I:  New Low Cost and Large Scale Manufacturing of Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jacqueline Siy-Ronquillo, Navillum Nanotechnologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project describes development of
a manufacturing method for production of large-scale, consistently high-quality
and low-cost semiconductor nanocrystals, such as quantum dots. The unique size-
and shape-related properties of these materials make them useful for light
emission applications (including biological labeling and displays) or for light
harnessing applications (solar panels). Despite the great potential of
nanocrystal-based technologies, a major barrier is the production of high-
quality nanocrystals in commercially viable amounts at low cost. The proposed
research activities directly address these limitations through an innovative
patent-pending low-temperature wet chemical synthesis route. Compared to the
conventional high-temperature synthesis route, the advantage of this method is
that it can precisely control the size and shape of products - properties that
are necessary for successful incorporation of these products into end-user
applications. Additionally, this method circumvents scaling limitations of
conventional high-temperature synthesis routes. This Phase I funding focuses on
demonstrating scaled-up production of high-quality nanocrystals with consistent,
predictable properties using this low-temperature synthesis method.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it solves
several challenges currently hindering broader commercialization of
semiconductor nanocrystals worldwide. If successful, nanocrystals will be
produced in large quantities, inexpensively and uniformly, resulting in a
disruptive advance for existing markets and emerging applications. With greater
availability and affordability, nanocrystals can be more easily utilized for
energy efficient lighting and displays, improve color quality in displays
(laptops, tablets, cameras and mobile devices), increase efficiency of solar
panels, and penetrate more widely into applications in medical research,
diagnostics and treatment. Emerging applications include the use of
semiconductor nanocrystals for biofuel cells, lasers, fiber optics, electronics,
security and surveillance, aviation and geothermal tracers. Given the immense
potential of these materials in diverse market segments, the results from this
effort can catalyze broader commercialization of these materials by removing the
barriers to manufacturing. This research will also give a greater insight into
the basic behavior of nanocrystals and into their formation and growth, issues
which are essential for the design and incorporation of these materials into
specific applications.