* 1248768
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantifying Consumer Rationale Expressed in Free Text Online Discussions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Paul Nemirovsky, dMetrics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at
developing a targeted semantic processing framework for the analysis of online
conversations. A particular focus is given to improving the state-of-the art in
the design of semi-supervised syntactic and semantic parsers capable of
processing informal conversations about consumer products and services across
industry verticals. This project will address some of the key shortcomings of
existing natural language processing (NLP) frameworks when applied to noisy
language typical of user-generated content, where linguistic phenomena is
significantly divergent from the carefully edited content such as news reports,
including colloquialisms, misspellings, grammatical errors, and incomplete
sentences. Given the wide proliferation, amount, and richness of available user-
generated content, combined with the limitations of the currently available
shallow textual representations, creation of better NLP models is critical for
extracting useful information from text that is largely informal, and for which
no annotated data is available. Successful completion of this work will fulfill
the urgent need for the development of NLP models accurate across multiple
domains, introduce novel information extraction models for the extraction of
consumer decisions, experiences, and rationale, while advancing our capability
to model, quantify, and understand the reasons underlying product adoption and
attrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project relates to the accuracy of automation that can be achieved when
analyzing large amounts of unstructured text. Millions of Americans use the
Internet to share, search and communicate information about products and
services. Whether considering a new product, relaying past product experience,
or analyzing product performance, consumers and companies alike are faced with
an overwhelming range of informational sources, making the process of gathering
information about products both slow and costly. Using in-depth text processing
technology to analyze product reports found across social networks, forums,
blogs, and company-driven websites will both increase the value of consumer-
driven product reports and improve companies' and regulators' ability to learn
from real-world product usage data to improve performance and public perception
of marketed products and services. If successful, this project will lead to
advancements in knowledge discovery, enable the automation of manual processes
associated with large-scale consumer studies and change the dominant
methodologies for conducting market research.