* 1248745
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost Scalable Manufacturing of Patterned Sapphire Substrates (PSS) for High Efficiency LEDs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Rajiv Singh, SINMAT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project deals with development
of a low-cost manufacturing process for high-efficiency patterned sapphire
substrates for cheaper and more energy-efficient light emitting diodes (LEDs).
Patterned sapphire substrates have been found to improve the quality of gallium
nitride epi-layers and enhance the light extraction efficiency of LED devices.
The project will focus on the development of a novel high-efficiency patterned
sapphire substrate by employing a unique planarization technology. Such a
substrate is expected to lead to improved film growth and enhanced light
extraction efficiency, while at the same time reducing manufacturing costs. The
feasibility of this technology will be demonstrated in Phase I, with Phase II
focused on scale-up and manufacturability issues for rapid commercialization of
this technology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lie in its ability to
increase the efficiency and reduce the cost of solid state lighting products.
LED-based solid state lighting devices, because of their potentially very high
efficiency, are expected to begin to supplant the inefficient incandescent and
fluorescent lamps which are dominant today. Lighting consumes over 20% of the
total electricity generated in the US and nearly 30% of electricity used in
commercial and residential buildings. The technology to be developed in this
project would increase the efficiency and reduce the price of high-brightness
LEDs, making them more competitive with fluorescent and incandescent lamps.
Finally, domestic manufacturing of low-cost patterned sapphire substrates will
result in the creation of high-paying manufacturing jobs in the US.