* 1248316
* SBIR Phase I:  Computer Aided Prognosis of Debilitating Disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Andrew Buckler, vascuVis Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project establishes the
feasibility of Computer Aided Prognosis of Debilitating Disease. Because disease
arises through a complex interaction of multiple molecular signals and pathways
often confounding the eventual effect, tools and approaches are needed to
identify key pathways that reflect the underlying pathological processes. While
both functional imaging modalities have recently emerged, the computational
tools that would allow for accurate analysis of these imaging modalities in
order to allow for prediction of therapy discovery, development, disease
stratification, and personalized medicine are sorely lacking. Previous
approaches rely on identifying one or a relatively small number of
distinguishing features hypothesized to be precursor to an acute event. CAP
seeks to build on this by providing functional characterization that extends the
static diagnostic categorization to prognosticate the likely future progression.
The research objective is to develop an integrated segmentation, registration,
and classification toolkit for prognosis prediction of vascular disease from
dynamic time-series imaging data. The goal of Phase I research is a software
endpoint. We demonstrate probable clinical utility by the successful extraction
of values that meet or exceed the manually produced preliminary studies when
assessed on the available animal and human data sets.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop methods
for identifying prognostic imaging signatures of disease aggressiveness and
predicting potential patient outcome so as to improve it. The task of
distinguishing which subtypes of vascular lesions will have favorable outcome as
opposed to unfavorable outcome requires sophisticated image analysis and
quantification and feature characterization algorithms to accentuate the subtle
imaging differences between these related pathologies. Scientific and
technological understanding of how dynamic aspects of disease progression may be
discerned from higher-order processing which optimizes information content from
imaging assays. This technology represents a cost effective, safe and capable
plaque assessment tool, so that patients could be treated more effectively,
sooner, and more appropriately. This project creates an end-user capable
prototype that may also be extended in preparing first a 510(k) and subsequently
a PMA application as a prognostic for individual patient management. vascuVis
will support the market initially by selling software licenses and later by
developing a pay per use business model. Commercially, over 20,000 MRI units
installed worldwide could benefit from this product. At $75K average pricing,
the opportunity is as high as $1.5B. The total accessible market for this
product could be as high as $1.5B.