* 1248385
* EAGER: MONITORING NATION'S WATERS - TOWARDS A SWIMMING BIOSENSOR TO DYNAMICALLY MAP MICROBIAL CONTAMINATION
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Vasile Nistor, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

1248385&lt;br/&gt;Yeghiazarian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About $20 billion per year of economic productivity is
lost in the U.S. alone due to illnesses caused by waterborne pathogens. Pathogen
detection in recreational and potable water sources remains a major challenge to
date. To prevent human exposure to pathogens, it is crucial to achieve realor
near-real time awareness of the microbial contamination status of surface
waters, i.e. when and where water is contaminated. To make a qualitative leap in
continuous and effective surface-water monitoring, there is urgent need for new
rapid laboratory-independent methods for monitoring and detection of waterborne
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term goal is the development of
autonomous hydrogel-based swimming biosensors to provide real- and near-real
time information on the microbial contamination status of surface waters. The
objective of this particular application, which is the next phase in attaining
the PI's long-term goal, is to develop a proof-of-concept device for microbial
water quality exploration, capable of swimming in open water and detecting
E.Coli, an important microorganism indicative of fecal contamination of surface
waters. The rationale for this work is that, once the technological base for
aquatic biosensors is developed, the continuous exploration of surface waters
and dynamic mapping of various water quality parameters will become possible,
which will lead, in turn, to a decrease in human exposure to waterborne
pathogens and increase in the security of homeland's water
supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim #1: Demonstrate Hydrogel Locomotion in
Unconstrained Aquatic Environment. Cylindrical hydrogels of various diameters
and lengths will be synthesized and immersed in water. A laser spotirradiation
will be used to induce photo-thermal volume phase transition in the hydrogel,
resulting in body shape changes necessary for swimming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim
#2: Demonstrate Capture of E.Coli in Unconstrained Aqueous Environment. The
hydrogels will be functionalized and exposed to E. Coli in an unconstrained
aqueous medium. Attachment of microorganisms to the hydrogels will be confirmed
with a microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim #3: Incorporate the Signal
Transduction Mechanism. The hydrogels will be functionalized to express
chromophore that fluoresces in the presence of E.Coli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach taken in this proposal is creative as it espouses state-of-the-art
methods from two different fields: Materials Science and Engineering provides
methodology for hydrogel synthesis and coupling of biorecognition and signal
transduction elements, while device mobility and control are implemented with
Robotic Technology. This approach is also original because no aquatic gel-based
pathogen biosensors currently exist. Finally, the project's deliverable is
poised to transform the way microbial surface water quality is monitored, and
paves the way to generating continuous real- or near real time information on
microbial surface water contamination. The proposed research is expected to
contribute a swimming biosensor for water exploration and microbial detection.
This contribution is significant because it will create the technological
platform to revolutionize the monitoring and management of surface water sources
for recreational and potable use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exposure to development of new technologies is vital in
shaping future careers of high-school and college students. We propose to engage
and educate graduate and undergraduate students, high school students and
teachers in the entire duration of the project. A partnership will be formed
with two UC programs (REU-Research Experience for Undergraduates, and STEP-
Science and Technology Enhancement Program). Through this partnership, 1 UC
graduate student (STEP Fellow), 2 undergraduate students and 2 high school
students will train and participate in research and product development in the
PI lab; and 2 high school teaching units will be developed in collaboration
between the PIs, STEP Fellows and high school teachers. These teaching units
will be incorporated into the STEM curriculum in at least one high school in
Cincinnati with a large underrepresented student body. In addition, STEP Fellows
will train as future faculty of STEM disciplines by integrating their education,
research, and career development. The schools are emphasizing STEM education,
and it is the goal of STEP to encourage and motivate students to pursue higher
education. A major long-term benefit to society from this project is the
reduction of human exposure to waterborne microbial contaminants, which will
increase the quality of life, reduce the economic burden of waterborne disease
and increase the security of homeland's water supply.