* 1248813
* SBIR Phase I:  Designing an Immune System Response Into High-Temperature Ceramic Matrix Composite Materials (CMC)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Joseph Pegna, Free Form Fibers L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is designed to evaluate
a novel interphase nanocoating designed for Silicon Carbide (SiC) fibers, which
is intended to behave as a biomimetic immune system for high-temperature Ceramic
Matrix Composites (CMCs) exposed to an oxidizing environment. High-temperature
CMCs must survive oxidative and thermomechanical requirements that even the most
advanced superalloys cannot withstand. Interphase coatings play a critical role
in achieving these objectives. Interphase coatings represent a tiny fraction of
the mass of a CMC, but are responsible for most of their outstanding properties.
The coatings isolate fibers from the matrix and from each other, control failure
mechanisms by regulating load transfer between fiber and matrix, and serve as an
Environmental Barrier Coating (EBC) to protect the load-bearing fibers. In
essence, an interphase coating is first and foremost a micromechanical system
engineered for failure mitigation, oxidation prevention, and a slight self-
healing. This Phase I effort aims to enhance these functions and add to them a
material "immune response" capable of local detection of oxygen intrusion,
followed by automatic compositional changes which resist further oxygen ingress,
and finally the creation of "scar tissue" that leaves the area more resistant to
future oxidation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will first be felt in
terms of enhanced safety and reliability of high-temperature Ceramic Matrix
Composite components used, for example, in jet engines, gas turbines, or nuclear
power plants. The proposed nanocoating technology is made possible by a new
fiber manufacturing platform technology, which allows a single process to
accomplish what currently requires two separate, very expensive, processes. The
cost of Silicon Carbide (SiC) fiber-reinforced CMCs can therefore be reduced
while delivering drastically improved quality. Indeed, the proposed technology
finally makes possible the introduction of affordable high-quality SiC fibers to
our target markets. These markets include military and aerospace (turbo
machinery, rockets, advanced structures), automobile, energy and other
industries that require advanced materials with exceptional strength, stiffness,
heat resistance, and/ or chemical resistance. SiC fibers alone, even without
considering this coating, represent a fast-growing market with great potential,
the collective size of which exceeds $2 billion. The technology enabling the
proposed interphase coating has an energy footprint that is 1/1000th that of
competing methods and which produces a fraction of the associated waste and
emissions as well. This provides a huge cost advantage as well as a dramatic
improvement in quality and performance.