* 1248614
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Thermal Interface Material for Cooling Medium and High Power Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Ewa Kirkor, Anchor Science LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2013
* USD 149,886.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project has the objective
of demonstrating thermal interface material (D-TIM paste) at least twice as
effective in use in packaging electronics with medium and high power loads as
prior material. A major focus is on enabling novel mode of heat transfer at the
walls of a thermal stack and within the thermal paste, while fulfilling other
technical requirements for a TIM, such as minimal thermal contact (interfacial)
resistance and compatible coefficient of thermal expansion. The TIM concept
investigated has a built-in performance enhancement as demands on the material
increase. Improved interfacial performance is the key to turning this
interesting and promising material into product of commercial value. The team
has scientific and business experience appropriate to the task; it has
identified measurement strategies and materials composition experiments likely
to lead to TIM with low contact thermal impedance. A balance of in-house
resources and out-sourcing ensures successful completion of the work. The work
builds on the body of work of the last two decades in nanocarbon composite
materials and exploitation of nonlinear responses of materials to selected
stimulae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the consequence of a breakthrough solution to fill the need for fast
thermal transport through thermal stacks for high speed, densely-packed, or high
power electronics. The results of this project will refine understanding and
performance of its proprietary materials to the point that commercialization
becomes feasible. This woman-owned company will supply unique thermal interface
products and license intellectual property for use in computing devices,
servers, telecommunications, motor control, and many diverse Industrial/military
applications such as semiconductor, energy conversion, transportation, chemical
manufacturing, and space satellite/probe thermal management. Improved heat
dissipation is of environmental significance, as better thermal performance
improves device lifetime, reduces material consumption, and allows greater
device speed for a fixed-size heat sink. Portable electronics reduces the need
to move materials or people between locations, thus reducing fuel consumption
and attendant pollution. The TIM is likely to be useful for stationary heat
transfer problems as well, such as solid state power supplies, fuel cells, power
inverters, thermo-electric coolers, and motors.