* 1248229
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering Bacteria for Low Cost Renewable Biochemical Production
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Ajikumar Parayil Kumaran, Manus Biosynthesis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a custom-
designed microbial biocatalyst for the renewable production of high value
terpenoid biochemicals. Terpenoid biochemicals derived from essential oils are
used in numerous consumer products and as food additives. Many of them
accumulate in nature in various stereo-isomeric forms, each of which possesses
unique properties and applications. These molecules are believed to function
principally in ecological roles, serving as herbivore-feeding deterrents,
antifungal defenses, and pollinator attractants. The research objective is to
develop a fermentation process for biosynthetic production allowing increased
adoption of such natural alternatives to synthetic chemicals. Multivariate-
Modular Metabolic engineering (MMME) approaches will be used to transfer the
natural biosynthetic pathway from the plant to a bacterial host and to optimize
the metabolic flux for the overproduction at a commercially viable level. A
high-productivity strain is anticipated, suitable for continued
commercialization efforts. Overall, this project, if successful, will provide a
new sustainable production route for these natural
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the development of a microbial process for the economic and
sustainable production of high value terpenoid biochemicals. These terpenoid
biochemicals have applications in a variety of industries ranging from agro-
chemicals, petro-chemicals and flavor and fragrance (F&amp;F) chemicals;
specifically they are commonly used as flavor agents, bio- herbicides, sprout
inhibitors and as bio-pest repellents. In all, the total potential addressable
markets exceed $3 Billion. Microbial production will benefit society by
improving the renewability of the production process and by relocating
production from overseas to the US. In summary, the development of microbes
capable of producing the target will enable sustainable production of the target
as well as create jobs in the US. This research will develop generalizable
microbial strain engineering techniques for the high-volume production of
natural products through a sustainable manufacturing process.