* 1248077
* INSPIRE:   Computer Learning of Dynamical Systems to Investigate Cognitive and Motivational Effects of Social Media Use on Political Participation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Nagler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,199,319.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by Human-Centered Computing Program and
by Social-Computational Systems Program both in the Division of Information and
Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer & Information Science &
Engineering, and by the Social Psychology Program in the Division of Behavioral
and Cognitive Sciences and the Political Science Program in the Division of
Social and Economic Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences.

With regards to intellectual merit, the goal of this project is to forge an
interdisciplinary collaboration that examines the impact of social media on
political behavior. First, from social psychology and political science,
fundamental hypotheses will be developed about how, why and when social media
affects citizens' cognition and motivation with respect to political
participation. Second, these questions will be expressed as testable hypotheses
derived from behavioral models. And third, drawing from biology and computer
science, the project adapts sophisticated computational methods of approximate
inference and machine learning (adapting methods developed for the analysis of
Systems Biology data) to evaluate the behavioral models using extremely large
social media and social network datasets.

The scientific opportunities afforded by the use of social media are readily
apparent when we consider the richness and precision of data on participation in
elections, protests, riots, and other spontaneous political events. This project
will construct a comprehensive data set of incoming and outgoing social media
messages messages using systematically structure formats that are ideally suited
to machine learning methods, and this information will be integrated with
information on social network connectivity and a vast array of metadata on
individuals and their social contacts. By developing new methods to harvest and
combine these data sources effectively, it will be possible to transform the
scientific study of social and political attitudes and behavior. Every time
individuals use social media, they leave behind a digital footprint of what was
communicated, when it was communicated, and, to whom it was communicated.
Typically, such precise estimates of these variables are available only to
laboratory investigators working in artificial settings. No previous study has
successfully used fine-grained social influence data such as these to predict
consequential behavioral outcomes, such as attendance at a given protest or
rally. The structure of the data means that we will have panel data on
respondents, many of potentially long duration. In addition, the investigators
will conduct a panel survey, which is essential for drawing causal inferences
about the cognitive and motivational processes whereby social media use
facilitates political participation.

With regards to broader impacts, this research will enhance interdisciplinary
training for graduate and undergraduate students. These include students in
psychology, political science, computer science, and biology and also includes
students from groups that are underrepresented in these sciences. In addition,
opportunities will be provided for high school students to become involved in
the research process. The research program will foster broad dissemination of
scientific understanding by leveraging past experience of the principal
investigators with disseminating large code-bases, data-bases, and data-sets to
share work with other scientists (pre-publication). Finally, the researchers are
committed to making their research available to the general public and have
extensive experience doing so.