* 1248097
* Cosmological Research with the 10-meter South Pole Telescope
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2019
* John Carlstrom, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 12/31/2019
* USD 14,820,213.00

An overarching goal of this award is to continue astrophysical observations with
the 10-meter South Pole Radio Telescope (SPT), as well as to support cutting-
edge scientific discoveries and research analyses of telescope's data. The SPT
research program for the next five years consists of three major parts: (1) the
continued scientific analysis of, and public release of data products from, the
recently completed 2500 sq. deg. Sunyaev-Zeldovich CMB survey; (2) three years
of CMB observations with the recently deployed polarization sensitive camera,
SPT-POL, including analysis and public release of data; and (3) the development
and deployment of, and two years of observation with the new camera SPT-3G that,
through a major upgrade to the SPT optics and a multi-chroic polarization-
sensitive 15,234 detectors, will provide over an order of magnitude increase in
the sky mapping speed. The data from each stage of this observation program will
be used to improve tests of cosmological models and the framework of General
Relativity, place increasingly precise constraints on the parameters describing
the early Universe and the neutrino sector, map large-scale structure,
characterize reionization, and provide catalogs of massive galaxy clusters,
high-redshift lensed galaxies, and other sources. This range of science
addresses some of the most compelling questions in cosmology and physics that
have been the focus of several national reports. In particular, the 2010
Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics Decadal Survey recommended the development of new
instrumentation and observations to explore the CMB polarization. Through
publications and data releases, the results of this ambitious program of
technical development and scientific research will be shared with the community.
The proposed activities contribute to the training of the next generation of
scientists by integrating graduate and undergraduate education with technology
development, astronomical observations, and scientific analyses. Research and
education are also integrated by bringing research activities into the
undergraduate classroom. The sharing of forefront research with non-scientists
is extended beyond the university through a well-established educational network
that reaches a wide audience at all levels of the educational continuum. Through
museum partnerships and new media, the SPT outreach and educational efforts will
reach large numbers of individuals while personalizing the experience.