* 1248651
* SBIR Phase I:  Universal Tagging and Collaboration System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Yves Schabes, LavaRipples LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,993.00

The innovation of this research is to investigate and design new techniques and
algorithms which show the feasibility of the concept of a universal file system
in which data tagging and synchronization are built in. The proposed file system
is universal in the sense that it will allow for uniform tagging and
synchronization of all files and information types across all operating systems
and devices. Novel techniques towards a proof of concept prototype of a tagging
system will be studied and implemented. In this system, tags can be universally
associated across all digital information types and devices. The system will
also instantaneously update and synchronize tags in between all devices as
changes are being made. The proposed system will consist of two components:
first, client applications in which tags can be assigned manually or
automatically and shared with collaborators; second, server software running in
the cloud which enables synchronization of tags across different devices and
users. The universal tagging system will allow for new methods of collaboration.

The broader impact of this research is to efficiently organize and retrieve
large amount of digital information distributed across multiple devices. As the
amount of digital information is exploding, methods of organizing digital
information through the traditional use of file systems and folders have become
unmanageable. Inspired by taxonomies used by digital librarians, consumers and
enterprises are starting to use tags to organize their digital assets. This can
be seen by the use of tags in email systems, photo software, or by the use of
hash tags in text messages. However, each of those applications maintains its
own tags and does not allow for the use of those tags outside of their own
application. This problem is even more acute as it is common to store the same
information across multiple devices, raising the issue of data synchronization
across devices. The techniques and algorithms investigated in this research
redefines the notion of a file system allowing universal tagging and
synchronization across all file types and all devices, enabling better
organization and transparent synchronization of data among various devices. The
technologies will help consumers and enterprises to better access and share
digital information as well as provide a new platform for collaboration.