* 1248274
* SBIR Phase I:  Direct Conversion of Lignocellulosic Feedstocks to Lipids and High-Value Products using a Proprietary Microbial Process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Mark Kozubal, Sustainable Bioproducts LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 164,825.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project describes a simple,
novel and economical process for converting lignocellulosic feedstocks, such as
wheat straw, to lipids for conversion to biodiesel and fatty acids for specialty
markets (e.g. wax esters, stearic/oleic acids) using a minimal number of steps
compared to current technologies. The innovative technology described here is
based on the use of a novel microorganism isolated from Yellowstone National
Park, which is able to withstand extreme acidic conditions and is capable of
efficiently degrading cellulose, lignin and hemicellulose. The organism produces
high concentrations of lipids (30-60% of cell volume) in a one-step process when
grown aerobically on waste feedstocks in minimal dilute acid medium. The primary
objective of this SBIR Phase I is to determine the feasibility of lipid
production from various lignocellulosic substrates and determine fatty acid
profiles for biofuel production under laboratory scale systems. Additionally,
high value commercial products will be evaluated including waxes, biolubricants,
and nutraceuticals. Preliminary lab bench studies have shown conversion of wheat
straw to lipids ideal for biodiesel at 80g lipid/kg dry weight and the goal of
this study is to produce 110 lipids/kg, which cost analysis studies indicate
would be competitive with fossil fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the potential for a
low cost, simple and effective means for lipids (biofuel precursors) from
abundant lignocellulosic substrates. The products produced by the proposed
innovative process includes biodiesel, fatty acids for specialty markets,
enzymes for biofuel production, and raw material for wood product substitutes
and fuel pellets. These products will be sold to biodiesel producers and
distributors, petrochemical companies, composite material manufacturers, and
fuel pellet manufacturers. Only a few companies and research groups are
investigating microbial biodiesel production directly from lignocellulosic waste
and, therefore, the scientific community will benefit from this research through
a better understanding of direct degradation of lignocellulose materials and
production of lipids by microorganisms. Furthermore, research into the growth
and metabolisms of the novel microorganism described here will be directly
beneficial to researchers studying other lipid producing strains. The success of
this one-step technology would have a significant economic impact for the nation
by providing a novel route to the production biofuels and biomass based
industrial products from renewable sources.