* 1248181
* SBIR Phase I:  Inserting Microalgae and Oysters into RAS for Waste Management Purposes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Taylor Pryor, Acadia Harvest, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
whether integrated multi-trophic aquaculture (IMTA) can be imported from off-
shore salmon farms where the concept is being pioneered into on-land
recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS). RAS Corporation, and the University of
Maine's Center for Cooperative Aquaculture Research are already employing a tank
of black sea bass (Centropristis striata) plumbed directly to raceways
containing sand and deposit-feeding polychaetes (Nereis virens) to demonstrate
that the worms will consume virtually all of the particulate fecal waste and
unconsumed feed, thereby eliminating intermediate filtration equipment while
generating a valuable by-product. Phase I proposes to add an algae bioreactor
downstream in order to culture microalgae that will cleanse CO2, nitrates and
phosphates from the flow while adding back oxygen. Excess plant cells will be
extracted by flowing them through adjacent impoundments, containing filter
feeding oysters (Crassostrea virginica), hence a second by-product. A computer
model system will be developed to maintain the balance of the four trophic
levels. Success will result in having IMTA-RAS software that projects how many
kilos of baitworms, microalgae and oysters can be grown from the waste of a
certain load of fish, determining the optimum carrying capacity of each trophic
level.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will make on-land and
indoor fish production less costly, more profitable and organic in character,
thus more sustainable. Expansion of offshore cage culture of finfish is limited
by natural conditions, environmental constraints and competing uses for space
while RAS technologies are poised for greater enhancements. The two most common
criticisms of aquaculture are: (1) it generates waste; and, (2) the fishmeal in
fish feed is derived from wild-caught forage fish. This project will demonstrate
that wastes are valuable resources, which, if used internally, can yield two by-
products; baitworms and oysters if grown in concert with microalgae. This is
achieved by substituting biological versus mechanical methods for water
treatment. While recreational and commercial fishermen represent a large market
for baitworms, it has also been demonstrated that polychaetes make excellent
fish feed, hence a potential substitute for fish meal and oil. After trial
extraction of halibut waste to feed sandworms, CCAR concluded that 10 mt of fish
harvest would yield 1.0 mt of worm harvest (Brown, 2011).