* 1248765
* SBIR Phase I:  Creating an Online Interactive Earth Science Environmental Simulator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Glenn Van Knowe, MESOSCALE ENVIRONMENTAL SIMULATIONS AND OPERATIONS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 144,538.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Program Phase I project will develop a
unique interactive online earth science educational tool that will meet current
shortfalls in teaching earth sciences and related engineering technologies. This
innovation will allow a learner to conduct realistic simulated experiments
concerning hydrological and atmospheric processes and their interactions with
underlying surface characteristics of the earth. The system will be called the
Earth Science Environmental Simulator (ESES) and will provide a substantial
benefit for teaching a broad range of science, technology, engineering and math
(STEM) skills and concepts in an interdisciplinary approach. Applications will
include renewable energy, agricultural management, building/sensor design,
climate change impact and emergency management. This technology overcomes the
significant problem related to a lack of realistic applications for teaching the
processes important to the earth sciences. These processes are extremely
intricate, complex and powerful affect every person on our planet. The research
objectives are to 1) create a cost effective online educational prototype tool,
2) investigate and create intuitive interface and visualization tools and 3) do
a limited educational evaluation in order to determine the ESES educational and
commercial potential. The software innovation at the core of this system is a
series of physics based earth science and application models.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is brought on by the
fact that the educational process in the earth sciences has been hampered
because the earth-atmospheric system cannot be brought into the classroom to
study and manipulate. The proposed project has the capability to greatly improve
this situation by bringing true earth-scientific experimentation to learners.
The anticipated far-reaching benefits of this research are that all learners
will further develop: (1) problem-solving and decision making capabilities
essential to every citizen in a modern society that are fundamentally governed
by processes that obey the laws of physics to include the knowledge of the earth
science and their application such as meteorology, hydrology, oceanography,
geology, energy production and management, regional and global climate change,
forensic meteorology (insurance and legal claims), agriculture, and even other
planets just to name a few; (2) cognizance of strengths and limitations of
science capabilities, especially related to earth science; and (3) awareness of
relevance of short term environmental forecasts, e.g. severe weather, flooding,
forest fires movement, toxic material dispersion, to personal safety.