* 1248239
* SBIR Phase I:  Controlled Drug Release from and Degradation of PEG-Hydrogels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Gary Ashley, ProLynx LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop novel
hydrogel drug-delivery systems. We have developed linkers for drug conjugation
to circulating macromolecules that release the native drug by beta-eliminative
cleavage at predictable rates with half-lives spanning hours to months, and do
not require enzymes. However, a limitation of circulating carriers is that they
are eliminated by renal filtration with half-lives of 7 days or less. To further
increase drug delivery duration, the linkers will be used to tether drugs to
subcutaneous hydrogel implants, where the rate of drug release greatly exceeds
the carrier clearance. If successful, drugs could be delivered over very long
periods of time. However, a barrier is that bio-degradation is a requirement of
implantable carriers, and suitable hydrogels with tunable, ultra-long
degradation rates are not available. To surmount this, beta-eliminative linkers
will be also incorporated into hydrogel chains that will allow tunable gel
degradation. Thus, a drug will be tethered to the hydrogel using a linker with a
desired cleavage rate (e.g. t1/2 ~1 month), and a linker with much slower
cleavage (e.g. t1/2 ~6 months) incorporated into the polymer; the drug would be
released and the carrier subsequently bio-degraded into innocuous
fragments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to enable peptides as therapeutic agents. Most drug-delivery implants
encapsulate drugs in a polymer having a smaller pore size than the drug;
spontaneous hydrolytic cleavage of bonds in the polymer network increases the
pore size and concomitantly releases drug. This technology differs from
competitive technologies in that the drug is covalently tethered to the polymer
by cleavable linkers that release the free drug at precisely controlled rates;
further, a second set of cleavable linkers with longer cleavage rates are
incorporated into the hydrogel to cause controllable polymer degradation
subsequent to drug release. Unlike encapsulating systems, drug release and
polymer degradation are independently predictable, simple to control, and do not
show the initial bursts of drug release or terminal drug-dumping characteristic
of encapsulating systems. Commercial success will be achieved by a) partnerships
where we use our technology for proprietary drugs of pharmaceutical companies,
b) sub-licensing the technology per se for use in niche areas (e.g. regenerative
medicine, orthopedic implants, ophthalmology implants), and c) internal
development of long-acting implants of important off-patent drugs.