* 1248182
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimization of Tapered Spiral Welding for Wind Turbine Towers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Eric Smith, Keystone Tower Systems
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,107.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses two
roadblocks to reducing the cost of wind energy: the labor-intensive construction
process, and size limitations imposed by road or rail transport for turbine
components. The former issue drives up manufacturing costs and reduces US
competitiveness with countries with inexpensive labor, while the latter forces
sub-optimized tower designs and prevents turbines from growing larger and taking
advantage of faster, steadier winds at higher hub heights. This project
addresses both of these problems by adapting spiral welding - a well understood
system for pipe and piling manufacturing - to wind tower production. Spiral
welding is highly automated, requiring as little as 10% of the labor of the
equivalent manual process. It also combines multiple operations into a single
machine that can be operated on-site, eliminating transport costs and barriers.
This project's innovation is to adapt existing spiral welders - which can
manufacture only straight, constant wall-thickness pipe - to producing tapered,
variable wall thickness towers. A novel material geometry and automated control
of machine parameters are the keys to transforming the standard system to one
optimized for turbine tower production. With on-site spiral welding of turbine
towers, significant reductions in cost of wind energy are
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be felt in many areas: technical, commercial and environmental. The
system?s major contribution is an increase in the use of wind energy for US
electricity, enabled by both reduction in energy cost and increase in the number
of cost effective wind sites. Reducing the cost of tall towers enables increases
in the height and size of wind turbines, allowing them to reach and be optimized
for steadier, higher speed winds. With these increase in size and optimization,
decreases in cost of wind energy of 12% (for 120m tall towers) or more are
possible. In addition, the US land area for which wind energy is cost effective
can be doubled at 120m hub heights. Spiral-welding of turbine towers also
provides US jobs and increases American competitiveness with overseas producers.
Because on-site production is inherently local, manufacturing jobs are created
in the communities where wind turbines are installed. Also, this method gives
local production a major cost advantage over imports by producing towers that
are too large to transport from port to wind farm. This allows domestic
manufacturing to not only compete, but dominate in a domestic tower market worth
roughly $1B in 2011.