* 1248377
* I-Corps:  Spine Fusion Implant made from a Tough Piezoelectric Composite Biomaterial
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Elizabeth Friis, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The project will demonstrate the technological and commercial feasibility of
using piezoelectric composite materials as spinal fusion implants capable of
providing electrical stimulation. Previous researchers have attempted to use
piezoelectric materials in the body; however they have often relied on hard and
brittle ceramic materials that are not well suited to the environment found
inside the human body. Initial studies also did not incorporate the electronic
circuitry required to convert the power generated by a piezoelectric material
into a form the body is capable of using. Furthermore, the thickness of
piezoelectric materials is typically limited due to the need to pole the
specimens. This step requires the use of large electric field strengths, which
for thick specimens require prohibitively large voltage sources, making it
difficult to produce the thicknesses required for a fusion cage. An innovation
developed as a result of previous NSF funding has resulted in a manufacturing
technique capable of producing large scale piezoelectric composites that are
suitable for implantation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will result in the
creation of an implant that could drastically improve the lives of patients
suffering from low back pain. In a market that is currently dominated by
commodity products, this could be a truly disruptive technology that fulfills a
large patient need. Current adjunct therapies are effective but add tremendous
cost and have substantial negative side effects. The piezoelectric fusion
implant should be yield success rates comparable to a regular implant plus
adjunct therapy, result in fewer negative side effects, and reduce overall
patient healthcare costs. Furthermore, the tough piezoelectric composite
technology can also be used for many other applications both in and outside of
healthcare, and allows the creation of large scale, tough piezoelectric
structures previously not considered possible.