* 1248152
* Facilities Support: The CUAHSI Water Data Center
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Richard Hooper, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Cooperative Agreement
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2017
* USD 2,685,070.00

1248152 &lt;br/&gt;Hooper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Cooperative agreement
supports the Consortium for the Advancement of the Hydrologic Sciences (CUAHSI)
to construct and maintain a web-accessible water-data center (WDC) that builds
off the prototype Hydrologic Information System (HIS) developed at the
University of Texas. Over the next three years , WDC development will offer new
access to water data holdings, discovery tools, archival and sharing/publishing
capabilities and will build a consistent set of data format standards
definitions, data format translators, analysis software tools, mobile platform
applications and provide for user training and support. WDC will provide access
to a range of water data now held in a multitude of data formats and across
numerous platforms with vastly different access tools. Data to be ingested in
WDC will include the data holdings of the USGS National Water Information
Service, EPA and NOAAs National Climate Data Center (NCDC), other federal and
state agency data holdings, and academic and private foundation water data
holdings. WDC will integrate the use of cloud computing and data services to
facilitate data discovery and use and include tools for real time state-of-
health monitoring of operational sensor networks. The WDC concept directly
addresses NSF data policies and will be integrated into in a growing network of
geoscience information system services (e.g., Unidata, OpenTopography, EarthChem
through participation in GEOs EarthCube initiative). WDC PIs will continue
international efforts for developing and adopting consistent data standards for
hydrologic observation web-base publication through participation in
international standards-setting bodies (e.g., the Open Geospatial Consortium
(OGC) and the Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS)). The PIs also
plan a set of outreach activates focused on Native Americans (in collaboration
with tribal college and governmental partners) for building and development of
water management data tools in support of the tribal resources management
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***