* 1248111
* NSF/FDA SIR: Standardization of wireless coexistence testing of medical devices in the MBAN and ISM bands
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Hazem Refai, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 119,967.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1248111&lt;br/&gt;Hazem H.
Refai&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The number of radio-frequency (RF) wireless
technologies utilized in healthcare facilities and medical devices is
significantly increasing. This phenomenon brings to the forefront many issues
and concerns, in particular the potential of hacking, spoofing, and interference
from surrounding wireless networks. This is especially true for those operating
in the license-free RF spectrum, including the Industrial, Scientific, and
Medical (ISM) bands. Recognizing the potential interference among ISM devices,
including those of medical use, the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) on
May 17, 2012 allocated the 2.36-2.4 GHz spectrum band for Medical Body Area
Network (MBAN). This spectrum will be promoted for medical devices, enabling
them to operate outside the heavily used ISM bands. Although the MBAN spectrum
no longer shares bandwidth with the ISM spectrum, it remains an adjacent
channel. Careful evaluation of MBAN devices is necessary to avoid adjacent
channel interference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes the
development of wireless coexistence testing protocols for medical devices. Two
complementing approaches will be investigated. The first approach will be
characterized by an environment that incorporates a variety of wireless networks
and technologies, e.g., IEEE 802.11a/b/g/n, Bluetooth, Zigbee, ultra wideband,
cordless phones, and RF identification tags. Medical devices will then be
evaluated for coexistence by exposing them to real-world, heterogeneous wireless
networks using a prescribed methodology. The second approach will utilize vector
signal generators (VSG) to emulate wireless signals. Typically, VSGs are fully
configurable and able to generate a signal identical in frequency, modulation,
and bandwidth to those of offending wireless signals. However, VSGs don?t
implement ?listen-before-talk?, thus lacking thorough evaluation of coexistence.