* 1248322
* SBIR Phase I:  High-performance Polymer Composites for Mouth Guards
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Jan Akervall, Akervall Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,677.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the urgent
need for new mouth guard materials that provide better protection. Despite
widespread use of mouth guards in sports, there are more than 1 million dental
injuries per year costing $500 million in the US alone. Akervall Technologies
Inc. proposes a novel materials concept where solid/liquid suspensions are
incorporated into thermoplastic polymers. The research objectives are to: (1)
synthesize non-Newtonian solid/liquid suspensions that are chemically compatible
with thermoplastic polymers; (2) characterize the physical properties and
rheology behavior of the suspensions; (3) incorporate the suspensions into
polymers and measure the ability of the resulting materials composite to absorb
impact energy under typical sports or intubation scenarios; (4) fine tune and
match the properties of the material for impact energy absorption to optimize
the protection for a specific sport or medical application. Anticipated results
include proof of concept of a revolutionary approach to impact energy absorption
in mouth guards, and novel materials formulations providing the basis for next-
generation mouth guard technology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to introduce a new
concept for dental protection and to overcome the lack of consumer acceptance of
currently available bulky and uncomfortable mouth guards. The worldwide market
for mouth guards is about $500 million per year, and could exceed $ 1
billion/year if consumer acceptance of mouth guards could be increased. This
project sets the stage for the design and fabrication of a thin and flexible
mouth guard that is very comfortable to wear, while providing much better
protection than existing mouth guards. It will be the first and only mouth guard
that can be tuned and optimized for a specific application based on fundamental
research on tunable solid/liquid suspensions. The introduction oft this unique
mouth guard technology will position the company to reach for a significant
market share and will lead to job creation as the company plans to build a new
manufacturing facility for producing this mouth guard. The company is committed
to hiring a diverse work force and to invest into community outreach, to make
especially the youth aware of why it is so important to wear mouth guards in
sports activities.