* 1248981
* SBIR Phase I:  Silicon Quantum-dot Phosphors for LED General Illumination
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Chang-Ching Tu, LumiSands, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to greatly improve
the light output of white-light light-emitting diodes (LEDs) using fluorescent
nanoparticles or quantum dots (QDs) made from silicon. The most efficient and
economical design for a contemporary white LED is based on a blue LED chip which
excites a yellow-emitting rare-earth phosphor. This particular mix of blue and
yellow hues produces a cool and bluish-white light which cannot faithfully
render some colors in illuminated objects, especially in the case of red tones.
The proposed solution places red-color-enhancing silicon-QDs (SiQDs) in the
beam-path of these white LEDs; by absorbing some of the blue light output and
re-emitting red light, the SiQDs complement the absent red spectrum, and thus
improve the overall color rendering performance. The company has thus far
established baseline methodologies for the scalable production of brightly
luminescing SiQDs. This Phase I project will enable the company to improve the
performance of said SiQDs, and also establish their long-term performance
stability.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop SiQDs that
can ultimately replace current rare-earth-derived phosphors. China has a virtual
monopoly over global rare-earth supply, and is enacting draconian restrictions
on extraction and exportation to capitalize on its position. The cost of rare-
earth phosphors used in packaged white-light LEDs is thus set to soar because of
the dwindling supply and increasing market demand for additional rare-earth
phosphors (such as europium-doped nitrides or sulfides) to generate reds for
premium LED offerings. Hence, an earth-abundant and cost-effective alternative
phosphor material is desperately needed. Semiconductor QDs are considered a
promising solution due to their wide-range wavelength-tunability and high
photoluminescence quantum yield. Because of the inert nature and the abundance
of silicon, SiQDs can provide a non-toxic, high-stability, and lower cost
solution, in comparison with established heavy-metal cadmium-chalcogenide QD
materials (such as CdSe QDs). The project will serve as the first step in the
development of a repertoire of products which permit the creation of all visible
light wavelengths via SiQD-phosphors, allowing white-light LEDs to be free from
the need for rare-earth- and cadmium-based phosphors. This will in turn make LED
lighting more aesthetically attractive, affordable, and environmentally
friendly.