* 1248595
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Dynamic Power Management to Redcue Power Consumption in Data Centers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Joel Jorgenson, Packet Digital LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 170,160.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
research autonomous, dynamic power management to reduce power consumption in
data center servers by up to 15-20%, strongly supporting the Environmental
Protection Agency's push toward low-power data centers and rapid adoption of the
new Energy Star label for computer servers. In 2010, data centers in the United
States consumed over 200 TWh of energy, making data centers one of the largest
consumers of the electrical grid. This research project will launch an
aggressive initiative to develop a smart power management integrated circuit
that can be embedded within data center servers to conserve power on embedded
memory. The research will focus on characterization of the memory power
consumption, the creation of an autonomous controller to provide dynamic voltage
scaling of the memory, and demonstration of advanced power management by a real-
time, hardware-based power management method. If successful, the power
consumption may be reduced by 15-20% with no impact to the server design, while
simultaneously reducing latency, enhancing thermal management, and improving
reliability. The intellectual merit is to provide an innovative autonomous power
management technology with intelligent integrated circuits for scalable
solutions on any computing platform, including megawatt-sized data
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is carbon footprint reduction and significant cost savings by addressing
the overwhelming power drain by data centers, providing a substantial impact on
reducing the nation's demand for electricity. Since 2006, data centers use more
energy per year in the United States than televisions. In 2010, data centers
used the equivalent energy of 22 million homes. The continual increase in
demands for data center storage, cloud computing and processing power is
predicted to drive significant growth in the number of data center servers
worldwide within the next decade. This research may show that autonomous power
management integrated circuits implemented in 15.6% of servers worldwide would
reduce the need for an entire power plant. Leading server manufacturers are
seeking new solutions in power management due to the increasing costs and
environmental impacts of powering data centers. Unlike competing technologies,
the "just-enough/just-in-time" solution proposed in this research uniquely saves
power by monitoring activity across an entire system outside the microprocessor,
delivering power only when needed.