* 1248115
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of an Acyl Glycinate Surfactant by Fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Kevin Jarrell, Modular Genetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project is aimed at
demonstrating that acyl glycinate surfactant can be produced by a novel
bacterial fermentation route. The objective of this project is to construct a
bacterial strain that produces acyl glycinate, and to provide a sample of that
surfactant for commercial evaluation. A successful outcome will demonstrate that
acyl glycine can be produced by fermentation. Surfactants are the bubbly
components of cleaning products that give them their cleansing power.
Surfactants are currently manufactured from petroleum or from seed oils, such as
palm oil. The use of those raw materials increases greenhouse gas pollution and
also leads to deforestation of rainforests. Retailers are demanding greener
products, and regulatory agencies are demanding new minimally toxic chemicals.
The demand for greener chemicals creates an opportunity to replace current
surfactants with greener alternatives.

The broader/commercial impact of the proposed innovation would be
commercialization of the acyl glycinate surfactant. Additional benefits to
society are that chemicals produced using this technology will be manufactured
using domestically grown renewable raw materials, which do not compete with food
sources. Furthermore, the energy required to produce these chemicals is low
since the fermentation reaction is performed near ambient temperature. The
chemicals are inherently safer than traditional chemicals because toxic solvents
are not used, and the surfactants are biodegradable and do not contribute to
increased greenhouse gas accumulation. Successful completion of the project will
generate significant new scientific and technical information on new routes to
making such surfactants.