* 1248644
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Method to Manufacture Ultra-Precise Diffraction Gratings for X-Ray Analysis and Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Patricia Abbamonte, Inprentus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2013
* USD 178,772.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to revolutionize
the manufacture of ultra-high precision, x-ray diffraction gratings.
Mechanically ruled, x-ray gratings are used mainly at synchrotron radiation
facilities, where they define the wavelength of x-rays used for chemical
analysis and imaging studies in a wide range of disciplines including
photovoltaics, electronic materials, catalysis, structural biology, and
environmental science. These facilities serve a wide variety of industries and
academic disciplines. While the technology to make such gratings, based on an
instrument called a "ruling engine", was invented in the U.S., commercial
manufacturing moved abroad decades ago to Japan and Europe. Previous feasibility
studies suggest a potentially revolutionary new technology for manufacturing
x-ray gratings: using a scanning probe platform based on piezoelectric motion
stages, the ability to rule high-quality grating lines over length scales of 100
microns has been demonstrated. The objective of this project is to build a
manufacturing platform to scale up this approach to areas of 75 square
centimeters, which is sufficient for commercial gratings. The final objective is
to deliver a full-sized prototype to a partner facility which will perform
testing on the resulting structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is that, in the past three years, a
crisis has occurred in the x-ray grating market. The only two global suppliers
of mechanically-ruled gratings ceased to take orders, either because their
technology was obsolete or because of severe infrastructure problems. This
vanishing of world capacity has taken place when demand for x-ray gratings is at
an all-time high and growing. Extensive communication with management at several
synchrotron facilities has established that the average facility currently has
an order backlog of six gratings. There are seventy such facilities in the
world, which implies a near-term revenue potential of approximately $21 million.
The goal is to capture the entire market and bring this area of manufacturing
back to the U.S. This market aside, this project has the potential to enable new
technologies based on the ability to realize customized optical wave fronts, as
the proposed approach allows grating lines to be curved into arcs or ellipses,
providing lateral focusing, or written with topological defects that create
electromagnetic vortices with high angular momentum. These unexplored
capabilities could find use in inertial confinement fusion, x-ray telescopes, or
the wider market of optical gratings.