* 1248865
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Polymer Brush-like Architecture for Temperature Dependent Cell Release and Attachment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Tahmina Naqvi, Innovative Surface Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,011.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is designed to
offer two uniquely tailored thermoresponsive surfaces for the attachment and
release of weakly and strongly adherent cells. The commercially available
surfaces are highly crosslinked hydrogels that do not work well with either
strongly or weakly adherent cells. The goal is to transform the current
thermoresponsive cell culture technology by providing novel polymer brush-like
architectures to the culture surface to reduce protein adsorption, and allow
efficient hydration to release the strongly adherent cells. Moreover, addition
of functionalities to polymer brush-like architectures will increase the
adhesive strength of the surfaces for weakly adherent cells. Major research
objectives of this proposal include: 1) Synthesis of photoreactive
thermoresponsive brush architectures for strongly adherent cells 2) Synthesis of
functionalized brush architectures for weakly adherent cells and 3) Develop
coatings in a variety of different cultureware not presently available in market
due to the method used. The goal is 90% release of strongly adherent cells
within 30 minutes at room temperature and 80% attachment of weakly adherent
cells.

The broader impact /commercial potential of this project will be the generation
of functional cells or cell sheets. The generation of physiologically active
functional cells is often the roadblock in technology development. For example,
cells recovered from conventional growth surfaces are released using digestive
enzymes and chemicals such as Trypsin and EDTA, which alter signal transduction
pathways and affect overall cell viability. Thermoresponsive cell cultureware
involving the use of Poly N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm) obviates the use of
digestive enzymes; however, major roadblocks with the use of thermoresponsive
cultureware remain. The commercially available thermoresponsive plates work well
with several cell lines, but do not work well with strongly adherent or weakly
adherent cell types, and are available only in multiwell formats. This Phase I
grant will develop a new generation of thermoresponsive cell cultureware that
could gain wide market acceptance, and become an enabling technology. The
process uses simple equipment, is manufacture-friendly, cost-effective, and is
available in formats needed for tissue engineering and high-throughput
applications. Thus, clinical applications of cell types that were previously
considered impossible may be realized, and cell therapy, drug discovery, and
tissue engineering applications may proceed at an accelerated pace.