* 1248750
* SBIR Phase I:  Trans-esterified Lignin Thermoplastic
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* NHIEM CAO, Cyclewood Solutions, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need for
affordable biobased plastics to replace petroleum-based materials. The
objectives of this research are to demonstrate strong intermolecular
interactions between chemically modified lignin and thermoplastics, demonstrate
optimal conditions for transesterification, demonstrate enhanced mechanical
properties of polyester and polystyrene, and demonstrate scale-up feasibility.
This research has two main components that are broken down into other major
tasks. The first component is the experimental testing of transesterification to
improve lignin thermoplastic blends. This is completed by preparing a chemically
modified lignin and attempting to transesterify it at various blend proportions
with a polyester. Next, samples will be produced for analysis to determine the
physical and mechanical properties. The second component is to ensure commercial
viability of the manufacturing process and materials. Larger amounts of
transesterified product will be produced using small-scale industrial
manufacturing equipment. The production process will include steps towards
optimization of efficient manufacturing practices for scalability. The
anticipated results of this Phase I project are to create a transesterified
lignin/polyester product that has equal or better mechanical and physical
properties to polyester or polystyrene that can be produced at a commercial
scale.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses the growing
problem of the U.S. plastic bag and film market. Plastic bags are an
environmental eyesore that pollute waterways and kill wildlife. Local
governments are now passing laws to ban the use plastic bags in efforts to
hinder the spread of pollution. The U.S. plastic bag market was $8.6 billion in
2010. Further, the bioplastics market is expected to more than triple by 2015 to
$2.9 billion. While society and government have placed more emphasis on
reduction or replacement of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) shopping bags,
these bags are still widely popular, with over 100 billion bags consumed every
year across the U.S. alone. Lignin output is expected to increase in the ensuing
years due to an increase in cellulosic ethanol plants coming on line and more
efficient paper manufacturing processes. Transesterified lignin resins will
range in lignin concentration depending on the application. The components of
the resin can be fully biodegradable or compounded with conventional plastics to
create sustainable blends. The experiments conducted for this project will
determine the ideal conditions and materials necessary to produce
transesterified lignin products. Experiments will also be conducted to scale up
the process to a commercial scale.