* 1248886
* SBIR Phase I:  High Speed Laser Crystallization (HSLC) of Aluminum doped ZnO (AZO) nanoparticles at Room Temperature for High Performance Transparent Conductive Oxide (TCO) layer.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Michael Callahan, Greentech Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop high speed
laser crystallization (HSLC) of solution deposited aluminum-doped zinc oxide
(AZO) nanoparticle layers in order to reduce the manufacturing cost of thin film
solar cells. AZO is a promising transparent conductive oxide (TCO). Deposition
of TCO layers is one of the most expensive steps during the manufacturing
process of thin film solar cells. Initial studies has already shown that HSLC
crystallization of AZO layers yielded resistivity less than 3 x 10-4 ohms-cm and
a maximum mobility of 380 cm2/vs (1-2 orders higher than the other deposition
techniques such as sputtering). The proposed work will investigate high speed
laser crystallization of AZO nanoparticles inks to prove the viability of high
volume production of high performance TCO layers by HSLC of solution deposited
nanoparticles. Technical milestones include: TCO deposition process speeds up to
2 orders faster over current techniques, transmission over 90% in 400-1500 nm
range, and sheet resistance under 10 ohm/square. Scaling and optimization of the
high-speed processes will be demonstrated on multiple large-area cells with a
goal of a relative efficiency improvement of > 5% over baseline cells using a
sputtered AZO layer.

The broader/ commercial potential of this project will be achieved through new
equipment for integration into manufacturing to produce high-efficiency CIGS
solar modules. Nearly half of the world?s CIGS solar manufacturing capacity has
been established in the U.S. This SBIR development has the potential to improve
manufactured CIGS solar cell efficiency by over 5% (relative) and reduce cost
per watt by more than 10%. This would aid in moving flexible CIGS solar products
into a market lead position, grow U.S. manufacturing, and enable large-scale
adoption of solar. Integrating this technology into other PV device stack layers
(such as the CIGS absorber layer) as well as the TCO layer, which is the subject
of this proposal, could create over $4 billion in economic value annually by
2020. This process also has the potential to improve other commodity thin-film
materials such as those used in lightweight paper batteries, organic solid state
lighting, flexible displays, and RFID tags.