* 1248165
* SBIR Phase I:  Multiple Access Phase Shifter (MAPS)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Hector DeLosSantos, NanoMEMS Research, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at
demonstrating the feasibility of a novel multiple access (multi-band) phase
shifter (MAPS) concept, capable of effecting the phase shifter function on
multiple frequency bands simultaneously. The proposed MAPS concept addresses the
need for increasing spectral efficiency and reuse, given the proliferation of
wireless systems operating in an increasingly congested spectrum. While the
performance of current phase shifters (PSs) is impressive, they lack the ability
to simultaneously operate on multiple frequency bands. There is a need,
therefore, for PSs that can enable enhanced system capacity, as well as new
architectural solutions and concepts to enhance spectrum efficiency and reuse.
The proposed research has two primary objectives: 1) to design and fabricate a
novel MAPS; and 2) to demonstrate its feasibility via the measurement and
characterization of its performance. The research addresses key technical
challenges related to MAPS architecture to maximize operating frequency bands,
and to its fabrication process. The anticipated results include: 1) Elucidating
the design principles for the MAPS; and 2) The experimental realization and
testing of the feasibility-determining elements of the MAPS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be large. In the first place, the innovation will enhance
scientific and technological understanding in the areas of MAPS operation,
design and fabrication. In the second place, the innovation will pave the way to
enabling new capabilities in both high-end systems, such as aerospace and
defense systems, automotive radar and consumer electronics, in particular, the
innovation is anticipated to have a potential commercial value in the tens of
millions of dollars. And in the third place, the research will enable the
further scientific training and mentoring of a post-doctoral researcher. In
particular, the post-doctoral researcher will be engaged in activities toward
career development, such as, training in the preparation and writing grant
proposals, publications and presentations; guidance on ways to improve teaching
and mentoring skills; guidance on how to effectively collaborate with
researchers from diverse backgrounds and disciplinary areas; training in
responsible professional practice; and technology transfer. The project will
impact a number of technology areas and market sectors, such as, Phase Shifters,
Phased-Array Antennas, Wireless Communications, Satellite Communications,
Automotive Radar, and nanomanufacturing.