* 1248802
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantum Mechanical Predictive Tools for Identification and Redesign of Skin Sensitizing Chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jakub Kostal, Sustainability A to Z, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 164,650.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
timely need to develop new and robust in silico tools for the prediction of skin
sensitization potency of commercial chemicals. Currently, there are no reliable
and broadly applicable alternatives to the costly and ethically unfeasible in
vivo screening methods for skin sensitization testing. Skin sensitization
response is triggered by covalent modification of key biochemical targets by the
xenobiotic. These targets have been identified as glutathione, lysine-containing
peptides and surface cysteine residues of the Keap1 protein. The objectives of
the proposed research are to (i) build quantum-mechanical models representative
of covalent interactions between the xenobiotic and biochemical targets, and
(ii) incorporate supporting models for skin bioavailability and identification
of potential metabolites to compose a comprehensive model of skin sensitization
potency. First, reaction energetics associated with binding of skin sensitizers
to the biochemical targets will be calculated. Next, property-based linear
models will be developed to account for skin bioavailability. Potential
metabolites will be identified using existing validated models. The final in
silico tool is anticipated to predict skin sensitization potency based on a
chemical structure and inform design of safer alternative chemicals based on
chemical reactivity and physical properties.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide the
cosmetics, consumer chemicals, pharmaceuticals, textile and petroleum industries
with a means of identifying chemicals in their product lines that induce human
skin sensitization response and replacing them with safer alternatives.
Successful completion of this project will also bring immeasurable benefits to
the scientific community. A precedent will be set for applying techniques from
the computational chemist's toolbox for building predictive toxicology models
capable of informing the design of safer chemicals. This novel synergistic
approach to computational toxicology and computational chemistry places our in
silico tool in a unique position in the market with no direct competitors.
Current approaches for toxicity predictions in silico are dominated by
statistical models that rely solely on structural descriptors and/or properties,
and subsequently suffer from limited and often uncertain applicability domains.
The proposed research alleviates these deficiencies by including chemical
reactivity data obtained from direct modeling of molecular interactions. The
societal impact of the proposed research is in the safer product delivered to
the consumer and in the reduced dependence on animal testing required by in vivo
screening methods.