* 1248360
* SBIR Phase I:  Single Ion Conductor Gel Electrolytes for High Power Rechargeable Lithium Ion Batteries with Enhanced Safety
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Shihai Zhang, PolyK Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
advanced single ion gel electrolytes and related low cost manufacturing process
for high power rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs) with enhanced safety.
Current LIB electrolytes consist of liquid organic solvents and lithium salts.
Both anions and cations can move, though the anions do not participate in
electrochemical reactions and do not contribute to the power output. This not
only reduces the power density, but also leads to polarization gradient, salt
depletion at the cathode and risk of precipitation at the anode during high
power operation. The liquid organic solvents represent significant safety risks
in large size battery pack such as solvent leakage, pressure buildup from
solvent vaporization, and fire hazard during vehicle accidents. Therefore,
current LIBs have limited acceptance by electric vehicles. This project will
develop ionomer gel electrolytes in which anions are completely immobilized and
the solvents fully constrained in the gel structure. The power density and
safety of the LIBs will be enhanced by the gel structure as well the
electrolyte/separator assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is related to rechargeable lithium
ion batteries (LIB) with high energy density, power density, enhanced safety,
and reduced cost by using an innovative single ion gel electrolyte and low-cost
manufacturing process. Rechargeable LIBs have broad applications as power source
for many portable electronics. However, due to the material limitations of the
electrolytes and electrodes, current LIBs have limited applications in large-
size high-capacity energy storage systems such as hybrid electric vehicles and
grid scale energy storage system. If successful, the novel single ion conductor
gel electrolytes can improve the power density, improve the safety, and reduce
the manufacturing cost of LIBs and promote their wide adoption in large size
high power energy storage systems.