* 1248160
* SBIR Phase I:  Peptide-modified Hyaluronic Acid Biopolymers for Soft Tissue Augmentation, Protection and Rejuvenation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Grant Smith, Wasatch Molecular Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I will focus on development
of novel biopolymers obtained by covalently attaching peptide side chains to
hyaluronic acid (HA) backbone polymer chains through carefully controlled
chemistry. The resulting material can be used for soft tissue augmentation,
protection, and rejuvenation. The work will rely on a combined experimental and
molecular modeling approach. In this novel approach, the synthesized
polypeptide-HA polymer is an in-situ gelling biomaterial that self-assembles
into a physical gel inside the body driven by hydrophobic attractions between
the peptide side chains. Molecular modeling will guide the synthesis of
polypeptide-HA polymers that form gels with desired mechanical and osmotic
properties. The physical crosslinks in the gel can be reversibly broken down by
high shear forces in the injection needle, allowing use of a narrow gauge
injection needle that reduces patient pain and allows for formation of stiffer,
more resilient gels. The innovative biopolymer is likely to outperform currently
used biomaterials because of in-situ gelling, better control of and
accessibility to a wider range of gel properties and the side chains can be used
to carry molecules with biological functionality. The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be a new material that can meet requirements for
an ideal HA-containing dermal filler. These requirements include a material that
is pain-free and easy-to-inject into the body, in vivo survivability for at
least one year, absence of immunogenic or allergic reactions, enhanced water
retention, tunable mechanical properties, attachment of functional molecules,
and low cost. Such a material will significantly enhance capabilities for soft
tissue augmentation over existing HA-based materials and will be in large
demand. The properties of the novel biopolymer can be tuned for other important
and growing biomedical applications such as viscosupplementation for arthritic
joints and ocular antioxidant protection. The proposed combined experimental and
molecular modeling approach will also provide a unique fundamental understanding
of the interplay between molecular characteristics (composition and
architecture) and macroscopic properties (mechanical and transport properties)
of gels and solutions comprised of these molecules. The proposed molecular
simulation guided material design approach is a state-of-the-art technology that
can be extended for development of other complex materials.