* 1248714
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineered Sensors for the Pulmonary Forced Oscillation Technique
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Charles Forbes, Feather Sensors, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,785.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will advance the
development of a new pulmonary testing instrument. The innovative device
utilizes a strain gauge to measure pulmonary airflow, an indicator critical in
monitoring the health of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
patients. The research challenge is to develop and demonstrate the feasibility
of a customized strain gauge for this device. This will involve fabricating and
testing thin film sensors and comparing their efficacy to the commercial sensor
now used. The customized sensors will be developed in a university-based clean
room and tested against the commercial sensors by comparing signal to noise
measurements. Research efforts will aim at improving signal to noise and
minimizing non-linear responses seen in the commercial sensor. For this
proposal, the specific application of the new sensor will be in a device that
will measure pulmonary airflow resistance using the Forced Oscillation Technique
(FOT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be to market an instrument that has significant advantages over
those currently in use to measure lung airflow of pulmonary disease patients. An
estimated 36.4 million Americans suffer from asthma or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Successful development of the proposed assistive
technology will offer a low-cost, easily cleaned, readily mobile testing device
that is adaptable to home use. The specific application proposed for this
device, forced oscillation technique (FOT), has a significant advantage over
standard spirometry, as it does not depend upon deliberate cooperation of the
patient to perform required respiratory maneuvers. It is therefore useful for
comatose patients, infants and children, mentally and physically impaired
individuals, and even animals. FOT devices are new developments; they are being
used primarily in research settings. The device proposed here will be extremely
competitive in the marketplace, primarily due to its low cost, but also to its
simple design and ease of use. Software developed for his device will make the
wireless transfer of data from the patient?s home to the physician?s office
effortless.