* 1248728
* SBIR Phase I:  Amplification-Free Small RNA Sequencing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Masoud Toloue, Bioo Scientific Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to make next
generation sequencing technology for small RNA more quantitative and less
biased. High throughput sequencing has transformed the landscape of genomic
research with its ability to produce gigabases of data in a single run. This has
enabled researchers to perform genome wide and high depth sequencing studies
that would normally not be possible. Despite this capacity, amplification
artifacts introduced during PCR increase the chance of duplicate reads and
uneven distribution of read coverage. Accurate profiling using deep sequencing
also has been undermined by biases with over or under-represented miRNAs. The
presence of these biases significantly limits the incredible sensitivity and
accuracy made possible by next generation sequencing. The goal of this proposal
is to develop novel, bias-reducing technology for making amplification-free
small RNA libraries. The company's kits and protocols will ramp-up considerably
the rate at which global microRNA profiles can be determined, and that between-
sample and within-sample differences (as well as newly discovered small RNAs)
can be subsequently validated. This product will result in a major shift in the
way small RNA sequencing is performed and pave the way for unbiased measurements
in the clinic.

The broader impact of this project will be the accurate measure of small RNAs,
and the clinical utility of such a profile. Products of the same microRNA gene
that vary in length by one or two nucleotides are involved in a whole host of
diseases, including cancer. The value for developing a method to measure the
true profile of microRNAs in a sample would be immense for the research
community studying transcriptional regulation, and would open the doors to
clinicians interested in capitalizing on the diagnostic value of microRNA
profiling. Companies whose sole model is to extract prognostic information from
microRNA profiles would benefit from the wealth of date generated from accurate
non-biased high throughout sequencing. The size of the next generation
sequencing market is expected to pass $4 billion by 2014. Growth in the
sequencing diagnostic market is just beginning. Unique diagnostic kits developed
from this technology will fulfill an unmet market opportunity with the potential
to exceed $15 million in the first 3 years.