* 1248465
* SBIR Phase I:  A Radio p-Chip for Intracellular Sensing and Communication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Wlodek Mandecki, PharmaSeq, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at
developing a Radio p-Chip, the first microchip with a sensor that can be
injected into live cells, and transmit information from within without a
physical connection. The design combines elements of laser light-activation of
the p-Chip, a novel device that transmits the chip's serial number via radio
signals, with enhancements to monitor events by adding a sensor. The target
dimensions for the Radio p-Chip are suitable for investigations of large cells.
The on-board sensor will gather information about real-time physiological
conditions in the cell and transmit it along with the serial number identifying
the cell itself. The information will be transmitted to a reading station that
will collect data related to the identity of the cell, as well as the reported
conditions from the sensor. The main goals of the Phase I project are to 1)
design, build and test the fully functional prototype of the Radio p-Chip; 2)
implant the device into a living mammalian cell and demonstrate its function;
and 3) build and test components of a future version of the chip. The device
envisioned is one part of a system incorporating, in addition to the chip, a
custom-designed receiver and antenna system, the stimulus apparatus, devices to
implant the chip into cells, and associated firmware and application software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be felt in a wide variety of applications, including the readout of key
physiological characteristics, ID-tagging of individual cells and tracking their
history, tagging embryos, flow cytometry and process monitoring. All research to
date with living cells relies upon indirect or intrusive methods that almost
always effect what is being measured. The Radio p-Chip will be superior in both
performance and cost and will have a wide commercial impact. The development of
a Radio p-Chip will provide a powerful new tool for cell biology and in
particular for the in vivo studying of a wide variety of human diseases and have
implications for drug discovery and in vitro diagnostics.