* 1248521
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Temperature Ion Source for High-Brightness Focused Ion Beams
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Brenton Knuffman, zeroK NanoTech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the commercial feasibility of low-temperature ion source (LoTIS) technology
which uses laser-cooling to create a beam of Cs+ ions with high brightness and
low energy spread. This technology could extend the utility of focused ion beam
(FIB) instrumentation that is widely used for nanometer-scale precision
machining tasks by addressing shortcomings in precision and speed afforded by
commercially available ion source technology. The research aims of this project
are the characterization of key ion source performance metrics - brightness and
energy spread - of this technology, in order to compare it to incumbent ion
source technologies in important application segments. Relative to the industry
standard liquid metal ion source, this technology could provide an estimated
tenfold to hundredfold increase in brightness and a fivefold reduction in energy
spread. These improved ion source characteristics would enable superior
machining precision at higher speeds over a broader range of ion beam operating
energies.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop improved
FIB instrumentation to enable users in a variety of research fields and
industrial applications, including nanotechnology, biotechnology, semiconductor
manufacturing, and energy exploration. In particular, nanomachining
applications, including integrated circuit edit and rapid prototyping of
nanoscale device structures, are increasingly limited by the precision afforded
by the current ion source technology, and the users in these areas are in need
of higher-precision FIB solutions. FIBs employed for transmission electron
microscope lamellae preparation require less precision but could benefit from
reduced subsurface ion damage provided by LoTIS, through the use of Cs+ ions at
low energy. A bright source of Cs+ ions could also dramatically improve the
resolution and throughput for spatially-resolved elemental mapping in secondary
ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) applications. This technique represents an order-
of-magnitude ion source performance improvement that will address FIB user needs
across a wide spectrum of scientific and commercial applications.