* 1248924
* SBIR Phase I:  Defect-Free Nano-Scale Printing: An Enabling Technology for Nanofabrication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Carmen Menoni, XUV Lasers
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,954.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a compact,
table top, high-throughput nano-photolithography tool capable to print arrays of
periodic features of arbitrary shape with sub-50 nm feature size defect-free.
The innovative printing tool makes use of the Talbot effect, in which a
coherently illuminated periodic diffractive structure (the Talbot mask) self-
images by diffraction at planes known as Talbot planes without the use of any
optics. Coherent illumination with extreme ultraviolet (EUV) laser light allows
replication of masks containing nano-scale patterns onto photoresist. The method
is non-contact and it is defect-free as any defect in the mask is averaged over
the entire imaging field. The method uses a high average power, highly coherent
table-top EUV laser commercialized by XUV Lasers Inc. The proposed compact tool
will bring cost-effective nano-patterning capabilities to small size companies
and university laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is in its ability to simplify the printing of periodic
arrays of nanostructures. The table-top nano-printing EUV system will
significantly enhance the capabilities to fabricate nanostructures in an
affordable and versatile way. Its main attributes are that it offers defect-free
printing, high through-put, and cost-effectiveness in the printing of
nanostructures. These capabilities could have a broad impact in various
disciplines, including material science, advanced optical component
manufacturing, nanoelectronics, biology and medicine. The nano-printing tool is
aimed at markets that require the printing of templates for nanostructure
growth, chemical micro-sensors, gas separation membranes, and the fabrication of
high density diffraction gratings, short wavelength light polarizers, and
plasmonic structures.