* 1248052
* INSPIRE: Studying and Promoting Quantitative and Spatial Reasoning with Complex Visual Data Across School, Museum, and Web-Media Contexts
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Joshua Radinsky, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 799,151.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Transforming Undergraduate
Education in STEM Program in the Division of Undergraduate Education and the
Discovery Research K12 Program in the Division of Research on Learning in the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources; the Geography and Spatial
Sciences Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in the
Directorate for Social and Behavioral Sciences; and the Cyberlearning program in
the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a research program to promote and study effective strategies and habits of
mind for understanding complex geospatial data using interactive visualization
tools, and to generate and test design strategies for such tools in three
contexts: an online data access website, interactive museum exhibit, and social
science classrooms. All three research sites will utilize geographic information
system (GIS) visualization tools to give learners access to geospatially-
referenced historical U. S. Census data for examining changing populations
across space and time. These complex data tools are increasingly used in
different disciplines and in multiple aspects of everyday life. However, how
learners interact with them is still poorly understood. The three research sites
will strategically employ multiple, coordinated research methods, including
design-experimentation, machine-learning analyses, multimodal interaction
analyses, and grounded-theory generation of hypotheses. The outcomes of these
empirical studies, coordinated across three contexts, will be used for iterative
generation and evaluation of design strategies to promote effective reasoning
with complex data for learners in each of these learning environments. This
project also will build a coherent, interdisciplinary understanding of
representational fluency for complex geospatial data across learning contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The merit of this research program
derives from its fundamental interdisciplinarity, combining research methods,
concepts, and design expertise from Sociology, Computer Science, the Learning
Sciences, and GIS design and large-scale implementation, in the service of
addressing pressing questions about how people learn with social-scientific
data. Because the proposed research does not fit neatly within any single
academic discipline, it is an ideal match for the goals of the INSPIRE program.
The conceptual and methodological diversity of this project contributes to its
potentially transformative nature, as a model for cross-discipline collaboration
in transforming status-quo approaches to studying data visualization and the
design of learning environments. The collaborating investigators, as active
members of multiple research communities and regular contributors to the work of
educational practitioners, are uniquely situated to effectively translate
empirical research findings into accessible designs and professional development
opportunities across multiple communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The proposed project has the potential to have substantial impact due to the
exceptional scale of dissemination currently realized by the Social Explorer
project and related installations at the New York Science Museum, as well as the
diversity of audiences for design-based research conducted in these three
contexts (museum, classroom and web-based learning environments). In addition,
the core of the research is the archive of historical U. S. Census data, which
is central to research practices across social science disciplines, as well as
popular news media, and is also highly relevant to people's understandings of
our society.