* 1248148
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-Thermal Plasma Device for Wound Disinfection and Promotion of Wound Healing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Stephen Weeks, Sterionics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is intended to
demonstrate the disinfection efficacy of a novel non-thermal-plasma-generating
technology that produces a variety of reactive ionic species. Non-thermal plasma
discharge has been found to be disruptive to normal bacterial, viral, and spore
cell growth and proliferation. Plasma exposure has also been successful at
destabilizing biofilms and reducing overall bacterial viability. Phase I work
will define the ionic, molecular, and radiation species present in the plasma
plume for a wider range of feed gas, and determine which species are most
effective at achieving bacterial disinfection, how deep into the infected tissue
the plasma plume is effective, and the treatment times necessary to disinfect
these tissues. With modifications to the device construction allowing variations
in the concentrations of constituents in the feed gas, it is believed that
plasmas generated by this device should also impair biofilm formation,
destabilize biofilm formation once they mature, and kill large amounts (if not
all) of bacteria embedded within the in vitro constructs. With antibiotic
resistance and nosocomial infection rates climbing in medical facilities,
demonstration of significant germicidal capabilities of non-thermal plasma could
be advantageous for patient care.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the creation of a
unique, portable, and low-cost device that will allow for treatment of wounds
without inducing drug-resistance while simultaneously shortening the healing
time, thus reducing the treatment cost by 50% or more. This is especially
critical for a number of chronic and antibiotic-resistant wounds. The economic
and social impact of wound injuries and subsequent infection is immense. The
most serious challenge in wound care is treatment of chronic wounds. Chronic
wounds affect 6.5 Million people in the US with an estimated $25 billion spent
annually on treatment. This number continues to grow due to increasing health
care costs, an aging population, and the rise worldwide in the incidence of
diabetes and obesity and their associated chronic wounds. The successful
development of this technology will have a broad positive impact on patient
outcomes.