* 1248325
* SBIR Phase I:  Wearable Robotic Knee Osteoarthritis Active Living Assistant - KOAALA
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* John Rokosz, Adicep Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a leg-
brace that monitors, and potentially prevents the progression of Knee
Osteoarthritis (KOA). Research shows that Knee Adduction/abduction Moment (KAM)
is a key marker in KOA progression and a valuable tool in managing treatment,
but is difficult and expensive to measure with existing techniques for all but
the simplest activities. The proposed brace addresses the monitoring and early
intervention of KOA by producing high resolution KAM and gait data during all
Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and easing customer acceptance of wearing
robotic devices by minimizing the device's ADL interference, while making it
easier to walk with less fatigue. It also limits the maximum knee joint force
(potentially slowing KOA progression, as repetitive high knee joint loadings are
believed to exacerbate KOA); Phase I research objectives include:
create/integrate KAM sensors and a wireless capability into an existing device;
bench test a prototype brace; compare the brace's KAM/gait parameter
measurements against existing KAM/gait measurement techniques; and create an
early stage infrastructure software application that presents the KAM/gait data
to managing clinicians. Anticipated results include demonstrating feasibility of
software development and that measured KAM data compares favorably to existing
measurement techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project stems from its impact on KOA, a disease causing
mobility dysfunction amongst an estimated 12% of the world's elderly population.
Existing medical management of KOA is difficult in part because there is no low
cost procedure for monitoring KOA progression. Treatment typically occurs after
KOA begins interfering with Activities of Daily Living, via a staged process
starting with training programs with the goal of reducing the tibiofemoral force
on the diseased knee compartment for mild cases, progressing to drugs and
offloading braces for moderate pain cases and ending with a Total Knee
Replacement (TKR) when the pain becomes severe. Total cost to the US health
system for the 500K TKR procedures done in 2010 was $17.5B with projections of
3.5M TKR procedures costing $139B by 2030. A conventional vaccine for KOA
currently does not exist; the proposed assistive technology is tantamount to a
robotic vaccine with promise to slow KOA progression by reducing tibiofemoral
force. A highly advanced leg brace, it also provides new tools for
rehabilitation clinicians managing symptomatic KOA pain via training programs in
remote settings. A successful project will enable researchers to address one of
the world's major health problems.