* 1248423
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Novel Maize Bioenergy Plants Using the LignoLink Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Scott Welsh, Lignolink
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

Intellectual Merit This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project takes
a novel approach to produce improved maize cultivars for bioenergy applications.
Lignin in cellulosic biomass creates a barrier that limits conversion of
cellulose into biofuels. In the proposed approach, the lignin in crop cultivars
is modified to improve conversion to liquid fuels. The Company previously
demonstrated the approach in hybrid poplar. The Company has now produced 37
transgenic maize lines with the same lignin modification. The Company is
characterizing the biomass composition in the stover (non-seed portions of the
maize plant) from these lines, including lignin content, cellulose content,
hemi-cellulose content, and protein content. The Company will conduct tests on
several plants from each transgenic line for efficiency of conversion of the
biomass into ethanol by gentle pretreatment methods. The Company will also
conduct field trials with seed collected in the greenhouse from the 37
transgenic maize lines crossed to important maize inbred lines. The field-grown
plants will be crossed to generate third-generation seed, and the fodder of the
plants analyzed for biomass content and digestibility. The stover of these
transgenic maize plants is expected to have increased cellulose extractability
and significantly higher rates of conversion to ethanol.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of new, more cost-effective feedstock cultivars of maize for the bio-based
products industry. This project will also demonstrate the applicability of this
new lignin-modification technology for improving bioenergy feedstocks for both
annual and perennial crops. The treatment of cellulosic biomass for sugar
extraction for production of biofuels and bioproducts is a challenging and
expensive engineering issue. Pretreatment adds as much as 20% to the cost of
biofuel production, and can be a limiting factor for economic and environmental
viability of the new bioenergy industry. The lignin modification technology
developed at Lignolink will be shown to improve the commercial viability of
biofuels production by increasing sugar release from biomass, using milder,
more- environmentally-friendly pretreatment techniques. The market potential for
technology that improves biomass for pretreatment and sugar release is large.
The ability to decrease biofuels production costs by improving biomass
processing efficiency will help ensure profitability in biofuels production.
Corn growers will have a new market for stover, which may surpass the market for
first generation biofuels from corn seed. Scientific and technological
understanding of a novel means for lignin modification in biomass feedstock
plants will also be advanced.