* 1248556
* Towards Effective Cyber Security Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Andrew McGettrick, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 11/30/2013
* USD 67,260.00

In the wider computing community, there is substantial debate about how best to
address the educational challenges of producing graduates who are well qualified
and meet the cybersecurity needs of the country. The primary purpose of this
project, led by ACM's Education Board, is to contribute to the resolution of
these issues. A Leadership Group, composed of cybersecurity experts / leaders
from universities, community colleges, industry and government, is providing
important information and guidance on how best to stimulate high quality higher
education in cybersecurity and what form that should take. A stand-alone report
on the results is being published and made widely available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately this activity is about taking initial steps
that will lead to the development of a new set of professionals in
cybersecurity. The implications for this are considerable. Apart from producing
skilled graduates who can serve industry, business and government needs, this
activity leads to a greater awareness of the challenges of cybersecurity
education within educational institutions and beyond. Intended outcomes are an
improved level of faculty expertise, doctoral studies in the area and eventually
this should act as a stimulant for certain kinds of cybersecurity research.