* 1248850
* SBIR Phase I:  Transparent Molecular Photovoltaic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Miles Barr, Ubiquitous Energy, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 146,039.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project explores
a transformational visibly transparent photovoltaic (PV) device. Building-
integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) are a promising energy pathway to capturing
large areas of solar energy and increasing U.S. building efficiency at the point
of utilization. However, the widespread adoption of such technologies is
severely hampered by the cost and aesthetics associated with mounting
traditional PV modules on siding and windows. Here, these challenges are
overcome by exploiting the excitonic character of molecular and organic
semiconductors that lead to "oscillator bunching" to produce PV architectures
with selective absorption, i.e. exhibiting visible minima and ultra-violet (UV)
and near-infrared (NIR) maxima, uniquely distinct from the band-absorption of
traditional inorganic semiconductors. By using excitonic molecular
semiconductors with structured absorption in the NIR/UV these devices are
simultaneously optimized for high power conversion efficiency, visible light
transmission, and color rendering index. Accordingly, the aim of this program is
to reach relevant size, lifetime, aesthetic, and form-factor objectives that
will demonstrate the feasibility of developing the proof-of-concept prototypes
into a commercially viable, transparent, PV window film that can be applied to
glass surfaces at the point of window fabrication or as a retrofit on existing
windows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project enables unprecedented freedom for architectural PV
adoption by maintaining the aesthetics of existing building materials and the
quality of natural indoor lighting: (1) increasing building efficiency and
energy independence by producing electricity at the point of utilization, (2)
reducing building cooling demands by rejecting infrared solar heat,
supplementing or replacing existing low-E and solar-control window coatings, and
(3) achieving low levelized energy costs by piggybacking on the installation,
framing, and maintenance of the existing building envelope. Installed window
surface area in the U.S. equipped with such films represents hundreds of
terawatt-hours of potential energy, comprising energy generation and energy
savings. Moreover, this project will result in a core knowledge from which
future generations of transparent photovoltaic devices and materials will be
designed. Visibly transparent PVs are also amenable to seamless energy
harvesting within non-window surfaces such as electronic displays and mobile
electronic accessories, enhancing the functionality of those products without
impacting aesthetics or functionality. The deployment of transparent PVs, both
domestically and abroad, supports American efforts to maintain technological and
economic leadership in developing and implementing advanced technologies, by
revolutionizing the way electricity is generated and consumed.