* 1248454
* I-Corps:  High-value surface modifications with nanomaterial thin films
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Qi Fan, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project aims to demonstrate the commercial viability of using
highly reflective and light scattering nanoparticle thin films as solar cell
back reflectors with the goal to replace high-vacuum processing techniques. Back
reflectors can enhance the solar cells photocurrent by 30%, but conventional
back reflectors consist of sputtered metal films. Large scale production
sputtering systems require high capital cost and frequent downtime due to system
maintenance and target replacement. In addition to the high cost, silver back
reflectors used in record efficiency solar cells cannot be used in commercial
products due to poor adhesion, oxidation, and migration into the cell resulting
in deteriorated performance and reliability. Instead, aluminum back reflectors
are used, but only results in moderate performance improvements due to poor
reflectance in the most critical portion of sunlight. This project uses the
electrophoretic deposition method using novel solutions to grow dielectric
nanoparticle films, which will reduce the cost of producing back reflectors due
to reduced capital expense devoted to building out the processing facilities and
reduced operating expense through less down time, more efficient coating
material utilization, and reduced energy consumption.

A broad market opportunity exists for technologies that add high-value
functionality to otherwise low-value surfaces, e.g. superhydrophobic surface
coatings for self-cleaning applications, photonic structures for light
management, textured/porous structures for electronic devices. Conventional
methods to obtain high-value surfaces typically require chemical wet-etching,
high-vacuum, and lithography methods, and consequently, rarely make it out of
the lab and into commercially-viable products. The proposed innovation is to use
nanoparticle-based films deposited by the low-cost, ?green?, scalable, and
industry-relevant electrophoretic deposition method, which could bring value-
added technologies to market. An application identified for the nanoparticle
films is a solar cell back reflector. Competitive solar technologies require
both high conversion efficiencies and low-cost manufacturing techniques. If
successfully deployed, the proposed technology is expected to enable solar
manufacturers a lower cost alternative to high-vacuum sputtered metal back
reflectors for high efficiency and stable solar cells.