* 1248967
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time, Low Cost Point-and-Shoot 3D Camera
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Christopher Slaughter, Lynx Laboratories Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 179,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to build a
low cost, real-time 3D camera. The research objectives are to prototype a
portable, compact and low power camera capable of capturing 3D models of indoor
scenes. This research will use techniques from computer vision, robotics and
high dimensional statistics and signal processing in order to achieve its goals.
The novelty of the research is in bringing together cutting-edge ideas from
these diverse disciplines to solve real-world problems in 3D modeling. The
anticipated technical results include a working prototype that enables real-time
operation without any human intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes the architecture,
engineering and construction (AEC) industry. An industry where mistakes can
prove costly both in terms of money and lives, our research can enable real-time
tracking of the construction process, enabling workers, architects and engineers
to ensure that mistakes are detected and corrected promptly during construction,
and &lt;br/&gt;historical monuments are preserved over time as 3D models.
Additionally, this technology can aid educational activities in classrooms, help
with remote surveillance etc., with multitude of applications to impact people
from all walks of life.