* 1248352
* SBIR Phase I:  Autoclave Equivalent Composites Via In-Situ Pressurization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Zachary Wing, Advanced Ceramics Manufacturing
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,957.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop
materials and manufacturing processes that enable aerospace composite materials
to be produced without an autoclave. To ensure the best material quality and
reliability, aerospace composites are processed inside autoclaves that combine
heat and pressure to fully bond multi-layered composites. Autoclaves that can
accommodate aircraft fuselages and wings now exist. The capital costs, labor
costs, and manufacturing times associated with autoclave processing are
significant but are a necessary evil to ensure composite quality. A large
opportunity exists for Out Of Autoclave (OOA) technology to reduce costs and
streamline composite manufacturing operations. The current OOA focus of industry
is to develop new resin/fabric systems that can be processed OOA but still yield
suitable performance. A better approach to achieve broad-based OOA manufacturing
is to compatibilize existing resin/fabric systems. This goal may be achieved
through a combination of new tooling materials and manufacturing processes that
can self-pressurize and consolidate composites. The results of the Phase I
effort will demonstrate a true OOA technique that allows autoclave equivalent
composite properties to be achieved in any existing resin/fabric system without
the use of autoclave.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide the
composites industry with an OOA solution that is resin independent. The use of
advanced fiber reinforced composites in aircraft has become a necessity to
achieve higher performance and greater fuel efficiencies. Boeing's 787 and
Airbus' A350 are two such aircraft that exemplify the push to increase composite
content above 50% by weight. A large opportunity exists for OOA technology to
reduce costs and streamline composite manufacturing operations. The OOA
technology developed in Phase I will have a large impact on the composites
industry through cost reduction and manufacturing efficiency gains. It will
allow a broader manufacturing base to produce autoclave-like parts. Society will
see benefits through the broader use of fuel-efficient composites in air- and
land-based vehicles. This effort will also foster collaboration between small
business and large aerospace manufacturers as well as offer undergraduate and
high school students an opportunity to work on the project.