* 1248961
* Student Travel and Activities Support: ACM SIGSPATIAL 2012 International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Craig Knoblock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 33,267.00

This travel support enables U.S.-based students to attend the 20th ACM
SIGSPATIAL GIS 2012 Conference, held in Redondo Beach, CA, USA, November 6-9,
2012 (http://acmgis2012.cs.umd.edu/). The ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS conference has
established itself as the world's premier conference to foster research in the
areas of Spatial Data and Analysis and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). The
conference provides a forum for original research contributions covering all
conceptual, design, and implementation aspects of GIS ranging from applications,
user interfaces, and visualization to storage management and indexing issues. It
brings together researchers, developers, users, and practitioners carrying out
research and development in novel systems based on geospatial data and
knowledge, and fostering interdisciplinary discussions and research in all
aspects of GIS. It is the premier annual event of the ACM Special Interest Group
on Spatial Information (ACM SIGSPATIAL). The conference seeks to continuously
advance the state of-the-art in spatial data management and spatial data
analysis and broaden its impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides
partial travel support and conference registration for 30-35 qualified U.S.
based graduate and promising undergraduate student participants. The students
will greatly benefit from attending this conference, as they will be able to
partake in the current state-of-the-art in the area of geospatial systems and
applications, present their work, and potentially make connections for research
collaborations and research mentoring. The total number of ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS
participants in the past has been in excess of 250 participants, with a majority
of the participants from the U.S., followed by Europe and Asia. The conference
participation has shown a steady increase in the past few years due to the
growing importance of geographic information. A strong representation of
U.S.-based graduate students at ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS is useful in maintaining U.S.
competitiveness in the important research areas crucial for U.S. infrastructures
and applications that critically depend on geo-referenced information. Those who
receive the award will be featured in the NSF Student Supported Research special
section of the combined Poster, Demo, and PhD Showcase Session, a major event in
the conference that is attended by all conference participants.