* 1248414
* SBIR Phase I:  High Throughput Cell Sorting with Coherent Raman Scattering (CRS )
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Christian Freudiger, Invenio
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a flow cytometer for sorting cells based on chemical phenotyping, which
(1) provides quantitative analysis of specific molecular species, (2) has single
cell sensitivity, (3) is high throughput, (4) label-free, and (5) non-
destructive to living organisms. The proposed system uses coherent Raman
scattering (CRS), a laser spectroscopy based on analysis of the vibrations of
chemical bonds. Compared to conventional Raman scattering, the CRS signal is
coherently amplified, which should achieve sorting speeds up to 10,000 cells/s,
which is &gt;10,000x faster than what can currently be achieved with spontaneous
Raman. Reaching this goal requires development of (1) a spectrally multiplexed
CRS system based on a narrowband pump laser and a broadband probe laser, and (2)
a high-speed, high-sensitivity multichannel detection system to simultaneously
probe multiple spectral components of the broadband pump
laser.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project derives from the variety of potential applications of this novel
phenotyping technology in basic and applied R&amp;D. One example is in the field
of products from biological organisms (e.g., algae or yeast) including fuels and
specialty chemicals, where the organism synthesizes the target chemical using
energy either harvested from sunlight or from a low-value feedstock, such as
glucose. Genetic modification is used to improve yield and specificity for the
target chemical species. The process of mutation and selection can be repeated
until an optimized outcome is obtained. High-throughput chemical phenotyping is
required to sample a large number of genetic mutations and speed up the directed
evolution process. It would be advantageous to perform such biochemical analysis
non-destructively, so that the fitness of candidates could be tested in growth
and stress assays after selection. In addition to biofuel production, there are
numerous applications in basic research, as well as medical applications in both
diagnostics and treatment.