* 1248147
* SBIR Phase I:  Securing Industrial Control Networks with Network Forecasting
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Michael Schultz, Observable Networks, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

The innovation of network forecasting is a new approach to securing industrial
control networks that is based upon 1) discovering, monitoring, and modeling all
devices on a network, 2) using these models to predict future device behavior,
3) evaluating past predictions with current observations of networked device
behavior, and 4) investigating prediction-observation discrepancies to discover
misbehaving devices. The intellectual merit of the innovation lies in its
departure from traditional network security paradigms. Traditional approaches,
such as signature-based anti-virus and intrusion prevention systems, detect
misbehaviors by recognizing repeats of past behaviors; these approaches
necessarily overlook one-of-a-kind or zero-day misbehaviors. In contrast,
network forecasting incorporates an understanding of correct and expected
network behavior so that aberrant behavior can be identified even if it has not
been seen before. The approach will be built upon the foundation of Continuous
Device Profiling (CDP), which concretely models and monitors the active roles
that devices assume on the network. Network forecasting will predict near-future
CDP characteristics of devices; when predictions fail to match reality on the
network, network operators can respond without needing to fully understand the
details of the threat that caused the disturbance.

The broader/commercial impact of this innovation is substantial because critical
infrastructure represents both a significant investment and a substantive risk
in modern society. While recent cyber attacks may have heightened public
awareness of these threats, such infrastructure has been the object of sustained
concern from government and private-sector groups for many years. However, as
our need for increased security in critical infrastructure has grown, the
effectiveness of network security methods has diminished; the pace of effective
cyber attacks and network breaches is increasing, not decreasing, as time
passes. If successful, network forecasting has the potential to transform the
security and monitoring practices in nearly all domains of critical
infrastructure, far beyond the power plant demonstration this proposed effort
will undertake. The stakes are high: future cost savings, technological advances
and economic prosperity all presume the existence of secure, networked critical
infrastructure. Substantial advances in the security of such infrastructure,
such as that promised by network forecasting, can help protect that future.