* 1248912
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time Locating System by Radio Frequency Identification for Human-Machine Interface
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Hao Lin, CIELWAY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop an
indoor real-time locating system to provide a better wireless computer mouse and
to enable new 3D human-machine interface. The conventional optical mouse
provides only 2D tracking, and requires battery and a non-reflective patterned
surface. New human-machine interface based on video processing such as Kinect is
limited by line-of-sight and has high demands of CPU cycles on the host
computer. This proprietary technology is the passive harmonic RFID tags that can
be localized by the reader in sub-millimeter precision within the 2-4 meter
reading range, and can provide 9-bit precision of sensor data by multi-frequency
phase detection. The main research tasks include 1) conforming the wireless link
to the allowable FCC bands of amateur radio, Bluetooth and/or RFID UHF, 2)
investigating multi-antenna technology to reduce the multi-path interference in
the harmonic uplink, and 3) developing improved algorithms for the mouse motion
tracking to minimize the host reader loads. It will formulate the prototype
choices for the passive tags as the battery-free 3D mouse and for the dongles on
the host Windows computer as the reader.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
is that many other human-machine interfaces for gaming, prosthesis, and motion
tracking can be enabled by this RFID technology, which have large market growth
potential as well as social impact on everyday life. The plan on the 3D mouse
and other human-machine interface such as game controllers will help obtain the
necessary manufacturing expertise, grow revenue, and build business reputation.
If 10% of the present wireless mouse users would switch to this battery-free,
no-surface constraint 3D mouse, the conservative estimate will be a market size
at 40 million dollars with one product alone. With further extension of range,
multiplexing and digital ID integration, the real-time locating RFID technology
will also have broad applications on building energy management, inventory
control, and security monitoring. In addition to the conventional harmonic radar
concept to reduce interference, several new concepts in the nonlinear-
transmission-line based backscattering tags have resulted in self-matched
impedance with various antenna, spectrum spilling prevention, high harmonic
conversion efficiency, and high-resolution distance determination by preserving
the phase information. The enhanced technological understanding of personal area
networks will further enable new market applications.