* 1248187
* EAGER: Exploring Scientific Drilling in Lake Towuti, Indonesia: Paleoclimate, Biological Evolution, and Geomicrobiology in tropical Pacific lake
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 90,073.00

Proposed is an exploratory multichannel seismic reflection survey of Lake
Towuti, South Sulawesi, the largest lake in Indonesia. Existing seismic
reflection datasets from Lake Towuti indicate the presence of up to 150 of
lacustrine sediment in Lake Towuti overlying a deeper package of fluvial and
lacustrine sediment. These deeper sediments potentially record the middle to
late Pleistocene hydrologic history of central Indonesia, but are poorly
resolved in current datasets. The overarching goal is to generate a seismic-
stratigraphic framework for this basin through multichannel seismic reflection
surveys to provide new insight into the climatic and geological evolution of
central Sulawesi since the mid-Pleistocene. These data will also provide the
fundamental, seismic-stratigraphic architecture upon which to will build a
large, interdisciplinary project to obtain long drill cores from Lake Towuti to
investigate climatic, environmental, and biological evolution in central
Indonesia during the Pleistocene. &lt;br/&gt;The Indo-Pacific region contains
the largest pool of warm water on Earth, and variations in rainfall over the
Indo-Pacific impact global climate through changes in the Earth?s atmospheric
circulation. Despite this region?s importance, we know very little about its
long-term climatic and environmental evolution. Indonesia sits at the heart of
the Indo-Pacific and hosts numerous lakes, the sediments in which record the
region?s environmental and climate history. This proposal aims to geophysically
characterize the sediments of Lake Towuti, the largest lake in Indonesia.
Specifically, the project will characterize the nature and history of
sedimentation in this lake since the mid-Pleistocene, or the last 1.5 million
years. This work will provide new insight into this region?s climatic,
biological, and geological history.