* 1248739
* SBIR Phase I:  Personalized Point-of-Care Immunity Assessment Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Michael Harvey, Maine Manufacturing LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create a
multiplexed point-of-care (POC) testing platform for the assessment and
verification of vaccination using whole blood samples. For the rapid assessment
of immunization status, both accurate multiplexing and plasma separation from
whole blood pose technical hurdles for POC test systems. Lateral flow
immunoassays have been limited in achieving multiplexed results from whole blood
samples. Plasma separation from blood in sufficient sample volumes, and
interferences from neighboring immunoreaction, creates significant technical
hurdles for development of an effective POC test for immunity. Moreover, an
epitope-specific assessment of immunity has yet to be demonstrated in such a
test. The objectives of this proposal will be to create a plasma-generating
multiplexed epitope-specific test device for testing immunity to viral diseases.
The Phase I project will establish optimum, non-interfering, peptide array
configurations on appropriate nitrocellulose surfaces in line with a blood
separation material. In parallel, the company will take advantage of epitope
mapping technology. The elucidation of multiple vaccine-response epitopes, and
the design and validation of peptide affinity-capture analogs to enable
quantification of circulating vaccine-response antibodies, will be essential to
creating an accurate serological test.

The broader impact/commercial impact of this project includes an enhanced
technology for multiplexed immunoassay, a more efficient plasma generation
system for POC, and a demonstrated methodology for defining antibody responses
to immunization. More than 10,000,000 people in the US alone must verify their
immunization status each year. This is currently accomplished by providing a
verifiable immunization record from a primary health care provider, or by
demonstrating proof-of-immunity through appropriate antibody tests. The POC
immunization assessment device proposed for this SBIR project will provide a
rapid, reliable and lower cost solution for all of those who do not have access
to verified immunization records. The devicde avoids the expense and long wait
required for antibody titer tests, currently the only option for people without
verifiable records. The test system will provide improved, rapid, and
inexpensive test methodology as well as a means to capture, analyze, and store
the results using common equipment.