* 1248079
* INSPIRE :An Engineering and Economic Pathway to Electric Vehicle-Based Transportation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lang Tong, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Communication and Information
Foundations Program in the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations
of the Directorate for Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE/CCF)
and the Economics Program in the Division of Social and Economic Sciences of the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences (SBE/SES), and addresses
engineering and economic challenges in developing a sustainable pathway to an
electric-vehicle based transportation system. In particular, the project aims to
develop transformative technologies and economic/policy solutions that
facilitate a paradigm shift from individual and on-demand charging of today to
one of network-switched, interactive, and managed charging. The major benefits
of the new paradigm include reduced peak power demand from large scale charging,
improved profit potential for charging facilities, enhanced consumer experience,
and ultimately the wider adoption of electric vehicles.

The project pursues joint economic and engineering solutions based on an
architectural innovation that integrates renewable sources, responds to real
time electricity pricing, and interacts with consumers through dynamic and
service differentiated pricing. The project employs economic modeling and
optimization techniques to characterize demand and profit conditions. A dynamic
model will be developed to investigate the interactions between charging
facility investments and electric vehicle ownership. Counterfactual analysis
will be conducted to gain insights into the roles of consumers, investors, and
the government and the impacts of different economic, policy and technological
factors in the diffusion process of electric vehicles and charging
infrastructure.