* 1248710
* SBIR Phase I:  A Bioactive Hernia Mesh Containing Choroid Plexus Factors For Improved Tissue Integration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Chris Thanos, CYTOSOLV INC.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project continues the
development of the choroid plexus (CP) growth factor cocktail for application to
biologic hernia meshes to treat the challenging hernia repair market. CP factors
represent a broad spectrum of potent biologic molecules that have demonstrated a
benefit in the healing of splinted open wounds in diabetic mice, are
neuroprotective, and can be harvested from cultured CP epithelium for at least a
year. The current project focuses on formulating these factors into coatings
that can be applied to porcine derived acellular dermal matrices in an attempt
to provide modulation of the inflammatory cascade and subsequent improvement of
engraftment. CP factors harvested from culture will be collected, purified, and
concentrated into hydrogel coatings. Three markers of potency, VEGF, TIMP-2, and
TGF-Ã¢, will be assessed by ELISA to characterize the raw materials, as well
release profiles of various formulations. Using the rat midline abdominal defect
model, coated mesh prototypes will be compared to commercially available
products with a focus on histopathological characterization, gene expression
within the graft, and mechanical integrity. The experimental design and selected
endpoints are expected to provide the foundation for determining potential
efficacy and subsequent product development pathways.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful will
address the need of, approximately 200,000-400,000 patients annually who are
associated with impaired healing, poor engraftment of traditional hernia meshes,
and recurrence rates as high as 65%. With very high rates of primary repair
failure, as well as hernia developing from simple laparotomy, there is a
significantly large unmet clinical need resulting in a market size of
approximately $1.7B. A successful translation into the clinic will result in a
product that improves hernia mesh engraftment by accelerating inflammation and
promoting cell migration and extracellular matrix production. Such a product has
the potential for an immediate impact in the clinic due to the rise in
prevalence of patients with challenging hernia repairs, and lack of available
efficacious therapies. The studies proposed here are preliminary steps toward
commercialization, with the opportunity to capture a significant portion of the
approximately $1.7B market, none of which is currently occupied by growth factor
therapies. By demonstrating a therapeutic benefit, this work could be
commercialized rapidly through an ongoing partnership to provide near-term
benefit to patients with impaired healing.