* 1248398
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Antibiotics from Marine Animal-Microbe Symbioses
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Dallas Hughes, NovoBiotic Pharmaceuticals, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 147,276.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new platform technology to exploit previously inaccessible microbial diversity
to discover novel broad-spectrum antibiotics. The project focuses on symbioses
between marine invertebrates and microorganisms known to be rich sources of
novel bioactive compounds with potential therapeutic value. Microbial symbionts
have long been suspected to be the actual producers of such compounds. They, and
other microorganisms in general, remain largely unexplored because over 99% of
them cannot be cultivated in the laboratory. Recovery of cultivable
microorganisms from the sea is especially poor (0.1 to 0.01%) making the
?missing? marine species particularly attractive. The company employs a
radically new method for in situ cultivation of previously uncultured
microorganisms that significantly raises the cultivability of environmental
bacteria, from &lt;1% using traditional technologies to &gt;20%. In Phase I, the
company will adopt and optimize this method to access microorganisms
specifically from marine symbioses, isolate novel microbial species from marine
sponges and corals, and explore their antimicrobial properties. The principle
intellectual merit and innovation of this proposal is in focusing on an
essentially novel source of antimicrobials, microbes living in association with
marine invertebrates, and the use of a novel method to grow these
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project stems from an increasing need for new antibiotics with new modes of
action that are not susceptible to current resistance mechanisms. Agencies such
as the Antimicrobial Availability Task Force of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America and the World Health Organization have publicized the urgency of the
resistance problem and the lack of forthcoming antibiotics in development. The
multiple antibiotic-resistant bacteria are the exact pathogens that the company
is targeting. Although big Pharma has largely abandoned their antibiotic
discovery programs, they remain interested in acquiring new viable antibiotics.
The global market for antibiotics is over $25 billion. Top earners, such as
Levaquin (Floxin), Zosyn, and Augmentin have 2008 sales over $1 billion, with
significant resistance already observed to all three. There is also an acute,
unmet need and market even for narrow-spectrum antibiotics. Their commercial
value and societal importance cannot be overstated. Of particular importance is
that the proposed research will not only lead to a selection of novel
antimicrobials, but to a new technology platform forming a whole new pipeline of
new therapeutics.