* 1248690
* SBIR Phase I: Sensors for InLine Certification Capability for Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Lijun Song, SenSigma LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,623.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project will develop a
spectroscopic sensor that detects and categorizes defects, predicts the
composition and phase transformation, and monitors the manufacturing quality in
real time for additive manufacturing industry. Current sensors for quality
assurance are not widely employed in manufacturing processes because they lack
reliability and functionality, do not work in real time, or are costly and
complex to implement. The approach to design the smart optical monitoring system
is through understanding the physical mechanism of laser/arc manufacturing
processes, characterizing the laser/arc induced plasma and developing effective
plasma signal processing algorithm to predict manufacturing quality. The
intellectual merits lies in 1) a breakthrough technology for in-situ monitoring
and control of phase transformation and composition by systematic diagnosis of
the laser induced plasma, and 2) an advanced technology to detect and categorize
manufacturing defects through understanding the effects of different defects on
plasma and designing effective algorithms to interpret plasma signals. The smart
optical monitoring sensor will contribute to the competitive advantage for
American manufacturing industry by providing 'InLine Certification' capability
for additive manufacturing, to minimize material wastage and lost labor time,
and to increase long-term product quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in its ability to save
enormous amount of capital resource of materials and human time and to increase
the competitive capacity of the industryby dramatically reducing the post-
processing time to identify composition, microstructure and manufacturing
qualities, leading to zero scrap. The enhanced scientific and technological
understanding lies in the mechanism of how defects, composition and phase
transformation affect the characteristics of the laser/arc induced plasma, and
how to design effective algorithm based on this mechanism to in-situ interpret
the plasma signals to predict defects, composition and phase transformation and
further categorize different defects. The Broader Societal impact of this
innovative spectroscopic sensor is its potential to influence the whole metal
manufacturing and materials processing industries by providing the 'InLine
Certification' capability. The capability of predicting composition, phase
transformation and manufacturing defect will allow for the fabrication of near
net shape and property (NNSP) components with heterogeneous structures and
complex geometries for additive manufacturing industry. In-situ prediction of
phase transformation using spectroscopic sensor is a high-risk, high payoff
innovative technology with the potential to change the way material processing
and manufacturing is practiced today.