* 1248528
* SBIR Phase I: Low-cost, High Performance Fabrics for Inflatable Sructures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Ben Glass, Altaeros Energies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2013
* USD 155,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
low-cost, high-performance fabric suitable for long service life helium
inflatable structures, including aerostats and airships. Traditional fabrics for
lighter-than-air (LTA) applications utilize woven polyester or vectran
basecloths laminated with various materials that improve gas retention,
environmental resistance and allow the material to be thermally bonded. This
combination has excellent performance, providing a useful service life in excess
of seven years, but comes at a high cost, which limits the commercial
application of helium inflatable structures. The proposed low-cost, high
performance fabric replaces the woven basecloth with a scrim of high-strength
synthetic fibers, similar to those in high-end sailcloth. This type of material
has not seen wide use in helium inflatable structures where seams are subject to
long-term loading from internal pressure. The impact of scrim pattern and yarn
alignment on seam stiffness and long-term holding strength is considered. This
Phase I research will investigate the behavior of these materials, as well as
one or more alternative woven fabrics, under long-term loading, UV exposure, and
mechanical wear and tear, in order to evaluate their suitability for helium
inflatables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will be a step toward the widespread commercialization of LTA
inflatable structures in traditional and new application areas. Helium
inflatable structures are traditionally used for transporting or elevating high
value payloads, such as military surveillance equipment or advertising, where
the relatively high cost of the fabric envelope is not a barrier to commercial
feasibility. The advent of a low-cost, high performance helium inflatable fabric
will make LTA structures economically viable for a number of industries that are
cost-sensitive, including remote and emergency wireless communication; low-cost
freight transport; and airborne wind energy production. The research will also
enhance the understanding of the behavior of scrim-based fabrics under loading
conditions, which may benefit a wide range of industries that could use these
fabrics, including sailing, architectural fabrics and air inflatable structures.