* 1248221
* Student Poster Symposium at ASME Society-Wide Micro and Nano Technology Forum, Houston, Texas, November 9-15, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Daniel Attinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 26,000.00

CBET-1248221&lt;br/&gt;PI: Huang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The travel grant request
is for partial travel support for graduate students presenting posters in a
Poster Symposium at the ASME Micro-Nano Technology Forum at the ASME IMECE 20112
in Houston, TX. The plan is to support nearly 40 meritorious graduate students
from a pool of nearly 150-200 posters that will be presented during this forum.
Students selected will be on the basis of merit and diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professional development of talented, diverse group of
scientists in critical emerging areas is an important need for the nation and a
priority for NSF. The travel grant is focused on doctoral students preparing for
careers in academia and industry and in the vital technological area of nano and
micro technology that NSF, CBET and the Thermal Transport program have heavily
invested in for over a decade. The ASME IMECE is the premier conference for
mechanical engineers and in the nano-technology area, and is therefore a good
venue for the proposed poster presentations. The students will be exposed to
cutting edge emerging research across the country and world, and those
presenting will be able to further develop their professional skills in
technical presentations. Beyond that, students attending will have the
opportunity to learn from a variety of sources, as approximately 2000
presentations are generally presented at this annual meeting, further
facilitating idea development for future careers in research. It is anticipated
based on previous year attendance that over 150 presentations will be made, and
there will be over 300 attendees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano technology science
research is now maturing and leading to transformational technology. Supporting
this grant will foster interactions between budding researchers and
entrepreneurs and will promote the technology and its transformational aspects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is expected to help in professional
development, and students will be supported with an eye on diversity and
encouraging under-represented group participation. Student selection will be
done by an expert panel organized by the PIs from the posters submitted to the
symposium. Opportunities that exist for postdoctoral positions and faculty as
well as opportunities facilitated by other governmental agencies (e.g. DoD) will
allow for important career development analyses. By attending, students will
also have the option to attend professional development workshops and seminars
that go beyond the traditional scientific development into areas important for
career success, such as public speaking skills and resume/CV preparation.