* 1248807
* SBIR PhaseI: Water Cleaning with Photocatalytic Nanofiber Mesh
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Jusang Lee, Gouma Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will further
develop the company's visible-light activated Photocatalytic Nanofiber Mesh
technology to clean up hydrocarbon contamination in produced water resulting
from oil and gas drilling operations, such as fracking. It involves a highly
promising and unique approach to remove contaminants from petroleum-oil polluted
water by decomposing them in-situ into environmental friendly products. The
proposal explores novel scalable processes for nanomanufacturing the catalytic
nanofiber mesh based on the CuO-WO3 system in high quantities and at low cost
and aims to assessing their photocatalytic efficiency with respect to
decomposing a wide range of BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes)
concentrations. Pilot studies in the field will provide definite measures of the
potency and usability of these nanofiber meshes. The flexibility of process
conditions (contact time with pollutant, floatability, recovery, reuse) are
among the key features of this nanomaterials-based technology and a solid
response to an urgent need for economic water remediation technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
involves remediating oil pollution in water. Oil derivatives are among the most
dangerous compounds for the environment. Produced water from fracking operations
results in large amount of water contaminated with hydrocarbons such as BTEX.
The photocatalytic nanofiber mesh technology provides a means to contain and
clean BTEX contamination in water, in a most cost-effective and ecofriendly
manner. While current photocatalysts are activated by only about 2% of the solar
irradiance, the nanofiber mesh responds to radiation from the full solar
spectrum. And solar power is free. Apart from water remediation, immediate uses
of the nanofiber mesh technology are envisioned in filtration, as well as in
biomedical and pharmaceutical industries. Scaling-up the nanomanufacturing
process will provide significant benefits in terms of reducing the cost and
increasing the availability of the nanogrids to be used in actual commercial
products. Commercializing this technology will create new jobs for both skilled
and unskilled workers, will provide the opportunity to train the workforce in
using nanomaterials technology and nanomanufacturing to make real and versatile
market products, and it will benefit the environment and the human welfare.