* 1248509
* SBIR Phase I:  Cooperative Overground Gait Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* Adam Zoss, Ekso Bionics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to address
the significant technical barriers associated with an untethered overground
cooperative gait rehabilitation exoskeleton. Current gait rehabilitation
techniques available to patients with gait abnormalities include conventional
therapist based rehabilitation and more recently Body Weight Support Treadmill
(BWST) robotic rehabilitation. The leading BWST devices employ a cooperative
gait rehabilitation approach that varies the assistance to the user based on
their ability. The conventional therapy approach is extremely labor intensive,
but while the BWST therapy is the leading alternative it has shown mixed
results. Researchers hypothesize that this is due to differences in the trained
gait between BWST walking and overground walking. Mobile exoskeletons have
emerged to better imitate overground walking, but to date no mobile device has
implemented a cooperative control strategy, mainly due to the technical issues
associated with its use. This SBIR intends to develop novel advances in
cooperative rehabilitation control strategies along with innovative actuator
designs to make possible the first mobile overground gait rehabilitation
exoskeleton that implements a cooperative strategy. Specifically, it will
address the major technical barriers to achieving this goal to increase the
chances of successfully developing this technology in Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
could directly impact the lives of patients with impaired gaits from a variety
of symptoms including post-stroke, incomplete spinal cord injury, and multiple
sclerosis. It is estimated that nearly 2 million patients in the U.S. could
currently benefit from improved gait rehabilitation therapy. This technology can
be sold directly to rehabilitation hospitals through existing distribution
channels. This technology will have a significant impact on the lives of
patients undergoing gait rehabilitation. It will enable a new level of
effectiveness by providing a novel cooperative rehabilitation approach on an
overground device. Existing conventional therapy often causes patients to
transition to therapist-assisted overground walking prematurely, resulting in a
gap in the progression of care. This device addresses that gap by supporting a
patient from acute therapy until they are strong enough for therapist-assisted
overground walking. Finally, this device will expand our technical understanding
of the limits and effectiveness of robotic gait rehabilitation. The device will
serve as a platform to develop the next generation of even more effective
robotic rehabilitation control strategies, both for the investigators and the
greater research community.