* 1248809
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous 3D Scanner for Building Interiors and Exteriors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Oskar Skrinjar, Scientific Imaging and Visualization, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 146,716.00

The innovation of this project is the development of a system that can
autonomously scan building interiors and exteriors and construct corresponding
detailed, photo-realistic 3D models with minimal interaction of an operator that
does not need to have specialized skills. The idea is to use a small unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) equipped with a wireless camera and a laser line that can
almost fully autonomously fly inside and around the building, video record all
the interior and exterior structures, and send the video and other recorded
information to the base station where the 3D model is constructed using computer
vision techniques. The proposed system requires the development of two
innovative technologies: (1) automated construction of texture-mapped 3D models
of structures video recorded from a flying vehicle, and (2) autonomous flying of
an UAV inside and around a building based on the recorded video and range
information. While 3D scanning is an existing technology and small UAVs have
already been developed, this proposal will combine these technologies and
enhance their capabilities to deliver new value. In addition, computer,
smartphone and tablet software for interactive visualization and exploration of
the constructed 3D models will be developed.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is in the area of marketing of
businesses and institutions, virtual reality applications as well as in rescue
and law-enforcement applications. Having detailed, photo-realistic 3D models of
building interiors and exteriors is useful in a number of applications. However,
the existing approaches for the construction of such models are labor intensive
and require highly trained people and expensive equipment, which make the entire
process prohibitively expensive for most applications. The proposed system would
reduce the cost of construction of such models by at least an order of magnitude
compared to the existing solutions and would automate most of the process. The
proposed system could be used to relatively inexpensively construct detailed,
photo-realistic 3D models of interiors and exteriors of: real estate properties,
restaurants, sport clubs, museums, historic buildings, architectural sites,
touristic sites, university campuses, amusement parks, water parks, zoos,
apartment complexes, resorts, hotels, hospitals, shopping malls, etc. The
constructed 3D models can then be explored online using computers, smartphones
and tablets. Furthermore, the system can be used for mapping or exploring
buildings in situations where it is dangerous or impractical for people to
enter, which is often the case in rescue and law-enforcement applications.