* 1248536
* SBIR Phase I:  A Nano Net for Trace Explosives Detection: Closing the Multi-target Systems Gap with a Peroxide Vapor Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Benjamin Rollins, Vaporsens Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new and
improved sensor material to detect the vapors of peroxide-based homemade
explosives. The Department of Homeland Security and Department of Defense have
identified peroxide-based homemade explosive detection as a top priority need.
Terrorists worldwide continue to carry explosives onto airplanes and transport
them through the mail. In addition, sixty percent of US and Allied deaths in
Iraq and Afghanistan are related to improvised explosive devices (IEDs).
Vaporsens is developing a revolutionary detector capable of continuous, non-
contact detection of explosive threats. The sensor material to be used in the
detector can identify the majority of explosives - with the exception of
peroxide-base explosives. To develop this multi-target detector, the company
must demonstrate the feasibility of detecting peroxide-based explosives with its
novel sensor material. The outcome will be a highly sensitive peroxide sensor
material ready to be to be integrated into our multi-target explosive detector
product.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will address our
homeland security needs to chemically detect explosives accurately, quickly, and
in a non-intrusive manner. The small, fast-acting detector will be ideal for
portable explosive detectors and also for integration into existing security
monitoring, building ventilation, and detection systems. Furthermore, the
development of such a technology is feasible from an investment standpoint
because potential commercial value is high.