* 1248947
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Contrast Agents for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Thomas Macher, MagnnPro
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,954.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a feasibility
assessment of using ultrathin magnetic iron oxide nanowires as positive contrast
agent for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Each year, approximately 30 million
MRI scans are performed for diagnostic or therapeutic purpose. Two types of
contrast agents are routinely administrated to alter the image contrast: T1
positive contrast agents-gadolinium (Gd) complexes and T2 negative contrast
agents-iron oxide nanoparticles. The brighter MR image of a T1 contrast agent is
clinically preferred over the darker image of the T2 contrast agent. The current
problems with the T1 Gd-based contrast agents is the health risk to patients
with liver and kidney diseases, and babies, and are difficult to retain at
target locations. Because iron oxide -based T2 contrast agents are generally
accepted to be safe and can be reabsorbed through normal iron metabolic
pathways, if they can be used as T1 contras agents, it could provide safety and
imaging efficacy. The unique magnetic property of ultrathin nanowires offers
great potential as positive contrast agent. The research objective is to
evaluate the potential of these nanowires in clinical relevant conditions,
leading to a safe and effective MRI contrast agent.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. As the
leading imaging modality, MRI generates contrast agent revenues of over $1.87 bn
in the U.S. alone with growth rate of 12%. The MRI contrast agent market is
driven by the increased demand on new applications, faster scan times and better
quality, aging population, and increased cancer incident. The potential
commercialization of such a MRI contrast agent offer a solution to patients with
live and kidney diseases. The targeting capability of the nanoparticles will
significantly improve the imaging efficiency at a much lower dose. This contrast
agent will ultimately improve disease detection, therapeutic monitoring and
treatment efficacy, potentially leading to the advancement of human health.