* 1248704
* SBIR Phase I:  SQUIREWire 802.15.4 Wireless Sensor Network Solution
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Pamela Jennings, Noblewire
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Program (SBIR) Phase I project is to conduct a
feasibility study for the development of wireless sensor network application for
a personal healthcare product that monitors and gives feedback about sedentary
work habits. This society is becoming increasingly aware of the toll current
work environments have on the physical wellbeing. This project will be an
unobtrusive embedded solution and desktop/mobile data analysis application to
help people monitor their work patterns so that they can adjust their work
environments appropriately. Wireless sensor networks are emerging as a new
paradigm for connectivity, data retrieval and systems control for a range of
applications from healthcare and environment monitoring to consumer products.
This personal healthcare product and enabling technologies will provide the
foundation for a wireless sensor network development environment that will be
targeted to human centered computing researchers, designers, and manufacturers
who need to develop medium to large-scale wireless sensor network projects and
products, but do not have access to the engineering expertise that is required
to develop such systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project includes extending wireless sensor network
technologies into new product domains of personal healthcare and consumer
products. Manufactures, researchers, architects and designers have a growing
need to use mesh wireless sensor networks to monitor and control complex built
environments. Rather than use these technologies for passive monitoring of
ambient environments, this project focuses on the human-in-the-loop as an
integral component with the agency to change their environment for the
betterment of their physical wellbeing. The technologies developed for a mixed-
reality game application will be migrated into a robust, user friendly,
affordable, and scalable solution for the original equipment manufacturer and
business-to-business products and research projects. &amp;#8195;