* 1248683
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Validation of an In Vitro Diagnostic of HDL Cholesterol Efflux and Coronary Artery Disease Risk
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Joshua Schultz, Accent Assays, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new approach to accurately predict coronary artery disease (CAD) risk. Because
high-density-lipoprotein (HDL) protects from CAD, current methods to assess risk
measure the cholesterol content of HDL (HDL-C) as a surrogate indicator of HDL
quantity. However, the function of HDL, namely its ability to efflux
cholesterol, is what reduces CAD risk. Obesity and diabetes predispose to CAD
and compromise HDL cholesterol efflux activity. Because direct quantification of
cholesterol efflux activity is not amenable to clinical laboratories, we
developed a novel assay that uses electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopy to report indirectly on HDL?s cholesterol efflux activity. Our
assay is performed in approximately 10 minutes on less than 10 Âµl of blood
plasma/serum and is suitable for routine automated, high throughput clinical
use. The objectives are: 1) validate the EPR assay compared to direct
measurement of HDL cholesterol efflux activity, and 2) determine the predictive
power of our assay to identify dysfunctional HDL in an established cohort of
individuals with type 2 diabetes (METSIM). It is expected that this assay will
have superior sensitivity and predictive power over all existing methods to
determine CAD risk.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable rapid
assessment of HDL function and accurately predict CAD risk, a multi-billion-
dollar commercial opportunity in the medical diagnostics and drug development
space. This project will develop and validate a rapid, sensitive and accurate
assay that reports on HDL function. This innovative (first-in-class),
discontinuous (goes beyond HDL-C), and transformational assay (highly specific
measurement of HDL function directly in plasma) can be used as a diagnostic
assay to identify patients at risk, even those with normal HDL-C levels, and as
a surrogate outcome measure in clinical trials and patient management. The
exceptional capability of our assay to serve as a window on metabolic disease
status in an age- and gender-independent fashion is unprecedented. This
technology promises to greatly improve the early diagnosis of CAD and metabolic
disease predisposition and facilitate the discovery and implementation of
interventions to prevent disease and significantly reduce long-term healthcare
costs. The still broader use of EPR spectroscopy to measure structural changes
in proteins as functional biomarkers of disease represents a platform innovation
that denotes a new era of sophistication for molecular diagnostics.