* 1248092
* CAREER: Distributed Broadcasting Protocols for Multi-Radio Multi-Channel and Multi-Rate Ad Hoc Mesh Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Min Song, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2013
* USD 114,512.00

A vast array of broadcasting protocols has been developed to alleviate the
Broadcast Storm Problem for single-radio single-channel and single-rate wireless
networks. The emergence of Multi-radio Multi-channel and Multi-rate Mesh (M4)
networks, however, brings a lot of new challenges, such as channel assignment,
adjacent-channel interference, and network capacity. This project focuses on the
design, analysis, and implementation of distributed broadcasting protocols for
M4 networks. Challenges such as channel assessment and assignment, interference-
aware metric design, transmission rate control, broadcasting tree construction,
etc., are to be considered. In-depth theoretical analysis, simulations, and
real-world network experiments are also conducted to evaluate the broadcasting
protocols. This project also explores several educational innovations. These
include the development of a novel three-layer teaching structure, efficient
pedagogical approaches, and effective means of incorporating research into
learning and education. As one important component of this project, outreach
activities are developed for underrepresented minorities from local high schools
with the aim of improving their academic performance.

This research advances knowledge and understanding in the areas of wireless mesh
networks, network optimization, and information dissemination. The problems
studied are pragmatically and intellectually important and their solutions are
critical to several areas such as the modeling of wireless communication links,
networking traffic theory, and network performance analysis. The techniques
developed in this project will benefit a broad spectrum of applications,
including homeland security and military network deployment. Research results
will be disseminated through a number of channels including international
conferences, academic journals, seminars, workshops, and websites.