* 1248970
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost highly-reflective and light scattering dielectric nanoparticle based thin films for solar cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Braden Bills, DSST, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of an innovative concept in using highly reflective and light
scattering nanoparticle thin films as solar cell back reflectors with the goal
to replace high-vacuum processing techniques. Conventional back reflectors
consist of a sputtered metal film, which requires high capital cost for large
scale systems and frequent downtime due to maintenance, cleaning, and replacing
of the sputtering targets. In addition, sputtered metal back reflectors can have
adverse effects on the solar cell device. Solar cells with silver back
reflectors can achieve record efficiencies, but silver migrates into the
absorber material and deteriorates the performance and reliability. Further,
silver does not adhere well to substrates used in solar cell manufacturing and
readily oxidizes reducing its reflectivity. Instead, sputtered aluminum back
reflectors are typically used in thin film solar industry, but aluminum absorbs
light in a crucial portion of the sunlight spectrum resulting in moderate
performance gains. This project will use the lower-cost electrophoretic
deposition method to grow dielectric nanoparticle thin films. The anticipated
result is a manufacturable nanoparticle back reflector that is equally as
reflective as silver for high efficiency and reliable solar cells.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to produce high
efficiency thin film solar cells using nanoparticle-based back reflectors. The
proposed nanoparticle-based back reflector can be fabricated using the
atmospheric electrophoretic deposition method and replaces the conventional
approach of using high vacuum sputtering of metals, which can be expensive, time
consuming, energy intensive, and have poor material utilization. Engineered
nanoparticle-based films are an ideal way to obtain very high light scattering
and reflective surfaces, which are required properties of back reflectors in
high efficiency solar cells. A combination of high solar cell performance and
low-cost manufacturing methods means that the proposed nanoparticle-based back
reflector will be well positioned to succeed in a highly competitive solar
market, which had sales of $82 billion in 2010. Beyond solar, additional
applications for highly engineered nanoparticle-based films include backlight
reflectors for high efficiency flat panel displays, superhydrophobic surfaces
for self-cleaning and water shedding applications, textured/porous structures
for electronic devices, and photonic structures for electro-optical devices.
This project will promote technology-based economic development in the upper
Midwest. Collaboration with South Dakota State University will train graduate
and undergraduate students in nanomaterial science and engineering to advance
the capabilities of the future workforce.