* 1248066
* INSPIRE: Kreyol-based Cyberlearning for a New Perspective on the Teaching of STEM in local Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Vijay Kumar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,044,584.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Cyberlearning: Transforming
Education program in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS)
in Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), the Research and
Evaluation on Education in Science and Engineering (REESE) program in the
Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal Environments (DRL) in
Education and Human Resources (EHR), and the Linguistics program in the Division
of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS) in Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences (SBE).

This project addresses the issue of how to help those whose mother tongue is a
language that does not include scientific and technological terminology to
nonetheless learn STEM content and practices well. While research in linguistics
and on how people learn suggests that learning in one's native language will
promote deeper learning than learning in another language, no research has
specifically been done around this question when the native language does not
include scientific and technological terminology.

The focus of this project is on the creation and innovative uses of Open
Education Resources (OER) for STEM learning at the post-secondary level with
Haitian Creole (Kreyol) as the language of instruction. As part of their work,
the PI and his team are creating a set of Haitian Creole-based, technology-
enabled active-learning resources for STEM higher education in Haiti. Haitian
public policy is to teach in French, a distinct disadvantage for the Kreyol-
speaking public. In addition, there are few materials, and almost no on-line
materials, available in Kreyol that can serve as resources. Interactive
materials and resources created at MIT (STAR; Software Tools for Academics and
Researchers) are being translated into Kreyol and embedded within the active-
learning framework for learning science and engineering created by and used
successfully in large classes at MIT (TEAL; Technology-Enabled Active Learning).
Professional development materials for TEAL are being translated into Kreyol as
part of the project, and Haitian teachers are learning to use an active-learning
approach. A variety of fundamental research questions are being addressed,
pertaining to (i) the effects, impacts, and challenges of creating opportunities
to learn in one's mother tongue, especially when it does not already contain
relevant vocabulary (ii) the creation and diffusion of scientific and technical
vocabulary in languages without technical words, called "language engineering",
(iii) technical and socio-technical issues in adapting and incorporating
learning technologies into the learning environments of underserved populations.

The proposed project crosses goals of NSF programs in linguistics, education,
and cyberlearning but does not fit directly into any existing NSF programs. With
respect to linguistics, the project makes systematic use of Kreyol in the
production of materials and includes substantial language engineering. As such,
it is a translational linguistics project, putting knowledge about language
structure to work in ways that may raise fundamental new questions for
linguistics research. With respect to STEM education, the proposed project
promotes large-scale adoptions of proven educational innovations, and its
approach (systematic use of the language of discourse of a community) is quite
different from other scale-up and dissemination projects. With respect to
cyberlearning, the proposed work aims to study impacts of available educational
software and other resources on learning and extend the reach of existing well-
designed learning technologies. The infrastructure that will be set up may very
well provide other researchers opportunities to learn more about personalizing
learning for specialized populations. This project aims to bring together what
is known across disciplines for positive societal change.

In Haiti and other parts of the "Global South," education is offered only in the
language of previous colonial powers rather than in the native language of the
population. Because the colonial language is not the mother tongue of either
teachers or students, most of the population are at a huge disadvantage with
respect to STEM learning. This, in turn, contributes to perpetuating the poverty
and lack of economic development in these countries. Two hypotheses form the
foundation for this project: (1) Better science, technology, engineering, and
math education in under-developed countries will lead to better economic
development. (2) Education in the language of the community will qualitatively
and transformationally improve learning. The investigators are therefore
bringing together what is known across the fields of linguistics, education, and
learning technologies to develop effective educational materials in the mother
tongue of Haitian students and to help teachers learn up-to-date active-learning
methodologies for teaching STEM subjects. They are studying the effects of these
materials and approaches and learning how to design and integrate such materials
into the learning environment and broader cultural environment of the learners.
The project is being carried out across a variety of post-secondary
institutions. Potential broader and transformational impacts include improved
economic development in countries in the "Global South" and perhaps a paradigm
shift in thinking about the role of local languages in STEM education. Such a
paradigm shift could lead to improved access to education for all, both in
countries where the spoken language is not a language with scientific and
technical vocabularies and in developed countries where some of the population
(e.g., refugees and new immigrants) do not yet speak the language of the country
well.