* 1248103
* Collaborative EAGER Research: Mineral reactions during seismic slip and earthquake instability
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Ze'ev Reches, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2013
* USD 66,848.00

Although a great deal is known about the location of earthquakes and their
danger to society, our knowledge of the underlying physics of how they nucleate
and, especially, the physical processes operating as the slipped area on the
fault expands during an earthquake is still poorly understood. Greater knowledge
of these processes is necessary to better predict seismic shaking danger and, it
is hoped, to one day enable prediction of major earthquakes. This EAGER project
will use experimental studies and high-resolution electron microscopy to test a
new hypothesis of how the slip on continental earthquakes occurs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Earthquakes are understood to initiate by two distinctly
different processes: In the cold, low-pressure, environment of the upper few
tens of km within the Earth, earthquakes generally begin by overcoming static
friction on pre-existing faults. However, earthquakes also occur continuously to
depths approaching 700 km in subducting oceanic lithosphere where the pressure
is too high to allow brittle failure. Experiments show that shear failure
(faulting) at high pressure requires a mineral reaction that yields a small
amount of 'fluid' for their initiation and expansion; the 'fluid' can be either
a true fluid (eg. H2O or CO2) or a nanocrystalline solid exhibiting an extremely
low viscosity in the solid state. One of the two PIs of this project (Reches) is
a leading expert in frictional sliding and the other (Green) is the world leader
in high-pressure shear failure. They are joined by two leading experts on the
physics of earthquakes of the US Geological Survey (D. Lockner and N. Beeler) at
no cost to the project. This EAGER project will test the hypothesis that the
process of mineral-reaction-induced shearing instability, the mechanism of
faulting at high pressure, can also operate in shallow earthquakes where it is
activated by the frictional heating/straining that occurs during initiation of
earthquake slip. The team envisions two main ways in which this may occur: (1)
Breakdown of clay minerals or carbonates in the fault zone releasing a fluid
(water or CO2, respectively) that results in a large drop of the resistance to
sliding on the fault; (2) generation of extremely small particles during
initiation of sliding that form a nanocrystalline solid that can flow by grain-
boundary sliding at seismogenic speeds, as has already been demonstrated for
high-pressure faulting. Models of earthquake slip, experiments, and examination
of fault zones in the field strongly suggest that shear-heating-induced
devolatilization occurs in some earthquakes. The high-pressure experimental
observations that such reactions lead to shearing instabilities further suggest
that similar processes could enhance shallow earthquakes. Similarly, recent
laboratory work in at least two laboratories concludes that powder-lubrication
may be a critical part of fault propagation and lubrication. The key question we
will test experimentally is whether such shear-heating-induced mineral reactions
can lead to rapid drop in friction and/or enhancement of slip under shallow
crust conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will investigate the role of
'fluid'-producing reactions in fault mechanics. They will activate shear-induced
devolatilization in laboratory experiments at the University of Oklahoma by
high-speed sliding under a range of normal stresses. They then will characterize
by high-resolution Scanning and Transmission electron microscopy at UC Riverside
the microstructure of gouge and sliding surface produced in these experiments
and compare those microstructures with the 'superplastic' fault-filling
materials produced in high-pressure faulting experiments. Preliminary results on
carbonate that are very encouraging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project brings together scientists and graduate students from two university
campuses and a federal government lab for an EAGER project with potentially
profound consequences for residents of earthquake-prone areas such as
California. If this work demonstrates that devolatilization is directly
responsible for friction drop and/or that fault gouges of large earthquakes are
weak nanocrystalline solids, they will have opened a door that will lead to
greater understanding of faulting and potentially will lead to a better
understanding of which parts of which faults in a given area such as California
are dangerous and which are not. The students of this project (one at OU and the
other at UCR), with the likely addition of undergraduate assistants, will
receive training on state-of-the-art instrumentation and will participate in
research at the frontier of their science.