* 1248216
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel low temperature, in-situ processing route  for high performance, light weight structural materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Allen Roche, Vinci Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 164,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project relates to the use of
nano-structured chemicals in the processing of light-weight magnesium (Mg)
alloys for high performance applications. It is postulated that reactive nano-
structured chemicals such as polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) with
multiple silanol functionalities will be added to Mg alloys by solid phase
mixing and in-situ reaction to achieve microstructure stability at higher
temperatures leading to a significant performance enhancement for Mg alloys.
This in-situ processing route is achieved through creating an environment where
surface metal ions, with oxides removed and positively charged by acid or flux,
bond to Si-OH groups in POSS. The end reaction results in chemical attachment of
high concentrations of nanoscale Si-O cage compounds that are chemically and
thermally stable near the grain boundary. These nanoscale cage compounds provide
obstacles to prevent overgrowth of intermetallic compounds (IMC) and retard the
motions between grains at high temperatures for microstructure stability of Mg
alloys. The in-situ process overcomes the common problem of dispersing
nanoparticles in a metal matrix where agglomeration and clustering of
nanoparticles can occur. The resulting Mg alloys will be demonstrated to have
improved service and mechanical properties at both ambient and elevated
temperatures.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to significantly
improve performance of structural Mg components enabling widespread application
in the automotive and aerospace industries. The automotive and aerospace
industries are under ever-increasing pressure to reduce both fuel consumption
and harmful emissions. Reducing the overall weight of vehicles and aircraft is
key to achieving these goals and magnesium alloys, with their low density, can
often be a viable proposition. However, the widespread use of magnesium is
limited by its relatively poor mechanical and high-temperature creep properties.
The project goal is to produce high-strength, creep-resistant magnesium material
suitable for structural applications by POSS processing. Material with high
concentrations of nanoscale Si-O cage compounds will be used as a master alloy
in casting operations to produce large net shaped components. The manufacturing
technology developed will provide a cost advantage over foreign competition for
manufacturers of structural automotive and aerospace parts.