* 1248040
* INSPIRE:  Novel Ceramic Membrane Electrode Assemblies for High Efficiency Thermo-Electrochemical Converter
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Lonnie Johnson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Energy for Sustainability Program
in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems, and by the Energy, Power, and Adaptive Systems Program in the Division
of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems, both in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a new partnership between
the Chrisey group at RPI, which has previously developed new ceramic membranes
and manufacturing technology for energy storage, with Johnson R&amp;D of
Atlanta, which has developed a new concept of Thermo-Electrochemical Conversion
(JTEC) to convert heat differences to electricity. For major energy applications
today, where efficiencies greater than 20% are required, today's technology
involves the use of mechanical engines to convert heat differences or fuel to
mechanical motion, which is then converted to electricity by a mechanical
generator. JTEC promises us a totally different path, using the more efficient
Ericcson thermodynamic cycle instead of the usual Otto, Rankine or Brayton
cycles which have lower theoretical efficiencies, with no solid moving parts. In
order to convert this from a concept to a new technology, this project aims to
prove, on a laboratory scale, that the two most critical subsystems -- the
Membrane Electrode Assemblies (MEA) -- can be fabricated, and can meet the
required performance on conductivity, pressure, pumping and temperature. The
laboratory data will then be incorporated into a preliminary systems-level
design for an entire JTEC system(s), to address the needs for possible
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conversion of heat differences to electricity is a ubiquitous technology.
Breakthroughs in efficiency would&lt;br/&gt;also have ubiquitous benefits. For
example, analysts at Sandia have reported that industry has the ability today to
build large-scale solar farms, using dish-style solar thermal systems, which
only cost 13 cents per kwh, the least expensive form of solar generation in the
US today. However, at the core of those systems is a 31% efficient Stirling
engine. Early simulations suggest that JTEC may be able to achieve twice that
efficiency, in systems of that size; if all goes well, there is hope that twice
as much electricity could be produced from the same dish, cutting the cost of
solar power in half. Likewise, in all the most fuel-efficient hybrid cars, from
Prius to Volt, there is a 30-percent efficient gasoline engine now used in
converting liquid fuel to electricity; if that is replaced or augmented by JTEC,
it could double the miles per gallon of such cars (when fueled from liquid
fuel).&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the technology benefits, Johnson R&amp;D has a
long track record of outreach to Tuskegee University and to the African American
community.