* 1248100
* INSPIRE: The underpinnings of Semantic change:  A Linguistic, Cognitive, and Information-Theoretic Investigation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Maria Pinango, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2018
* USD 759,708.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Communication and Information
Foundations Program of the Computing and Communications Foundations Division in
the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering
(CISE/CCF) and the Linguistics Program of the Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences
Division in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences
(SBE/BCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a well-established fact that meanings
associated with linguistic expressions evolve in systematic ways across time.
But we have little concrete understanding of the cognitive and communicative
basis of such systematic change. Central to the proposed research are two
questions: a) Does the constrained and trajectorial nature of semantic change
derive from the organizational properties of the neurocognitive system? b) How
precisely is the actuation and the implementation of instances of such changes
rooted in the dynamics of rational communication? By simultaneously addressing
these questions from the perspectives of linguistic structure, conceptual
structure, brain-functional structure, and communication structure, the
investigators hope to develop a cognitively grounded, experimentally viable, and
mathematically informed theory of semantic change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
cross-linguistically well-attested paths of change have been identified as being
especially relevant in probing the potential connections between language,
cognition and communication: (a) the path whereby locative expressions
diachronically evolve to express possession, ultimately evolving into dative
case markers; (b) the path whereby copulas or linking verbs arise from posture
verbs (e.g., sit, stand) to encode the distinction between incidental/temporary
and essential/permanent attribution of properties, generalizing at a later stage
to encode both types of attribution. On the one hand, by experimentally studying
the processing and neurological aspects of these semantic notions, the team will
probe the interface between language and cognition -- specifically the
connection to percept-based and non-percept-based dimensions of the conceptual
system. These results will facilitate a better understanding of the cognitive
pathways that organize the infrastructure of the conceptual system, particularly
the prefrontal cortex. On the other hand, insights obtained from formal
linguistic models, semantic change phenomena, and cognitive psychology, will be
combined with ideas from engineering and statistics to formulate at least the
beginnings of a probabilistic theory of semantic information, which models how
information is exchanged in linguistic discourse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
envisaged, this project promises to have broader impact at two levels: First, it
will liberate phenomena conventionally restricted to one small subfield in
Linguistics and transform them into tools for investigating the fundamental
mechanisms from which they emerge, making them relevant for Cognitive Science,
Neuroscience, and Information Theory. It will also open up direct channels for a
possible synthesis between the rich (but relatively messy) empirical facts of
real language and abstract theories of communication, paving a path towards a
Semantic Information Theory. Second, it will afford a cleaner understanding of
how cognitive pathways guide the evolution of language in the linguistically
typical (i.e., neurocognitively healthy) population. This, in turn, has direct
implications for research on linguistically atypical populations. In both these
ways, the project will redefine the boundaries between linguistics, information
theory, cognitive science, and neuroscience and lead to new methodologies for
studying semantics, cognition and information. The proposed research will also
lead to the creation of a novel educational and research approach: the study of
language change from an information-theoretic and neurocognitive perspective.