* 1248090
* EAGER:  The molecular basis of aging:  The role of allele-specific gene expression, protein folding, and protein stability on the progression of aging
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Stephen Goff, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The molecular mechanisms responsible for aging remain unclear. Proposed theories
ascribe aging to a buildup of deleterious mutations or damaged macromolecules,
to the differential advantage of some genes early in life that are later
detrimental, or to an age-related trade-off between metabolic energy used early
in life for reproduction versus energy used for repair and maintenance. These
models are not mutually exclusive and each may play a role in the aging process.
From studies of model organisms it is known that aging is associated with a
decrease in energy metabolism, decreased rates of protein translation, lower
protein turnover, and a buildup of damaged proteins. This protein damage is
proposed to be a natural by-product of metabolism and lifespan may be inversely
correlated with metabolic rate. The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes a novel
idea about the molecular basis of aging. The PI hypothesizes that damaged
proteins that accumulate with aging are increasingly difficult for cells to
degrade and eliminate. Cells respond to the accumulation of damaged proteins by
enhancing the expression of protein metabolism genes encoding chaperonins
involved in protein folding and enzymes involved in protein degradation. The
enhanced protein folding capability is proposed to decrease a cellular protein
quality control mechanism that minimizes expression of unstable proteins, thus
creating a positive feedback loop that causes even more damaged or unfolded
proteins to be created. Regulation of the system could be at either the
breakdown of the protein and its mRNA, or at the level of gene expression
assuming epigenetic mechanisms have evolved to down-regulate mRNAs encoding
unstable proteins. The proposed working model is that controlled expression of
unstable or weakly folding proteins (i.e., allele-specific gene expression) is a
critical quality-control component of the youthful state that is lost in aging
individuals, making the aged individual less vigorous and more susceptible to
disease. This aging model predicts that allele-specific gene expression and
protein quality control will be maintained during lifespan extension by caloric
restriction as well as in worm and fruit fly mutants with extended lifespan. The
model also predicts that identification of allele-specific gene expression
experimentally coupled with computational analysis of relative protein stability
will serve as an efficient assay to monitor and assess the progression of aging.
This molecular model can be readily tested by combined computational and wet-lab
approaches focused on mice, worms, and flies. Proof-of-concept of this novel
theory has important broader impacts, leading to the development of new
computational approaches for addressing the aging process which may provide
diagnostic and computational approaches to mitigate the impact of inherited
deleterious genes in humans.