* 1248336
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient and Effective Recycling of Post-Consumer Plastics for High-Value Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Philip Brunner, NuGen Polymers, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,933.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will effectively and
efficiently recycle post-consumer plastic materials for high value applications
through an innovative and environmentally benign approach known as solid-state
shear pulverization (SSSP). SSSP subjects the materials to high shear and
compressive forces and avoids melting. In contrast, the current technique for
recycling post-consumer plastic involves batch grinding commingled, unsorted
color waste to form flake scrap material followed by melt-processing,
pelletizing, and finally extruding the pelletized plastic waste to form recycled
plastic products. Utilization of post-consumer plastic materials processed in
this manner is severely limited due to poor mechanical performance and color
distribution of the resultant product. Sorting, adding compatibilizing agents
and cleaning have been used to improve the final performance of the recycled
product. However, these additional steps are quite expensive, rendering the use
of recycled materials impractical. For the use recycled materials to become more
widespread, an innovative and cost-efficient technology is needed to yield a
product that is similar in both cost and performance to virgin materials. In
this project, the company will use SSSP to process unsorted, uncleaned post-
consumer materials to overcome these issues and manufacture cost competitive,
high-value recycled consumer products.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the effective
recycling and utilization of post-consumer plastic materials. In 2010, only 8%
of the 31 million tons of plastic waste generated in the United States was
recovered for recycling. A majority of the remaining spent plastic was found in
municipal solid waste streams or landfills, contributing heavily to pollution
and environmental contamination. The company will use a novel approach, SSSP, to
recycle materials without the need for cleaning or sorting, thereby reducing
processing steps and making the use of these materials more cost competitive
with virgin resins. In addition to the major environmental benefits, a
successful proposal will also result in significant economic implications. It
has been found that processing recycled materials alone creates nine jobs for
every 15,000 tons of recovered materials. Furthermore, the increase in recycling
will attract new industries, subsequently leading to an increase in the number
of green jobs available. Ultimately, this innovation will enhance scientific
understanding by investigating a novel, environmentally benign approach for
polymer processing and will lead to the development of recycled materials that
will be applicable to many industries.