* 1248396
* SBIR Phase I:  Polyoxometalate-Based Conductometric Cell
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Nikolay Sveshnikov, Spectradyn Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 144,236.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed
at development of a conductometric cell for water quality monitoring that
employs properties of polyxoxmetalats (POMs) and their so called lacunary
derivatives. The proposed approach is based on measurements of electric
conductivities of solutions of lacunary POMs and water samples under
investigation before and after mixing in the conductometric cell consisting of
two chambers. The lacunary POMs are very soluble in water and highly charged
anions capable of incorporation of multi-valent cations, such as Ca2+ and Mg2+,
which are primarily responsible for total water hardness. Changes in solutions'
conductivities due to the encapsulation of these cations into lacunary POMs will
be used for their quantitative determination in water samples. Research
objectives of this project will include development of the conductometric
monitor and semi-empirical calibration models for determination of water
hardness. Performance of the cell will be compared with potentiometric and
colorimetric techniques currently used on the market for water hardness
determination. The anticipated technical results of this research will lead to
implementation of this technology to produce a series of water hardness monitors
ranging from portable instruments to in-line industrial grade monitoring
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of the proposed innovation relates to application of this instrumentation to
reliable water analysis. This research project will enhance better understanding
of encapsulation of multi-valent cations into lacunary POMs under moderate
conditions and its effect on electric conductivities. The main area of
application of the proposed approach is in water quality control and
environmental monitoring. Development of this technology will be beneficial for
water distribution and monitoring infrastructure. It will be of interest to a
wide spectrum of customers: municipal facilities, beverage producers, hospitals,
hotels, laundry facilities, and industrial plants. Water hardness creates a
variety of problems negatively affecting efficiency of heat transfer and water
distribution systems, and inexpensive and reliable in-line instrumentation is of
great demand on the market. The most prospective application of this monitor is
anticipated to be in advanced municipal water treatment. In the United States,
this market is growing at a compound annual growth rate of 8.2% to reach $2
billion in 2016. POMs are very diverse, and their lacunary forms are capable of
incorporation of various cations. If proven successful, this approach can be
extended to monitoring of other species and toxic pollutants in drinking water
or wastewater.