* 1248117
* INSPIRE: Stochastic Processing Calculus: A New Methodology for Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing and Data Center Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Bill Lin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2016
* USD 750,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by Research in Networking Technology and
Systems Program in the Division of Computer and Network Systems in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, the
Manufacturing Enterprise Systems Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing in the Directorate for Engineering, and the Communications and
Information Foundations Program in the Division of Computing and Communications
Foundations in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses common problems across
two traditionally separate disciplines of manufacturing and networking by
focusing on the following applications in the two fields-advanced semiconductor
manufacturing and virtualized data center networking. Research in each field has
heretofore focused on different problems, with semiconductor manufacturing
largely focused on throughput maximization, mean cycle time minimization and
system stability and cloud networking on network performance guarantees.
However, the two areas would benefit from sharing a common integrated focus and
a unifying stochastic processing network model for modeling and analyzing
problems. This project contributes this new mathematical foundation along with a
set of practical service disciplines and scheduling algorithms to enable
reasoning about and to provide performance guarantees in stochastic processing
networks. In particular, this project will concurrently investigate the problems
of delivery guarantees in semiconductor manufacturing and network performance
guarantees in virtualized data centers so that the two application domains can
inform each other and by doing so develop new solutions that might not otherwise
be imagined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central contribution of the proposed work
will be a new mathematical foundation, which the principal investigators call
Stochastic Processing Calculus that will allow researchers and practitioners to
reason about and provide performance guarantees for diverse range of
applications that can be modeled as stochastic processing networks. Scientific
discoveries often happen at the intersection of two disciplines. This project
involves very competent and accomplished researchers (in the areas of
networking, network theory, and industrial systems engineering and operations
research) and crosses diverse disciplines with the intension of looking at a set
of intersections as it explores and advances Stochastic Processing Calculus. The
contributions from this effort include exploring this new area of mathematics
and in its potentially transformational application to each of the two research
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This INSPIRE project is
transformational in that it promises to deliver a new rigorous modeling and
analytical framework that can encompass a broad range of emerging networking
problems. New analytical and algorithmic results that will be developed for the
general abstraction of stochastic processing network are expected to have broad
applications in a diverse range of fields. More broadly speaking, the proposed
work is transformational in that it will contribute to a larger body of 'Network
Science'. Network Science is being recognized as an emerging field in its own
right in that many of the mathematical foundations and network algorithmics
developed in the networking community are finding wide applications in many
other fields.