* 1248801
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Media-Rich, Game-Based Social Learning Paradigm for Improving Math Process Skills Both Inside and Outside the Classroom
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Sheela Sethuraman, CueThink
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposal explores
an innovative approach to improving math problem solving skills using a game-
based peer-to-peer mobile learning platform. Mathematics education is struggling
in the U.S today. By the time our students reach middle school, many of them are
already disengaged with and even afraid of mathematics. Research shows that
schools often emphasize low-level procedures over higher order problem-solving
skills and learners are taught using a top-down, one-strategy-fits-all approach.
However, students bring their own strategies and techniques to problem solving
and need opportunities to share these processes and get effective feedback. In
Phase I, the firm will prototype a mobile version of a social learning platform
that supports a student's thinking and learning process for pre-algebra topics
in grades 6-8. The core of the platform is the scaffolded creation, curation and
evaluation of multimedia vignettes of a student's thought process. The Phase I
research will focus on evaluating this approach and concept framework and
developing data mining algorithms required to convert inherently qualitative
information into measurable and actionable data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project offers tremendous promise
for changing math education and engagement both in and out of the classroom. The
CueThink platform should help students develop confidence and skills in solving
complex problems, refine their math communication and improve their meta-
cognition through the review of other students work and equip teachers with
real-world examples of multiple learning styles and typical student errors and
misconceptions. This enables CueThink to harness a substantial market
opportunity for online instructional technology for math both inside and outside
the school classroom - $2.4 billion market in 5 years. In addition, the team has
identified portable opportunities for their solution in special education and
higher education STEM learning, both of which should have a strong positive
social impact while offering a huge scale-up potential via new markets. The
company team brings to the table a diverse mix of educational, technical and
business skills that will be critical to successful commercialization of the
proposed math education innovation.