* 1248522
* SBIR Phase I:  Grip-Act-Reposition Miniaturized Stable Working Platform for Minimally Invasive Procedures Inside Active Organs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Roger Bagwell, Actuated Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop the ?Grip-
Act-Reposition (GAR) Miniaturized Stable Working Platform for Minimally Invasive
Procedures Inside Active Organs.? Working within or on moving organs ? like the
heart or lungs ? is extremely challenging during minimally invasive procedures.
The working end of the surgical tool must be deployed through a long (100 cm),
narrow (3mm) catheter. The catheter needs significant flexibility to negotiate
the path to the target organ - which inherently limits control of the working
end. In catheter ablation for treating atrial fibrillation (AF), for example, a
radiofrequency ablation catheter creates scar tissue lines to isolate AF sources
from the remaining heart. The beating of the heart makes it extremely difficult
to attach to the heart wall, burn in the correct depth lesion, and then shift to
the next desired ablation position ? resulting in first-time success rates as
low as 30% for some forms of AF. The GAR technology platform will enable a tight
grip on the heart wall and precision clinician-controlled motion to the next
burn location ? and can be integrated in a wide range of medical applications
where stable positioning and relocation within a moving organ or body cavity is
desired. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project has several aspects. This project will initiate long-term collaboration
between cardiac surgeons and medical device development experts in industry. The
Grip-Act-Reposition (GAR) system will ultimately be manufactured in the United
States for a large commercial entity that distributes cardiac ablation catheter
systems, generating $7.2 million in revenue and 20-30 jobs by 2017. Even greater
potential revenue is anticipated when radiofrequency ablation in the left atrium
is simplified ? using the GAR approach - and delivered effectively to the more
than 2 million potential patients in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the GAR system in cardiac surgery is only the
first application. Surgery in the lungs and digestive tract are also complicated
by the target organs and tissues moving during the procedure. The GAR approach
will gain market share by allowing more effective contact with moving or loose
tissues within the body where clinicians are normally limited by the inability
of conventional systems to accurately determine and control the position of
devices. This project will also engage interns and long term collaboration
opportunities with nearby universities, tech schools, and high schools ? with a
goal of training future engineers, and also evaluating potential hires.