* 1248189
* Travel Grant for Eighth Mediterranean Chemical Engineering Conference to be held in Israel in 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2018
* USD 48,000.00

1248189 Cramer

This international travel grant seeks support for 22 U.S. academic
representatives to attend the 8th Eastern Mediterranean Chemical Engineering
Conference (EMCC8) to be held in Israel in 2014. This conference will involve
the participation of Israel, Greece, Turkey, Italy, Bulgaria, Romania and the
United States. Academic chemical engineers from other Eastern Mediterranean
countries will also be invited. Professor Yachin Cohen, Head of the Chemical
Engineering Department at Technion (Israel) will be the Chair of this
conference.

Intellectual Merit:

The EMCC8 will promote research collaborations from around the world and enhance
research and teaching in chemical engineering through interactive forums. This
conference will foster extensive scientific and personal exchanges similar to a
Gordon Research Conference. The U.S. will benefit from exposure to the high-
level of expertise from participating countries in research areas such as
transport phenomena, molecular dynamics, computer simulations, biotechnology,
reaction engineering and separation technologies. These areas have great
relevance to water purification, environmental remediation, energy production,
pharmaceutical development, food production, and more.

As in previous conferences, it is expected the participants will be made up of
approximately 25 academic chemical engineers from the U.S., 50 from the host
country (Israel), at least 20 from Italy, Greece, Turkey, and participants from
Bulgaria and Romania. In addition, it is expected that a large number of
graduate students will attend from participating Eastern Mediterranean
Countries. The U.S. EMCC coordinating committee consisting of Steve Cramer
(Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute), Nick Abbott (University of Wisconsin-
Madison) and Alex Katz (University of California-Berkeley) will select a
combination of senior and young investigators who produce excellent research and
are committed to establishing and continuing collaborations with investigators
from other participating countries. Special travel supplements will also be
provided to five U.S. participants to visit and lecture in Israel and other
participating countries to develop and/or promote collaborations.

Broader Impacts:

Based on the success of previous conferences, there will be a significant and
broad impact on the U.S. engineers attending the EMCC8. The first three EMCC
Conferences have had major impacts in acquainting U.S., Turkish, Israeli, and
Greek academics with their research interests and capabilities and in fostering
research collaborations. The fourth, fifth and sixth conferences provided
further opportunities by expanding the conference to include Italy, Bulgaria and
Romania. The seventh outstanding conference in Greece also included
participation from researchers from Saudi Arabia. These conferences have
provided excellent forums for fruitful discussions on curriculum issues among
faculty of the participating countries. In addition to the personal contacts
that the U.S. participants will make with people from the other countries, it
will be beneficial to U.S. interests to foster exchanges of research and
teaching ideas and of personnel, and establish research collaborations between
chemical engineers from the U.S. and chemical engineers from the Eastern
Mediterranean countries. Significant efforts will be made to include both young
and underrepresented faculty in the group of U.S. participants. It is also
likely that recruitment of potential graduate students may occur informally, as
in the past.