* 1248587
* SBIR Phase I:  Pressure Map Analytics for Ulcer Prevention
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Mehrdad Nourani, Dena Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to build a
system that enhances understanding of the patient?s body pressure
characteristics, such that it can provide assistive/cognitive support to
hospital staff to prevent pressure ulcer. The intellectual merit of this project
is an enabling technology that integrates analytics within a software platform
for monitoring, prevention and management of pressure ulcers. Research efforts
will focus on implementation of modules for whole-body pressure distribution
data collection, posture classification, limb tracking, risk assessment, turning
schedule utilization and patient status reporting. The anticipated result of
this project is a software platform that can be employed as an assistive
technology tool by caregivers for monitoring at-risk patients more effectively.
This platform will work well with the pressure mat systems in the market, with
the following abilities: (i) to receive data (raw pressure images) collected
from pressure mats by customers (e.g. hospitals) in a HIPPA-compliant server;
(ii) to apply image processing/enhancement techniques on uploaded data so that
the analytics can run with a reasonable accuracy; and (iii) to provide key
analysis data that improves caregiver cognition of the status of patient and
assist them in making informative decisions for risk assessment and ulcer
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be to create a commercially viable software package for monitoring,
prevention and management of one of the most costly, acute health conditions,
pressure ulcers - or bed sores. Unfortunately, conventional techniques have not
been very successful due to overworked nursing staff who frequently miss turning
patients, scarcity and high cost of special mattresses and pressure map systems
and more importantly difficulty of interpreting pressure images by
nurses/doctors. Statistics show that 11-23% of the patients in hospitals and
nursing homes (3-6 million) in the United States develop pressure ulcers that
cost our healthcare system more than $1.2 billion annually. Pressure ulcers
represent an enormous burden on our healthcare system, in general, and an
enormous problem for healthcare providers (e.g. hospitals and assisted-living
homes) in particular. This SBIR proposal has the potential to have a significant
impact by offering an important technology to the healthcare community. The
potential societal and commercial impact includes: (a) effective ulcer
prevention that will dramatically enhance quality of life and reduce patient
suffering and discomfort; and (b) significant decrease in ever-escalating
healthcare cost related to pressure ulcers.