* 1248956
* SBIR Phase I:  Wirelessly Operated Implantable Micropump for On-demand Drug Administration in Laboratory Animals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Christian Gutierrez, Fluid Synchrony, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on
technical feasibility of a remotely-controlled implantable drug infusion pump
miniaturized to a standard pill form factor. Technical challenges include the
development of a low-power inductively-powered pump actuator, ten-fold pump
miniaturization to an unprecedented small form factor for minimally invasive
implantation, and implementation of remote programmable control of a large
number of implanted pumps. The research strategy and competitive edge lies in
the innovation of novel microtechnology-based pump components and wireless
inductive power and control technologies. Successful demonstration of the
remotely-controlled implantable infusion pump system with external
hardware/software controller modules will enable new dosing schemes, provide
precise temporally controlled dosing for more reproducible results from acute
and chronic studies, and enable new approaches to drug therapy that would not
otherwise be possible. Remotely-controlled dosing following a programmable drug
regimen would dramatically simplify and expedite experimental studies. These
novel pumps can also be adapted or scaled up to treat human disease, especially
for advanced drug regimens not available with current commercial pumps.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will uniquely facilitate
drug development by improving outcomes in scientific and drug discovery, thereby
reducing costs early in the development process. The system includes several
significant first-to-market capabilities including chronic dosing studies in
freely-moving, tether-free animals in naturalistic environments and rapid
evaluation of many new drugs at once which are enabled by automation.
Importantly, the pump system enables studies that are performed in a manner that
will facilitate translation of therapies from animal to human. Our technology
will first be deployed to meet critical needs of preclinical pharmaceutical,
medical and animal research markets followed by animal care providers in the
veterinary market. The long term goal is to apply this technology to implantable
drug infusion for clinical use, a rapidly growing market estimated to reach $16B
by 2013. The suite of software and hardware technologies is applicable to
multiple markets and has the potential to impact healthcare in multiple areas.