* 1248944
* SBIR Phase I:  Analog/Mixed-Signal Integrated Circuit Verification Coverage
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Michael Krasnicki, Zipalog, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes an
analog verification coverage system. Today well-accepted formal and simulation-
based techniques exist to capture and measure test coverage for digital
integrated circuits, but there is no corresponding commercial capability for
analog integrated circuits. Analog designers frequently spend much time
analyzing and over-testing system behavior for a small set of well understood
usage scenarios while leaving significant portions of the state-space completely
untested. The design exploration problem for analog circuits presents critical
challenges for implementing such a system due to the inherently large design
space typical of analog circuits. The proposed innovative solution addresses
this issue by determining the design space of relevance for a specific circuit
and then assessing the completeness of exploration for that identified area. A
prototype set of instruments will be delivered that measure coverage during
analog/mixed-signal simulations. The proposed product will automatically parse
the design netlist, add the instrumentation, run the user's existing simulator,
analyze the output from the instrumentation, save data to a database, and build
a coverage profile. This capability provides improved productivity and quality
of results by eliminating redundant simulations and identifying areas of the
design space that have not been sufficiently tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to improve the
competitiveness of U.S. semiconductor industry by improving the quality of A/MS
design verification, improving first pass design success and reducing time-to-
market. The complexity of A/MS ASIC design has aggressively followed Moore's
law, but innovations in design verification have not. More importantly the ideas
being developed through this project have broader implications for complex
systems that cross the boundaries between multiple domains and do not conform
well to the highly constrained verification methods used for digital circuits.
Multiple domain verification problems include integrated circuits used in
combination with micro-electromechanical or opto-electronic devices, integrated
circuits that are utilized in complex environments such as biomedical
applications, as well as integrated circuits that are delivered in innovative
forms rather than traditional packages where the verification of the entire
delivery system is critical. Examples would include chips mounted directly on
flexible substrates or contained within multi-chip modules that may include
stacked die. To enable broad accessibility to small businesses as well as
dispersed efforts such as geographically distributed design teams or research
efforts, this capability can be delivered through an on-demand verification
infrastructure being developed as part of an earlier project.