* 1248753
* SBIR Phase I:  Temporal Geocoder: A Collaborative Software Tool for Connecting Historical Materials with Contemporary Place
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Robert Cheetham, Azavea Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation is a new approach to structuring, collecting and using historical
geospatial data that will make it possible to rapidly assign a geographic
location for text descriptions appearing in historic documents. Geospatial
location is a critical element of most documents, and historical archives are no
exception. Geocoding, the assignment of coordinates to a geographic reference,
is the key task required to enable geographic searching of historical databases.
While geocoding technology has continued to advance, current digital mapping
systems focus on contemporary location references, and an urban scale temporal
geocoder has yet to be developed. Such a service would take not only an address,
intersection or place name as an input but also a time period, enabling accurate
identification of its contemporary location on the urban landscape even when
street names and other reference information have changed over the years. New
database structures and processing algorithms will be developed that translate
street addresses from any documented time period into contemporary geographic
coordinates. Collaborative data collection and quality assessment tools will
enable individuals with varying skillsets across diverse locations to update,
edit, and refine the historic geographic and temporal data that will populate
the database.

The broader/commercial impact is the development of temporally-enabled
geographic databases that will support both new and more effective use of
historical data for research in public health, political science, criminology,
social science, genealogy and any other subject where the connection between
past and present is important. Street names, place names and addressing systems
in our cities change a great deal over time. The dynamic nature of urban
geography in particular has long been a barrier to the use of historic
directories, property deeds, atlases, and other archival materials as a means of
understanding the relationships between geographic location and the human
condition. While current commercial and open source geocoders can help
researchers navigate the contemporary landscape, the ability to tag documents
with a geographic location at a specific time will unlock an entirely new
dimension of human knowledge by bringing digital scholarship and research to
archives that are largely untapped. In addition to generating new knowledge
about the past, a collaborative platform for creating, maintaining, accessing,
and viewing temporal geographic data is a significant business opportunity. The
initial project will focus on the City of Philadelphia, but the resulting
framework will be applicable to any location in the world.