* 1248916
* SBIR Phase I:  High Throughput Silver Nanowire Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,10/31/2013
* David Schultz, Seashell Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
high throughput manufacturing process for the production of high aspect ratio
silver nanowires. Electrically conductive nanowires have shown significant
performance advantages in electronic devices. This is particularly evident for
silver nanowires, which have been recognized as the most promising replacement
for indium tin oxide in transparent conductor manufacture. Silver nanowires are
also superior to silver flake filler used in conductive adhesives since
continuous conducting networks can be formed at significantly lower fill
volumes. A barrier to successful commercialization of silver nanowire technology
for these applications is the capacity to manufacture the quantities needed for
electronic markets. During the Phase I investigation, a scalable high throughput
manufacturing process will be developed that can result in significant increase
in production capacity. The ability to tightly control reaction conditions will
result in high product quality and yield. The development of a high throughput
process suitable for manufacturing silver nanowires will be revolutionary and
allow for production of this material at the scale that will meet the expected
requirements of the electronic industry and at an affordable price.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is extremely large as silver nanowires represent a novel displacement
technology for the manufacture of many different types of electronics devices.
This nanomaterial has superior performance to other candidate materials being
evaluated for indium tin oxide replacement in transparent conductors, providing
a competitive advantage. The Department of Energy (DOE) listed indium as one the
materials in most critical supply with regard to supply risk and importance to
clean energy (Source: U.S. Department of Energy, Critical Materials Strategy,
December 2010). Potential customers for silver nanowires include electronic
device manufacturers for touch screen displays, flat panel or plasma displays,
organic light-emitting diodes (OLED) and photovoltaic solar cells. Improved
performing silver nanowire containing solar panels will enhance acceptance of
this green energy alternative. Environmental concerns are also guiding the
development and increased use of electrically conductive inks, pastes, paints
and adhesives, which can be accomplished using silver nanowire technology, as
alternatives to lead based solders. The ability to lower production costs due to
high throughput manufacturing capacity and quality by the methods proposed will
result in cost savings to manufacturers and distributors of silver-based
conductive composites.