* 1248598
* Math Pathways: A Longitudinal, Dyadic Study of Parent-Child Influence in Latino Families
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,064,491.00

This study aims to improve educational practices by filling critical gaps in
research on the impact of relationships on mathematics achievement for Latino
students. The study has two main objectives: First, the PIs will use
longitudinal data and advanced statistical approaches to understand factors that
influence mathematics attitudes and achievement during the transition from
elementary to middle school. Second, the PIs will apply the expectancy-value
model to the prediction of mathematics behavior and performance. Surveys will be
collected from 300 Latino mothers, students, and their math teachers near the
end of 5th grade, at the beginning and end of 6th grade, and at the beginning of
7th grade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is its potential to
advance understanding of how and why interest in mathematics develops or
declines over time, and how parents and teachers respond to these changes. The
work will address broader impacts and benefit society by contributing to the
body of literature concerning Latino students in STEM and has the potential to
influence both parental behaviors and teaching practices as they relate to
underrepresented populations. A graduate student will be trained to develop and
apply analytic tools for interdependent data to STEM education content, helping
to address the critical shortage of quantitative methodologists. The findings
will be disseminated to researchers, teachers, parent and teacher educators, and
parents.