* 1248339
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrophysiology and fluidic delivery with a nano patch-clamp probe
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Angelo Gaitas, Kytaro Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
micromachined patch-clamp probe that enables sub-cellular imaging,
electrophysiology, and fluidic delivery at the nanoscale with control of applied
force at pN levels. The probe can operate like a force sensing finger to sense
contact & membrane rupture, no longer damaging cells. The small aperture allows
for micro-injections and interrogation of ion channels. Additional information
such as imaging, ion channel localization/mapping, and elastography can be
obtained. The probe will provide new insights in the workings of cells.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to address the
increasing need for tools to study the structure and function of single living
cells. Patch clamps and micro-injectors are indispensible tools for studying
cellular activity. However, these tools are plagued with numerous problems, such
as damaging cells and lack of resolution, which recent innovations fail to
address. The proposed nano-patch clamp addresses these problems and enables
single cell analysis (SCA) for basic or clinical studies and drug discovery. The
micro-machined patch clamp can become a versatile tool for SCA, which has direct
implications in diagnostics, understanding disorders, and the discovery of new
drugs. With the costs of clinical trials in the billion dollar range, SCA offers
researchers an inexpensive way to quickly and harmlessly test and screen drug
candidates on cells before testing on animals or humans. At the same time, new
personalized treatments tested on the patient?s own cells, rather than one-size-
fits-all treatments, have an excellent likelihood of effectively treating
diseases in the future.