* 1248842
* SBIR Phase I:  Superpenetration Multiphoton Microscopy with MEMS SLMs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Steven Cornelissen, Boston Micromachines Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 177,308.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
develop and demonstrate a superpenetration multiphoton microscope (S-MPM) that
will more than double the imaging depth achievable in highly scattering
biological tissue. MPM technology has revolutionized the field of subsurface
biological imaging, but its depth of penetration is limited. The severe
scattering introduced by biological tissue - especially neural tissue - prevents
most commercial MPM instruments imaging beyond a few scattering mean free paths.
With this limitation, research on cells and cell networks at the frontier of
neuroscience is constrained. A recent breakthrough in coherent light propagation
and control through highly scattering media demonstrated the possibility of
enhancing focal intensity by factors of several hundred on the far side of a
medium, despite any amount of scattering, by using a spatial light modulator to
modify the phase of the coherent light on the near side of the medium. This
project will combine MPM and BMC's fast microelectromechanical spatial light
modulators (MEMS SLMs) to offer a compelling and affordable way to exploit this
breakthrough in optical science that will make a substantial impact on
biomedical and neurobiological research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to substantially improve
multiphoton microscopy techniques that have grown exponentially in importance
over the past two decades. If successful, the research outcomes will have broad
impact on the field of neurobiology by allowing researchers to routinely probe
molecular-scale structures and functions at depths of up to 1mm in brain tissue.
This enhanced capability will effectively double the achievable penetration
depth, with only modest additional instrument cost. The MEMS SLM work that
comprises the bulk of the Phase I work plan will generate an important new
commercial component, a fast, low cost, MEMS SLM subsystem. Since the proposed
instrument will only require use of less than half of the MEMS SLM dynamic
range, the drive electronics can be reduced in size and simplified allowing easy
integration and significantly reducing cost by using off-the-shelf components
and at the same time increase the temporal bandwidth of the system.. The result
will be a fivefold reduction in cost and a fivefold increase in speed, which
will also have a significant impact on other commercial applications such as
free-space laser communication, femtosecond laser.