* 1248445
* SBIR Phase I:  MEMS Manufacturing Platform for Novel Emissive Displays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Sandy Hu, LuxVue Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,666.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
innovative process for fabricating, assembling and soldering millions of micron-
sized silicon chips (microChips) into a display backplane with high-throughput
and yield. Solder technologies for micron-sized devices are fundamentally
different than those for bulk chip die-casting, due to increased surface tension
and decreased device-thermal-load, providing an opportunity for innovation and
value creation. This project leverages a manufacturing platform for fabricating
and assembling micron-sized LEDs (microLEDs), each with a single integrated
"solder bump" that automatically bonds the microLED into the backplane upon
transfer. To extend this approach to multi-terminal devices such as silicon
integrated circuits, we will demonstrate feasibility of forming multiple solder
connections within a single microChip. We will screen alloy compositions and
process parameters against detailed microChip thermal models, and develop a MEMS
process for patterning the selected alloys. We will study the wetting
characteristics of the solder under our assembly conditions to control
spreading. We will use these results to demonstrate a simple microChip circuit
in Phase 1, and use the technologies and design-rules developed here to build a
pixel-level driver in Phase 2 (the fundamental element needed to replace the TFT
backplane in flat-panel displays).

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project stems from development
of an innovative microLED display product that consumes less energy than state-
of-the-art LCDs, extending battery life in portable applications, and
potentially saving 0.86 Quads of U.S. energy per year in stationary
applications. The TFT backplane in these products is the primary cost-driver
(particularly for larger displays). Success in Phase 1 will prove the
feasibility of an approach to eliminate the TFT backplane, with significant
long-term benefits in the form of reduced manufacturing costs and reduced
minimum manufacturing scale and capital equipment costs. Lower manufacturing
cost will drive rapid market penetration, increasing the economic and
environmental impacts of this technology. Lower capital costs and manufacturing
scale will enable economic domestic manufacturing. The growth of a U.S. display
manufacturing industry would lead to increased manufacturing jobs and gross
national product, as well as enhanced national security through a domestic
supply of display products to the Defense Department. The ability to integrate
multi-terminal devices into this manufacturing platform will also allow this
innovative manufacturing equipment to expand into new industries in the future.