* 1248991
* SBIR Phase I:  Emotionally Immersive Tele-Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Ian Bennett, The Spirituality Network, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 155,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
incorporate novel machine vision functionality and innovative social networking
capabilities into the technology of distance learning and online webinars. The
primary objective is to make on-line training and virtual collaboration more
engaging and compelling by replicating non-verbal feedback related to the rate
and acceptance of information delivery in lectures, in order to make the
experience of distance learning more emotionally immersive. This project
contributes four significant innovations: 1) a machine-vision recognition system
for head position, gaze direction, facial expressions of interest or
comprehension, which when averaged across participants will provide simple
feedback related to the rate and acceptance of information delivery; 2) a
machine-vision-based hand detection system for motion and shape to detect hand
raising or other gestures; 3) to enable hot-deployable third party pedagogical
applications within the framework, aka "side apps"; and 4) to integrate social
functionalities that replicate pre- and post-lecture socialization including
pair-sharing, breakout groups, team teaching, and support for teaching
assistance. In anticipation of support for this project, TSN has already built
an evaluation test bed for tele-lectures and virtual classrooms. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to significantly transform on-
line education. On-line training also has the potential to radically alter the
delivery of education. By 2018, the estimated cost of four-year public
university education is expected to rise to $151,000. For private colleges, this
cost will increase to over $300,000. To address this crisis, several colleges
and startup companies have announced an increased use of on-line training.
However existing systems for streaming video for lectures, and virtual group
learning environments, have not advanced to the level that distance learning
isn't considered to be a second-class citizen in the educational world. The
proposed system can transform the fundamental efficacy of on-line training and
spur new research.