* 1248140
* SBIR Phase I:  MyCCMajors: A Knowledge-Based System to Improve Student Advisement at Two Year Colleges
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Fritz Grupe, Townsend Communications, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to improve
academic advisement for seven million community college students. Advisement is
a major weakness in student progress toward degree completion. The research
determines whether an Internet-based advisement instrument that takes into
account a student's academic and other achievements can improve academic
advisement. The instrument incorporates previously untapped knowledge from
campus-wide and departmental counselors. It improves the success rate of
students in STEM and other disciplines. It serves a broad range of traditional
and non-traditional students. The recommendations are specific to the wide
variety of courses of study available at individual campuses.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
system that embodies the knowledge of human advisors and counselors. Unlike
prior instruments, this system incorporates actual student achievement in
school, life experiences, and other relevant personal data in order to recommend
appropriate majors. To do this, the research will identify, codify and convert
"private" human advisor expertise in a knowledge-based system that can be more
easily improved, evaluated, validated and verified than "human-based" systems.
Recommendations will be specific to individual community colleges. MyCCMajors
augments and supports advisor resources at these institutions.