* 1248050
* EAGER:  Re-thinking crop pollination by bees: How the interplay of agricultural and natural landscapes influences pollination by native bees in Southern California
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ruben Alarcon, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,342.00

Widespread declines of pollinators are a major concern because of their
potential effects on agricultural crops and on reproduction of plants in natural
areas. Without pollination many species of plants will be in danger of
extinction. Pollinators are especially threatened in landscapes dominated by
agriculture. Nonetheless, some native species of bees are able to live in these
landscapes and are likely to pollinate a large diversity of flowers. Perhaps
they can compensate for the reduction of pollination services provided by non-
native honey bees, whose populations are crashing. This EAGER project will
survey native bee communities in agricultural landscapes of southern California.
Researchers will census areas dominated by blueberry and tomato crops. The
primary goal is to determine the environmental factors that best predict which
pollinators occur in different areas and which morphological traits best predict
their pollination effectiveness. This information will be valuable for
conserving and managing populations of native bees to ensure that the
pollination services they provide will be available for the greatest number of
flowering plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide basic
information about pollination, a critically important process in most
agricultural crops. The lead investigator is at a four-year Hispanic Serving
Institution and undergraduate students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in science will be involved in data collection and mentored in
field research, enhancing their educational and employment prospects.