* 1248327
* SBIR Phase I:  Moving Magnet Actuators for Nanopositioning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* David Hiemstra, HIPERNAP LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to establish the
feasibility of a novel moving magnet actuator (MMA) concept that holds potential
to simultaneously provide up to 10 millimeter stroke, nanometric motion quality,
and high scanning speeds in flexure-based nanopositioning systems.
Nanopositioning systems are employed in all scanning probe lithography and
microscopy techniques to provide the relative motion between the probe and
substrate. However, lack of appropriate actuation technology is one of the
primary factors that currently limit the motion range of existing
nanopositioning systems to approximately 100 microns per axis, which in turn
limits the "workspace" of current scanning probe techniques. To meet the above-
stated requirements of stroke, speed, and motion quality, a novel moving magnet
actuator concept is proposed which overcomes the limitations associated with
traditional MMAs. The innovative use of radial permanent magnets and concentric
coils reduces the moving mass, decreases fringing of the flux in the air-gap to
provide greater force output, and improves thermal management via use of
integrated heat-pipes. In this project, a systematic multi-domain modeling and
design framework that includes closed-form and computational analyses will be
employed to evaluate and optimize the proposed MMA's performance.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable the scale-
up of scanning probe lithography and microscopy techniques and enable their use
in practical industrial settings. The proposed MMA technology, if successfully
demonstrated in Phase I, will provide higher output force while maintaining
small moving mass and power consumption, along with better heat dissipation.
This, in turn, will enable unprecedented nanopositioning systems, with
10,000-fold larger workspace compared to competing products, at the end of Phase
II. These large-range nanopositioning systems will have a transformative impact
on direct-write nanomanufacturing techniques such as dip-pen, electron-beam, and
focused ion-beam lithography. While these techniques have been used to fabricate
optical metamaterials, thermoelectric devices, and diffraction gratings that
have shown remarkable physical properties, large-area patterning capability is
necessary to scale up these techniques for practical nanomanufacturing. This
project will also create an educational impact via partnership with the
University of Michigan that will facilitate the training of students.