* 1248049
* EAGER: Bridging The Gap Between Application Architecture and Network Architecture In Cyberphysical Systems Via Named Data Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Lixia Zhang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2014
* USD 298,830.00

This exploratory project applies the design approach of Named Data Networking
(NDN) to generate benefits for cyberphysical systems (CPS). NDN is an emerging
network architecture that shifts the thin waist of the Internet from IP's host-
centric model to a data-centric model. It uses names to directly fetch data and
binds names to data with cryptographic signatures. The project uses Building
Automation Systems (BAS) as a driver and representative case of CPS encompassing
the control, monitoring and management of heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC), lighting, water, physical access control and other building
systems. It will evaluate whether, in such real-world building automation
systems, NDN can provide: (1) quantifiably better performance and reliability
characteristics; (2) equivalent or better functionality for device addressing as
typical middleware and application-specific protocols; (3) reduced application
development complexity; (4) authentication, verification, and access control
through fundamental NDN capabilities and strategies. The project also considers
NDN device and service naming approaches that provide new functionality. To
provide an environment on which to build and evaluate NDN support for BAS, the
project will deploy a closed loop control system on the NDN testbed consisting
of industry-standard electrical demand monitoring and lighting control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Cyberphysical systems are a new and
rapidly progressing frontier in the broad use of computing technologies for
critical infrastructure. However, existing CPS can be complex, often difficult
to build and maintain, brittle to changes and vulnerable to faults resulting in
potentially large impacts. This effort aims to pave a new direction that enables
rapid development of reliable and secure CPS, and to bridge CPS with traditional
IT for applications including energy management, remote operation, monitoring
and data mining, and new types of human-computer interaction.