* 1248828
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Voltage Regulators for Small Footprint, Efficient Power Delivery in Multi-Core SoCs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Wonyoung Kim, Lion Semiconductor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop
integrated voltage regulators that are 20 times smaller than existing DC-DC
converters and enable better power management for processors. Modern processors
use a large number of voltage domains to improve energy utilization of
processing cores and IP blocks. The problem is that each voltage domain requires
a separate DC-DC converter and existing converters require board components
including inductors, capacitors, power switch and a controller chip. As a
result, the number of board components increases dramatically for complex
processors that need a large number of voltage domains. This leads to large
board area overhead, high component cost and complex board-level power delivery.
This project aims to develop a single-die voltage regulator that eliminates all
board components and integrates everything in a single die regardless of the
number of voltages the regulator needs to provide to the processor. This new
regulator will reduce board footprint, which is very important in both mobile
and data-center applications, and reduce component cost. This regulator also has
the potential to reduce power consumption of processors by up to 30% by enabling
more efficient, finer-grain power management.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is reduction in size,
cost and power consumption of power delivery solutions for processors and logic
chips in a wide range of applications from smartphones to datacenters. In a
smartphone, voltage regulators are one of the biggest components other than the
battery. While customers demand lighter, thinner smartphones, increasingly more
space is required for new features such as 4G communication, micro-projectors
and high-resolution cameras. Reducing the size of voltage regulators is critical
in creating space for new features in next-generation mobile devices. Moreover,
saving processor power using the new regulator can increase battery life.
Reducing power and size are not only important for mobile devices, but also for
server processors deployed in data-centers necessary to support increasing web
traffic. Saving processor power directly translates to lower cooling costs in
data-centers and reduction in CO2 emission. By reducing the size of regulators,
more processors can be stored in a limited area to create more powerful servers
for data-centers without increasing real estate. Impacting processors across the
globe, the new regulator has the potential to disrupt the $10B voltage regulator
market and enable further innovation in mobile devices and servers.