* 1248856
* SBIR Phase I:  Superior Spinel-perovskite Composite Catalysts for Combustion of Volatile Organic Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Richard Long, NEXTECH MATERIALS LTD
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project investigates a new
series of low-cost non-precious metal catalysts for combustion of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), such as propane, hexane, toluene, ketone, alcohols,
phenols, xylene and formaldehyde, for reducing VOC emissions from industry
exhausts. Catalytic combustion is an efficient approach for the VOCs destruction
at mild temperatures before they are released into atmosphere. This project
proposes nano-sized transition metal mixed oxides with spinel and perovskite
structures as catalysts for this application. Due to the interactions between
the spinels and perovskites, the composite catalysts are expected to exhibit
excellent performance in complete oxidation of VOCs to CO2 and H2O at 200-400C,
with less cost than traditional precious metal based catalysts. In this project,
nano-size powder catalysts will be synthesized with various methods, tested for
VOCs combustion, and characterized by physical and chemical methods. The
promising catalysts will be scaled up, washcoated in monoliths, and evaluated
under real VOCs combustion conditions in Phase II project. The generated
information can provide new insights into understanding activation process of O2
and small organic molecules and their interactions on the transition metal oxide
catalyst surface. The data will be utilized to understand VOC oxidation behavior
and design more active VOC combustion catalysts in the future. The generated
information can also be applied to develop active catalysts for combustion of
H2, CO, soot, natural gas, light hydrocarbons and other fuels. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project can help abate the VOCs emissions
because the VOCs can be completely oxidized to CO2 and H2O on the catalyst
surface before they are released into air. Since VOCs are toxic to human health
and contribute to a number of environmental problems (e.g., photochemical smog),
environmental legislation has imposed increasingly stringent targets for
permitted levels of atmospheric emissions. As compared to the conventional Pd
and Pt containing catalysts, the substitution with non-precious metal catalysts
could drastically improve the combustion efficiency and also reduce the cost of
the combustion system, which allows VOC catalytic combustion technology to be
more widely used in the world for reducing air pollution.