* 1248985
* SBIR Phase I:  Directed DNA Synthesis and Assembly
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Michael Fero, TeselaGen Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a technology that enables a rapid DNA assembly system for synthetic
biology. Wedding recent advances in DNA assembly methods, and the software
algorithms used to design those DNA assemblies, the company will develop a
platform technology for facilitating an optimized combination of direct
synthesis DNA assembly to make large combinatorial libraries. The proposed
technology is an enabling technology that will allow scientists to direct their
resources to conducting experiments that address primary
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be to accelerate the pace of microbe development for companies and
organizations that develop valuable proteins, advanced enzymes for industry, or
therapeutic medicines. DNA cloning is an everyday practice in the course of both
Industrial and University based research. Cloning technology has remained
largely unchanged for the last 20 years. As a consequence, researchers waste an
inordinate amount of time and money designing and constructing DNA, rather than
on designing and conducting experiments. Over the past few years, standardized
experimental DNA construction methods have been developed that lend themselves
well to automation and rapid assembly of DNA. Process automation is progressing
from luxury to necessity, as target applications demand the fabrication of large
combinatorial DNA libraries in the search for better antibodies, faster enzymes,
and more productive microbial strains. The proposed technology will allow rapid
forward engineered biological libraries of recombinant DNA. The commercial
availability of this technology will provide a low cost alternative to current
methods.