* 1248080
* INSPIRE: Mingle: Sensing the Interactions of Animals
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Joel Brown, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

This CREATIV award is partially funded by the Networking Technologies and
Systems (NeTS) program in the Division of Computer Networks and Systems in the
Directorate of Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering, the Animal
Behavior program through the the Divisions of Integrative Organismal Systems and
Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate of Biological Sciences, the Office of the
Division Director in CISE/CNS and the Office of the Assistant Director in CISE.
Despite many years of research on animal interactions, our information about the
details of those interactions, especially in large groups of animals, is
limited. Fortunately, today's technology can be used to extend our ability to
track the social interactions of animals to a much larger scale. While
collaborations between social networking and sensor networking researchers have
started in the right direction, current approaches have not provided the depth
of proximity and orientation information necessary to take the next logical step
and infer social interactions between animals. The main challenge lies in the
need to balance the accuracy of information about the animal interactions with
the energy consumed by the devices themselves, with the ultimate goal of an
effective, long running system. To this end, we have designed Mingle, an
adaptive sensor-based systems that tracks social interactions between animals.
The novelty of Mingle comes from the observation that such social interactions
can be tracked by monitoring the animals' relative orientation and relative
distance to each other. By relying on local information, Mingle optimizes energy
efficiency by integrating local collaborative sensing with the judicious use of
infrastructure-based solutions based on observations about the mobility of the
animals. Finally, Mingle integrates real application constraints to ultimately
drive energy-efficient data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mingle has the
potential to change education, science, and how we view our own society. The
ability to see the very detailed social interactions about an entire population
of animals will change how we understand and study them. Automating the process
of the collection of information about animal, and human, interactions will free
behavioral scientists from the collection process while providing data at the
level of detail and magnitude never before possible. Moreover, entirely new
educational curricula can be designed that engage children in scientific inquiry
in fundamentally novel ways. For example, students will have the ability to
"become the animals", enacting herding and foraging strategies. Additionally,
information about the children's own social interactions will change educational
research, enabling our understanding of how children learn in a group and
through interactions. While we focus on social interactions between animals in
this proposal, the results from this research can be taken into the human social
networking domain, where many people already carry sensor-rich smartphones,
enabling new and exciting social networking applications for interactions
between people, exposing social networking information based on actual social
interactions, or measuring social interactions to research social behavior and
social patterns.