* 1248825
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermal Spray Fabrication of Anti-Ferroelectrics for ESD Protection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Nicholas Moroz, CSquared Innovations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 167,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of fabricating anti-ferroelectric (AFE) thin-films for electrostatic
discharge (ESD) protection using a novel laser-assisted atmospheric plasma
deposition platform. The state-of-the-art in ESD protection offers inadequate
protection to increasingly compact and sensitive electronic devices, trading off
signal bandwidth for circuit protection and limiting the evolution of new
applications. A scalable plasma spray fabrication process will be developed for
an AFE ceramic which has previously been demonstrated at laboratory scale to
have unmatched capacitance change for use in multi-layered ceramic capacitors
(MLCC). Tape-casting and other conventional fabrication approaches have proven
inadequate for this MLCC application whereas the plasma spray fabrication
technology has already successfully produced battery components and functional
coatings with similar properties, and it is anticipated that it can create the
approximately five-micron films required for decoupling the switching field and
capacitance and creating an MLCC that dissipates large energies at low voltages.
Completion of this Phase I SBIR project will yield a technical understanding of
the precursors, deposition parameters, and component specifications necessary to
develop and scale a manufacturing tool in Phase II and introduce a disruptive
technology into the multi-billion dollar ESD market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the establishment of a
scalable technique for the mass-manufacture of MLCCs which can address the
increasing threat of ESD to electronics as component sizes continue to decrease
under Moore's Law. This AFE material fabrication/deposition innovation will
allow the creation of new MLCCs which offer an improved trade-off between signal
bandwidth and circuit protection be achieving AFE switching at low voltages.
Deployment of such a manufacturing tool will position the team as a key supplier
to automotive electronics manufacturers for MLCCs on control modules and other
circuit systems. It will also enable the niche supply of MLCCs and components
that are 10-15 times more efficient than currently available products for high
voltage, high energy density and pulse power applications for aerospace,
defense, and other industrial and military applications. In addition to
supporting U.S. technology leadership and the resurgence of domestic
manufacturing, this project will increase the technical understanding required
to make parallel, privately-funded advances in related technologies such as AFE
ceramic capacitors for high frequency, fast discharge power electronics, and
solid-state thin-film batteries.