* 1248820
* SBIR Phase I:  Physical Cellular High Content Screening Using a piggyBac Transposen System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jamie Chilton, ArunA Biomedical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,390.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
demand for new and evolving approaches to alleviate shrinking drug pipelines and
costly failed human safety trials and recalls by implementation of new
technologies to transform complex human stem cell-derived neural cultures into
informative temporal high content screening (HCS) assays. A robust means to
interrogate complex cell cultures is important since it is believed that many
diseases, drug side effects, and environmental phenotypes are the result of
multi-cellular interactions that have been disrupted, leading to physical
changes at the complex cell/tissue level. Extended studies toward improving
differentiation to specific neural phenotypes and translation of developed
techniques will include cell types beyond neural cells. The proprietary
expertise in developing scalable manufacturing systems is key to the success of
a robust cellular HCS for neural and other cells. Published studies using the
company's proprietary neural cells in HCS assays demonstrates utility of the
human cell platform, and reported transformative results indicative of human
pluripotent-sourced cells that are of significant importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
are that it will provide alternatives to animal model testing through
development of novel human stem cell-based assay systems that provide
potentially more predictive and translational outcomes for drug discovery.
Previously, gene targeted rodent models transformed our understanding of how
genes control or affect mammalian development and disease. The robust HCS
amenable adherent proprietary neural cells combined with new technologies will
enable transformational human cell-based assays that edit, knockout, or knock-in
any genome sequence before or during the HCS. As industry and academic
researchers move forward in their quest to enhance their understanding of human
development and diseases, discover novel therapeutic compounds and develop
improved tests for toxicity, so will demand for relevant sources of research
materials. Successfully facilitating complex high content system assays at
reduced cost while improving throughput also will limit assay variability. This
will be met with keen commercial interest from Pharma, chemical companies, CROs
and academic and government researchers. Anticipation is that the proposed new
genetically modified cellular products will shorten development lead times in
early phase compound assessment programs compared to animal studies and provide
more robust and informative compound information than current in vitro assays.