* 1248570
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Modified Microbial Surfactants: Biobased Solutions for Industrial and Environmental Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Richard Gross, SyntheZyme LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2014
* USD 149,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase-I project will address the
development of modified sophorolipid (MSL) surfactant molecules by simple and
scalable modification of natural SLs adopting "green chemistry principles".
Natural SLs will be produced through fermentation with yeast Candida bombicola.
Strategies for SL modification will focus on methods that are simple, green, and
minimize manufacturing cost. Furthermore, MSLs also include approaches to meet
specific application needs, for example, designing MSLs for oil spill cleanup
and bioemulsifiers/dispersants. Proposed approach is to identify compounds with
attractive properties for hard surface cleaning, degreasing, and oil phase
emulsification, foaming, dispersion, detergency and antimicrobial fouling
agents. Preliminary results show that by developing MSLs with the appropriate
structural features the performance of products is greatly enhanced for
commercially important surfactant applications. Successful completion of the
proposed Phase-I research program will result in a detailed investigation of
structure-property relationships for MSLs to determine compounds with superior
functional performance for commercial applications that will further engage
strategic industrial partners. The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project address the market pull for green surfactant products by designing a
library of MSLs by simple chemical modification to fine tune performance of
nature's molecules. The aim is to create SL derived biosurfactant molecules with
fine tuned surfactant properties for specific applications. Furthermore, the
surfactant molecules developed will be eco-friendly, biodegradable, and composed
of 80-to-100% readily renewable carbon. SyntheZyme MSL surfactants will
contribute to the on-going green chemistry revolution. MSLs introduced into the
market are expected to replace petroleum-derived chemical surfactants many of
which are produced by harsh chemical processes. SyntheZyme's MSLs will be
particularly important for applications where surfactants are disposed or used
within environmental systems as well as for uses involving human contact.