* 1248891
* SBIR PhaseI: High Velocity Impact Bonding of Dissimilar Metals by Energy Released in Chemical Production of Hydrogen
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Peter Lohr, Advanced Hydrogen Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to advance
manufacturing processes in the dissimilar metal/impact welding industries via an
aluminum/water reaction that chemically produces hydrogen energy. Ideally, the
energy in the form of about 100 kpsi-200 kpsi, could be the source of power for
a small high-velocity impact bonding machine to metallurgically bond dissimilar
metals. Current impact bonding methods such as explosive welding have not led to
machines for bonding near-net-shaped parts, but rather a process of preparing
large raw materials to be cut into the desired smaller parts. Disadvantages
associated with explosives include safety issues, long lead-times, high costs,
material waste, and reliance on imports. A high-velocity impact bonding machine
could revolutionize the manufacturing of smaller, discrete parts opening new
avenues for design engineers. Experiments will be conducted to establish the
ideal conditions for impact induced interlocking micro-bonds, e.g., between
Copper and Stainless Steel. The variable test parameters of this project
include: (a) flyer velocity (implicitly determined by hydrogen pressure), (b)
impact angle between the flyer plate and the anvil or base material, (c)
standoff distance between flyer and anvil material, and (d) surface topography.
The results will lead to optimized conditions for wavy-joint morphology of
dissimilar metals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is attributed to the utilization of a new energy source that
will transform how some manufacturing processes are powered. The advancement of
an aluminum/water reaction to replace explosives or complex pressure, heat or
electrical sources for electrical, friction, heat or impact bonding methods of
manufacturing dissimilar metal components will prove to have many benefits by
developing a safe, user-friendly and environmentally-friendly bonding machine.
Additionally, impact loading for other processes such as forging and
hydroforming that use high pressure fluid will capitalize on these benefits as
well. The introduction of this machinery will provide a versatile assembly-line
manufacturing capability with advantages to include: (a) substantial cost
savings, (b) motivating small U.S. manufacturing companies to produce discrete
parts within the U.S., (c) potential for new designs of customized parts
otherwise infeasible, (d) a low skilled operation for small facilities
eliminating long lead-times, and (e) the potential for other manufacturing
processes that could use this platform technology. Dissimilar/bi-metallic parts
are in high demand in the chemical, automotive, aircraft, marine, and nuclear
industries due to their high conductivity and galvanic corrosion resistance and
favorable mechanical properties contained in one part.