* 1248584
* SBIR Phase I:  An Environmentally Sustainable Approach to PVC-Free Flooring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Adam Pawloski, Interfacial Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase I project proposes to develop technology
and products that will eliminate the use of polyvinylchloride (PVC) in one of
its largest volume uses, flooring materials. Interfacial Solutions has recently
demonstrated that a high volume low cost plastic waste stream can be converted
into a valuable flooring sheet product by using innovative material compounding
and novel continuous sheet processing techniques. The high volume low cost
plastic waste stream comprises polyolefins that have been reclaimed from waste
streams typically having little value and usually discarded to landfills.
Innovations to effectively homogenize the variability in the waste stream and
remove contaminants have been developed to create a plastic compound that can be
converted into flooring sheet materials and potentially useful as a replacement
to PVC in the flooring market. A novel process to continuously create sheet
materials has also been determined. To complete the development of this
technology and disrupt incumbent products, the new technology needs to be
advanced to improve the adhesive bonding between layers in the flooring
construction, engineer flame retardant properties to meet industry
specifications, and demonstrate a cost effective process with the durability and
performance of current products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the removal of PVC from flooring
products and the conversion of a significant plastic waste steam into useful
products. The waste stream being utilized is largely scrapped into landfills
today. From an environmental and health risk standpoint, PVC is problematic.
Worldwide, government agencies and NGOs are seeking alternatives for PVC
replacement. Furthermore, PVC cannot be easily recycled, and therefore a
significant source of waste once it has reached a products? end of life, also
with significant health and environmental consequences during disposal due to
its propensity to liberate dioxins. By developing this new technology to convert
a low cost plastic waste stream into composite materials with properties
comparable or exceeding PVC, an opportunity exists to remove some 2 billion
square meters of PVC flooring per year. The technology platform developed by
this proposal can also be of utility in replacing chemically treated plywood
used in outdoor signage, marine plywood and concrete forms.