* 1248366
* SBIR Phase I:  Tool for cancer protein crystallization based on intrinsically disordered protein
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Charles Kissinger, Molecular Kinetics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 146,609.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
use of unique artificial protein sequences, known as entropic bristles, to
accelerate the study of protein structure by the method of X-ray
crystallography. Many interesting proteins have proven to be difficult to
crystallize, in part because they cannot be expressed and purified in a soluble,
homogeneous form. A new approach is proposed to address this problem. Entropic
bristles are highly charged, non-aggregating polypeptide sequences that lack a
fixed tertiary structure. It has been found that fusing such a sequence to
poorly soluble target proteins can dramatically improve their solubility.
Bacterial expression vectors incorporating these sequences will be designed for
the production of highly soluble fusion proteins that can be isolated at high
concentrations. Crystal formation will then be initiated by proteolytically
cleaving the bristle sequence under conditions suitable for crystallization of
the isolated target protein. The Phase I objectives are (1) demonstrate that
proteins previously crystallized by conventional means can also be crystallized
by in situ proteolysis after being expressed as a fusion with an entropic
bristle, (2) demonstrate that a protein that has not been previously
crystallized can be expressed and crystallized using this method.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to dramatically
increase both the pace and the scope of protein structure determination. The
method has two important advantages over existing techniques and products for
protein solubilization: (1) the use of unstructured entropic bristles as fusion
partners appears more generally effective, (2) it potentially provides a built-
in mechanism for inducing crystallization. This new application of our entropic
bristle technology will allow the three-dimensional structures of proteins to be
determined more quickly and reliably. Knowledge of the structures of disease-
related proteins is extremely valuable in designing drugs that target these
proteins, and structure-based drug design has become one of the most common
paradigms for discovering new drugs. The bacterial expression vectors and
crystallization methods resulting from this work thus hold the promise of
accelerating the field of structure-based drug design and facilitating discovery
of new disease treatments. They will be of great interest both to pharmaceutical
companies and many academic laboratories.