* 1248425
* SBIR Phase I:  Glycoengineering of Myceliophthora
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Mark Alfenito, EnGen Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to create a
cost-effective, fungal strain appropriate for manufacturing glycosylated
therapeutic proteins for use in humans. Fungi are promising alternatives to
mammalian cells as manufacturing hosts because they are rapid, cheap systems
that can perform eukaryotic post-translational modifications. Unfortunately,
fungi synthesize glycoproteins with non-human glyco-structures, which often
compromises the pharmacokinetic behavior of that protein in humans. This can be
solved by engineering the N-glycosylation biosynthetic pathway to make human
glycan structures. "Glycan engineering" has previously been applied to fungal
species not well suited for commercial production. This proposal utilizes the
filamentous fungus Myceliophthora thermophila (C1) that is well validated for
ultra-high expression level (50-100g/L) at industrial scale (50,000-150,000L),
and seeks to engineer a strain/s of C1 with the human G0 N-glycan (especially
important for human therapeutic antibodies). C1's glycoprofile is close to that
of humans; therefore, the strategy proposed requires minimal engineering.
Specifically, a two-step engineering strategy that involves the genomic knockout
of one endogenous gene and the knock-in of three novel N-glycan enzymatic
functions should yield the desired G0 structure. Because so little genomic
engineering is anticipated, the robust fermentation and expression
characteristics of C1 are expected to remain intact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broad impact/commercial potential of this project is in its effect on lowering
the cost of manufacturing biopharmaceutical drugs. Approximately one-fourth of
the new drugs entering the market are biopharmaceuticals, with annual global
sales projected to surpass $157B by 2015. As the market for therapeutic proteins
and antibodies expands so will bottlenecks in production. There are commercial
pressures (e.g., patent expiry) and government pressures (e.g., regulation to
mitigate rising healthcare costs) to develop faster, better, and cheaper methods
for the manufacture of biological drugs. Despite years of work, the current
systems represent incremental but not step-fold improvements over those used
earlier. This proposal introduces a potentially game changing filamentous fungus
host expression system, Myceliophthora thermophila that has been well vetted for
industrial enzyme manufacturing, and has the potential to eclipse other
production systems thereby making major improvements in time-to-clinic, and cost
of goods. Further, this proposal will extend our knowledge of the filamentous
fungi by confirming the extent of genomic conservation among the N-glycan
biosynthetic pathways, and also help to elucidate the subtle differences of M.
thermophila that might make it the most tenable host for the production of human
biotherapeutics.