* 1248381
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Time Critical Localization in Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mansoor Alam, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 100,001.00

Location Based Service (LBS) is one of the most popular types of applications in
mobile networks. As the name suggests, the success of an LBS application depends
on two pipelined procedures: localization and information transmission. In other
words, an LBS application cannot start until all the mobile users have obtained
their positions. The localization time of current methods is too long to support
time-critical applications based on mobile networks, where users continually
change their positions. This project envisions a radically new alternative to
the intuitive pipelined procedures approach, where the LBS application can start
before all the users? positions become available.

The intellectual merit lies in the concept of mobile essential localization,
which is expected to significantly reduce both (i) localization time and (ii)
energy consumption, while enhancing the location privacy and guaranteeing the
success of LBS applications. The proposal entails high-risk as it is applied to
real-time environments, which are highly unpredictable and dynamic. If
successful, this novel paradigm could motivate scientific investigations aimed
at a plethora of time-critical mobile network applications. One can expect high-
reward in terms of applicability to areas of strategic interest including social
and vehicular networks, and performance enhancements of such applications.

The broader impact of this project is reflected in several aspects: (i) The
outcomes of this NSF project will have societal impact on facilitating the
spread of mobile network usage; (ii) The new approaches may be adopted by US-
based industry in their future designs and protocols for enhancing the location
based service availability and its integrity; (iii) This EAGER projects
investigates the time critical localization challenge from an interdisciplinary
perspective combining Computer Science, Theoretical Computing, Electronic
Engineering, and Communications; (iv) The resulting software codes will be
disseminated to the public under open source license; and (v) New
interdisciplinary graduate curriculum will be offered to students in MA/OH
including minorities and underrepresented groups. Demos will be offered to
Toledo Public School students.