* 1248731
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Platform for Automatic Geo-Tagging of Images
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Tsung-Lin Yang, TaggPic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 146,581.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
computer software that automatically recognizes buildings, structures, and
landmarks in digital photographs, as well as the precise location where photos
were taken. The advent of the digital age has led to hundreds of millions of
photos being shared on the Web every day. This influx of user-generated content
is leading to significant challenges in organizing and understanding large photo
collections from the many thousands of photographs captured by a family over
several years, to the billions of photos shared online each month. For instance,
annotating photos is currently a burdensome task; users of photo-sharing
services have no accurate, automated method for labeling landmarks and other
structures present in their pictures, instead relying on manual tagging. Using
newly invented computer vision technology, this project aims to automatically
transform photographs of locations into geo-tagged user engagement portals
storyboards rich with pixel-level annotations and hyper-relevant information.
The innovations leverage a unique database of 3D models, yielding very accurate
locations and tags. The project objectives include developing algorithms for
world-scale location-based image content recognition, an accurate annotation
method, and an application programming interface for the system for use by
application developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project are significant; as digital photo-sharing has become a
major online activity, there will be considerable market interest in the ability
to identify and link photos to hyper-local and highly relevant information,
including advertising, for the tourism and hospitality market sector, as well as
for small local businesses. Additionally, the technology will enable companies
in the social media market sector to increase user engagement through
interactive and contextualized photo browsing. Furthermore, the proposed
technology can transform photos into image-powered platform for the mobile phone
market sector, allowing for a seamless transition between digital photos and
online maps and thus greatly enhancing user navigation of new physical
environments using mobile devices. Finally, the technology can also provide key
analytics to companies in social media monitoring, by determining aggregate
patterns in where and why people take photos at locations of interest.