* 1248574
* SBIR Phase I:  New Photoacoustic Imaging System for Cancer Screening Based on Illumination-through-CMUT-Transducer Design
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Alan Sidman, Advanced MicroSensors Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,816.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
development of a new photoacoustic imaging system that cascades a miniature
infrared light source behind an infrared-transparent capacitive micromachined
transducer (CMUT) array, and illuminates the image target through the CMUT
array. The unique features of this illumination-through-transducer design are in
that 1) there is no need for external alignment mechanisms between the
transducer and the light source during image acquisition, 2) depth at which the
tissue can be imaged is increased to 10 cm, and 3) overall size of the
integrated imager head is significantly reduced with the cascaded structure. Key
objectives of this research include design, modeling, fabrication, packaging and
testing of of a Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer (CMUT) array that
is transparent to near infrared (NIR) illumination. We anticipate to
successfully demonstrate the functionality and the feasibility of integration of
this CMUT array in a cascaded light-source-to-CMUT PAI system. This system will
be used for breast and other type of cancers screening. The proposed PAI system
will be an enabling technology platform for medical imaging, diagnosis and
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project lies in that the technology developed here can be applied outside of the
proposed photo acoustic imaging applications in clinical settings. Initially,
this technology will leverage some of the existing hardware profile of the
traditional ultrasound systems, to result in a safe, portable, low cost medical
imaging device for screening and early detection of breast and other cancers.
While optical microscopy continues to evolve through integration of optics with
microfluidics for diagnostic applications, it still has limitations such as lack
of portability and high cost due to complex and expensive optical components.
With proposed technology, multiple detection and imaging modalities can be
integrated for on-chip detection of infectious disease, as an alternative to
optical microscopy. Moreover, the proposed system can be used as a light-to-
mechanical and/or mechanical-to-light energy transducer in combination with
microfluidics, to enable a range of point-of-care diagnostics and monitoring
applications. The proposed technology can be combined with other emerging
technology platforms including optofluidics and acustofluidics, to enable more
functionality in smaller devices and at lower cost, for mobile-based clinical
microscopy in a range of global healthcare applications.