* 1248096
* RCN-UBE - GCAT-SEEK:   The Genome Consortium for Active Undergraduate Research and Teaching Using Next-Generation Sequencing
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Jeffrey Newman, Juniata College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 01/31/2019
* USD 445,039.00

The focus of this RCN-UBE project is to support and expand participation in the
newly formed Genome Consortium for Active Teaching using Next-generation
Sequencing (GCAT-SEEK). Genomics and bioinformatics are dynamic fields well-
suited for capturing the imagination of undergraduates in both research
laboratories and classrooms. However, high costs, demanding technical skills,
and high rates of change inhibit integration of next-generation sequencing
approaches into the undergraduate curriculum. GCAT-SEEK aims to generate and use
massively parallel sequencing data associated with the research interests of
network members as the catalyst for producing innovative and broadly
disseminated educational modules that offer authentic research experiences to
students. The goals of this project are to increase network participation,
produce and disseminate educational modules that are assessed for student
learning gains, foster a sense of community among network faculty and students,
and support network communications. Hands-on faculty/student workshops centered
on participant research projects are the key implementation strategy.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Anticipated outcomes include improved faculty expertise,
increased authentic student research experiences for undergraduates, and
production of innovative, effective educational modules that improve student
preparation for graduate, technical and research careers. We anticipate
impacting thousands of students via this project. Workshops will be moved around
the country to include three minority serving host institutions to bolster
participation by groups under-represented in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts towards support of
Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.