* 1248253
* SBIR Phase I:  Amphiphilic Copolymers as Thickening Agents for Personal Care Products
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Patrick McCarthy, ATRP Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed towards the
development of a non-ionic thickening agent for personal care products, which
does not contain poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG). Reports have stated that
commercially available PEG contains small levels of undesirable side products.
Therefore, there is a strong need to create an efficient, "PEG-free" thickening
agent. The proposed structure of the thickening agent is an amphiphilic
copolymer, synthesized using a powerful polymerization technique known as atom
transfer radical polymerization (ATRP). A systematic library of copolymers will
be synthesized during this project, with variations in the architecture of the
molecule, the type of hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups used, and the molecular
weight. The thickening properties of each molecule will be determined in an
aqueous solution, such as a shampoo base. It is expected that the best
performing copolymers will efficiently thicken cosmetic formulations at
concentrations of less than 1% by weight. The information obtained from the
synthesized polymeric library will determine which copolymer should be optimized
for scale-up and commercialization.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the need to replace
PEG-based personal care additives, driven by reports that these materials
contain toxic side products left after the manufacturing process, such as
1,4-dioxane, among others. The United States Food and Drug Administration
recognizes PEG as a source of potential contaminants, and has monitored levels
of 1,4-dioxane in personal care products since the late 1970s. Although current
products on the market have minimal amounts of 1,4-dioxane, heightened consumer
awareness is causing several companies to consider "PEG-free" alternatives,
especially in more sensitive applications. Besides personal care and cosmetic
products, PEG is also used in all polymeric drug delivery systems that are on
the market. For this type of application, even small amounts of toxic compounds
are unacceptable. The technology used in this proposed research to develop a PEG
replacement has great potential to also be used in the development of novel drug
delivery systems. Therefore, the product generated from this research project is
expected to attract considerable attention from several areas of industry.