* 1248402
* SBIR Phase I:  River Electrical Energy Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Scott Kennedy, Renerge, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
harvesting of kinetic river energy to produce electricity using a morphing
structure designed to exhibit hydroelastic gallop. Most hydroelectric harvesters
require damming a river to create head, while the exceptions that exist are only
productive in deep, well-behaved flows. River sites that are shallow and/or
turbulent represent an untapped natural resource. The proposed approach to
accessing this resource combines three well-studied but previously disconnected
phenomena: (i) the dynamic, fluid-solid interaction described as gallop, (ii)
shape morphing concepts derived from the smart materials community, and (iii)
mechanical-to-electrical energy transduction. While most research into gallop
has been aimed at minimizing undesired and potentially destructive structural
oscillations, this project will invoke shape morphing of a control surface to
optimize gallop. The goal of this Phase I program is to build a device that
demonstrates conversion of kinetic energy of flowing water to electrical energy,
and to establish the technical and commercial feasibility for 1 kilowatt
harvesters with approximate dimensions of 1x1x0.5 meters.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project stems from its goal of
harnessing an untapped renewable energy source, and an underserved market.
Resource maps reveal that the best locations for wind and solar energy are
generally sparsely populated, and thus complex and lossy transmission strategies
must be invoked to deliver the harvested resource to much of the population.
While initiatives to improve the efficiency of long-distance electrical energy
transmission are underway, a superior strategy to increasing US access to
renewable energy is identification of renewable resources that are collocated
with the consumer. People have always lived near water by necessity; similarly,
flowing water necessarily represents harvestable energy. Where significant river
head (potential energy) exists, current off-the-shelf technology can be used to
generate power. However, per a US resource assessment, there is currently no
technology base for harvesting the kinetic energy available in low head and/or
turbulent rivers and streams (estimated to be 14 GW). Thus, hydropower siting,
including sites adjacent to many population centers, is a significant barrier to
fully utilizing this renewable resource. This project specifically targets
turbulent and/or shallow river flows and would therefore dramatically expand
hydroenergy siting options, benefitting society economically and
environmentally.