* 1248118
* RAPID: Mitigating Litigating: NSF RAPID Proposal to Study Social and Psychological Impacts of the 2012 BP Claims Settlement
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Duane Gill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2016
* USD 199,993.00

This RAPID research will investigate the social and psychological effects of the
BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on Gulf communities. The research examines how
settlement and litigation processes in the aftermath of technological disaster
are influencing social and psychological recovery in coastal communities along
the northern Gulf of Mexico. The Primary Investigator, Liesel Ritchie, is a
leading expert on the social and psychological effects of technological
disasters. She has done over two decades of research, starting with her seminal
research on the aftermath of the Exxon Valdez in Alaska, 1989. Building on an
early Arctic Social Sciences RAPID award that supported the collection of data
immediately following the BP spill, this RAPID will allow Ritchie and her team
to gather date following the BP legal settlement and create a comparative data
set with the post legal settlement data from the communities affected by the
Exxon Valdez. The project responds to calls for research on community resilience
to disasters by the National Research Council Committee on Disaster Research in
the Social Sciences- the National Council on Science and Technology- and the
Department of Homeland Security/Federal Emergency Management Agency. This
research will advance knowledge regarding ways in which post-disaster processes
such as litigation and the timely settlement of damage claims can facilitate or
hinder community recovery. The research is responding directly to important
federal issues on research on policy and practice for community disaster
resilience. As pointed out by the applicant- this research is an explicit focus
of the Presidents reorganization of the Homeland Security and National Security
Councils and is a priority of the DHS Science and Technology Directorate. In
addition, research results will be used to inform local- state- and federal
initiatives with respect to community resilience to both technological and
natural disasters.