* 1248654
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Tripolar Concentric Ring Electrode Electroencephalography (tEEG) to Advance Epilepsy Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Walter Besio, CREmedical Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,898.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to establish the
feasibility of innovative tripolar concentric ring electrode
electroencephalography (tEEG) for epilepsy diagnosis. Epilepsy is the most
common serious brain disorder worldwide. Presently, EEG is the primary
diagnostic tool for epilepsy, but misdiagnosis occurs in up to 50% of the
patients. The root cause of misdiagnosis lies in the poor signal fidelity of EEG
which stems in part from signal contamination with noise. The proposed tEEG
technology achieves superior signal fidelity through two inventions: (1) the
tripolar concentric ring electrode (TCRE), a transformative electrode
configuration which overcomes the limitations of the conventional electrode; and
(2) a proprietary interface circuit which serves as a preamplifier to
conventional EEG amplifiers. This project will accomplish two specific aims. The
first aim is to improve the design of the clinical tEEG prototype. The second
aim is to evaluate tEEG against conventional EEG in adult and pediatric patients
with epilepsy. Success will be determined by expert review and quantitative
analysis. tEEG is expected to exhibit higher interpretability and quantitative
performance than conventional EEG, helping improve epilepsy diagnosis.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is three-fold: (1)
Commercial Value. tEEG is a platform technology that has a variety of medical
and commercial applications. By providing significantly higher fidelity which
leads to improved signal interpretability, tEEG will resolve conventional EEG?s
major drawback and a fundamental problem that clinicians and researchers have
been struggling with for decades. tEEG can advance diagnosis and fill unmet
clinical and research needs. Commercially, tEEG can transform the market
landscape and set a new standard for EEG equipment. (2) Societal Impact. The
fundamental improvement promised by tEEG and its non-invasive nature are
particularly appealing. tEEG has the potential to greatly simplify and advance
the diagnosis of a wide spectrum of neurological disorders and more effectively
guide neurosurgical and other medical procedures. (3) Enhanced Scientific and
Technological Understanding. tEEG can benefit a host of brain and behavioral
research areas. The fundamental improvement in signal fidelity and artifacts
rejection will help advance the understanding of brain activity, leading to new
discoveries in the research of various brain diseases and neurological
disorders. The increased signal fidelity from tEEG may advance research of
biomarkers to quantify neurological disorders with tEEG which was not previously
possible.