* 1248823
* SBIR Phase I:  A Double Sided Incremental Forming System for Rapid Dieless Sheet Metal Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Michael Beltran, Scimplicity LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will resolve key
technical challenges associated with the commercialization of an innovative die-
less sheet metal forming process, Double Sided Incremental Forming (DSIF). DSIF
locally deforms a peripherally clamped sheet metal component using a small
hemispherical ended tool on either side of the sheet, each moving along a pre-
determined tool path. Current toolpath generation methodologies do not take into
account the mechanics of sheet deformation during the forming process, resulting
in unacceptably high forming time and unsatisfactory geometry accuracy. This
research will create new automated toolpath design methodologies which account
for the deformation mechanics of the sheet metal during DSIF to achieve part
accuracies of 500 Ã¬m or less while maintaining a user defined throughput.
Additionally, a new DSIF forming center will be designed that can form large
components using high strength alloys, where high machine stiffness and forming
force are required. This work will provide a significant scientific and
technological foundation towards commercializing DSIF for rapid prototyping and
low volume production of sheet metal parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/
commercial potential of this project is to significantly reduce the cost of
rapid prototyping and low volume fabrication of quality sheet metal components
by eliminating the need for expensive die sets. The inclusion of deformation
mechanics into DSIF toolpath planning will establish a strong connection between
the toolpath and the final geometry and stresses of the formed product in DSIF.
Consequently, the iterative experimental procedure for optimum toolpath
generation will be replaced by a structured, scientific and more robust toolpath
generation methodology. The advantages of DSIF as compared to conventional
forming include absence of expensive shape specific tooling (up to $1M each),
higher formability (4 times higher) and reduced forming forces (30% lower).
Greater formability in DSIF will allow light-weighting and enhanced fuel
efficiency, leading to further energy savings. The cost of storing legacy die
sets will be eliminated by DSIF, since only part models in the electronic format
will be needed for re-fabrication of parts.