* 1248974
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrahigh Throughput Black Solar Wafer NanoManufacturing for Photovoltaic Energy Application
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Logan Liu, Effimax Solar INC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop and
deliver a high-throughput low-cost nanomanufacturing technology for making high-
density high-uniformity omnidirectional-antireflection nanostructures on the
entire surface of single crystalline and multicrystalline silicon solar wafers.
Currently the optical reflection from solar cell surface is accounted for a
significant loss in the photoelectric energy conversion process and thus better
solar wafers with nearly zero optical reflection across a broad range of
incident light wavelengths and angles will help to considerably improve the
performance of solar cell devices and potentially bring down the solar
electricity cost. The silicon nanostructures created by this unique processing
method on solar wafer surface developed in this project will have superior
antireflection and light trapping property. In this project the solar industry
compatible nanomanufacturing method for zero-reflection ?Omni Black? solar
wafers will be developed and the underlying processing physical mechanism will
be better understood and controlled.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide improved
product and manufacturing technology for the solar industry and bring
nanotechnology inventions from university laboratory to the commercial
applications in industrial productions of high-performance solar cells. The
proposed nanomanufacturing technology is a large-scale batch nanofabrication
process, can be scaled up to simultaneous productions of a large quantity of
solar wafers with nanostructured surface at industrial standard high production
rate, and may be readily translated into current solar cell manufacturing
industry in U.S. Cheaper and yet high-performance solar panels can be produced
with the adoption of the advanced nanoscale manufacturing technology to be
developed in this project, which makes the photovoltaic energy cost in U.S. more
affordable and competitive. The efforts combining nanotechnology and renewable
energy in this project will also be able to potentially create new manufacturing
jobs in U.S. by translating new industrial production technology inventions from
laboratory to factory.