* 1248984
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Commercialization of Nitrate-Selective Sensors for Precision Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Calden Stimpson, SupraSensor Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,959.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
proof of concept and validate the feasibility of translating a molecular
receptor for nitrate anion into a highly-selective and sensitive soil probe.
Ultimately, these sensors will fulfill the need for real-time monitoring of
fertilizer application in environmentally sustainable precision agriculture.
Both the ion-selective electrode and chemically modified field effect transistor
interfaces currently used for nitrate monitoring are capable of measurements
only in aqueous media. These sensors rely solely upon non-specific interactions
for their selectivity due to a general lack of nitrate selective receptor
components. This limitation preempts their use in soil media where highly
competitive interferents diminish response. The first innovation proposed herein
is the development of a sensor incorporating a rationally designed and
intrinsically selective host molecule, which will provide the affinity for
nitrate needed to enable monitoring in soils on a molecular level. This
technology will then enable a second innovation: a field-embeddable soil sensor
network that wirelessly reports fertilizer levels during application in real-
time. These innovations will enable molecularly selective sensing in soil, and
will pave the way for the development of future molecular sensors for monitoring
difficult-to-target anionic and neutral substrates in complex
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the simple need for feeding the world sustainably. Increasing food
production capacity by two-fold in the next 30 years, while concurrently
decreasing the environmental impact of nonpoint-source pollution has been
identified as one of the grand challenges facing the sciences. Nitrate-based
fertilizer accounts for almost 60% of the 21M tons of fertilizer applied
annually and almost 30% of this is wasted due to seepage, runoff and
volatilization. Conserving even 20% of the 2.5M tons of domestic fertilizer that
ultimately contribute to nonpoint-source pollution would save growers an average
of $45/acre annually, giving rise to an annual market in the U.S. worth
approximately $2.1B. Additionally, real-time monitoring of soil macronutrients
will enhance understanding of soil chemistry by providing snapshots of the in
situ behavior and fate of these chemicals. On a global scale the development of
a low-cost and universal probe for soil quality would offer developing areas a
novel method for optimizing yields and enabling self-sufficiency in food
production. Additionally, these sensors will address the environmental dilemma
of groundwater contamination with a foundational solution: limiting the wasteful
over-application of fertilizers in food, flower and grain production.