* 1248341
* SBIR Phase I:  Employing the Read Together While Apart Technology to Create Engaging and Educationally Effective Interactive Children's eBooks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jason Root, Ruckus Media Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,412.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to address a
significant need: aiding parents as they help their children learn to read. In
particular, our goal is to develop software that will enable a parent and their
child, who are not co-located, to reap the benefits that academic research say
accrue from reading together as if they were sitting together on the family
couch. There are a myriad of challenges arising from the nature of mobile
devices and networks that support mobile devices that will need to be addressed.
While collaborative functionality is available on desktops and laptops, it is
not available on mobile devices due to these challenges. Ruckus proposed Read
Together While Apart Technology (RTWA) that should enable the parent and child
to read the same award winning Ruckus eBook together in real-time, enable the
parent and child to play interactive games embedded in the eBook together, and
speak together through their mobile devices, i.e., talk without the hassle and
expense of a long distance phone call.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project address a key 21st
activity: supporting individuals as they engage in collaboration activities
while each is using a mobile device. There is clear evidence that individuals
working together as a team can solve problems that individuals acting alone
cannot. Towards helping individuals use their mobile devices to work together,
each using their own copy of a specific app, Ruckus proposed Read Together While
Apart Technology (RTWA), while initially targeting a parent and child
reading/talking/playing interactive games in an eBook while not co-located, can
be used, after some modification, to "collaborify" virtually any mobile app thus
enabling multiple concurrent users to create, edit, update, etc. the same file.
Ruckus will make the RTWA technology available as an API, a self-contained
software package, so that third-party developers can include it in their
applications to enable collaboration with non co-located users.