* 1248681
* SBIR Phase I:  Functionalized Coating Chemistries for the Environment-Responsible Control of Barnacle Biofouling
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Myles Walsh, E PAINT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the market-
driven need for environmentally compatible marine antifouling coating
technologies that outperform the state-of-the-art. Increasing environmental
regulations have led to the banning of the most effective marine antifouling
coatings which rely on toxicity as their mode of action. The best performing of
these coatings contain heavy metal-based organometallics which when released
into the environment persist, bioaccumulate, and affect non-target species.
Increasing scrutiny of any type of heavy metal antifouling approach and growing
concerns related to the use of even non-metal biocides has provided a product
opportunity for our toxin-free technologies premised on a mechanistically
different eco-friendly antifouling strategy. Our broad objective and anticipated
outcome from our green chemistry process is the creation of commercially viable,
eco-friendly antifouling surface technologies for biofouling control. By
integrating advanced materials and manufacturing practices with a chemical
biology perspective, we plan to create low cost, durable, self-polishing, low-
settlement, foul-release coatings suitable for rigorous marine applications
including ship hulls and energy producing offshore structures. Our coatings will
employ both non-toxic and zero-volatile organic compound (VOC) systems ushering
in new generation of highly effective antifouling technologies that are
environmentally more responsible than current high-VOC, metal/biocide poisoning
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project arises from a growing demand for green chemistry solutions to curtail
biofouling of manmade structures. If left unchecked, the attachment and
subsequent build-up of biofouling organisms, such as barnacles, will severely
compromise the performance characteristics of structures such as ship hulls,
aquaculture containment systems, and offshore energy-producing devices.
Increased hydrodynamic drag on commercial hulls results in estimated excess
fuels costs of 40 billion dollars annually and wastes natural resources and
contributes to pollution. Economical antifouling technologies have the potential
to disruption ecologically sensitive habitats and have shaped a product
opportunity in a commercial space defined by price point, performance, and
environmental regulations. Our transformative approach to developing effective,
low cost, eco-friendly marine antifouling coatings evolved from a chemical
biological and molecular mechanistic understanding of barnacle glue. When
integrated with foul-release properties, durable coating chemistries capable of
reducing settlement by preventing hardening of biofouler glue will result not
only in a commercial product addressing a societal need but will also enhance
our understanding of key scientific and technological principles underlying the
marine biofouling problem. Participating professionals will benefit from
multidisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;technical training in a 15 billion dollar marine
coatings, ?green? collar jobs industry.