* 1248017
* ECCS - EARS: Collaborative Research:  Enhanced Radio Spectrum via Information Acquisition and Learning
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Bhaskar Krishnamachari, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2016
* USD 250,000.00

This research focuses on the problem of information acquisition in the context
of spectrum sensing and utilization where a (set of) decision maker(s), by
carefully controlling a sequence of actions with uncertain outcomes, dynamically
refines his/her belief about stochastically time-varying parameters of interest
such as spectrum availability and quality, in order to communicate over that
spectrum as efficiently as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
represents a new theoretical framework for stochastic learning and decision-
making in such settings termed Information Acquisition and Utilization Problems
(IAUP). Motivated by a synthesis of the researchers' prior works on adaptive
sampling, active hypothesis testing, and restless multi-armed bandits, this
framework is particularly apt for problems of spectrum sensing and access for
several reasons. First, unlike more general stochastic control frameworks such
as partially observable Markov decision problems (POMDP's), the IAUP is a purely
informational problem in that the actions of the decision maker change only its
information state, but not the state of the underlying environment (spectrum
quality). Second, in an IAUP there is a conceptual distinction between two kinds
of actions: those taken to obtain/refine the information state, and those taken
to utilize the current information state, potentially allowing for tractable
solutions in many cases where a separation theorem can be proved between these
two sets. Finally, an IAUP can explicitly capture the tradeoff between the cost
of spectrum sensing and the accuracy and completeness of the information that
can be obtained.