* 1248670
* SBIR Phase I:  Multistatic Spectral Interferometry for Precision Profilometry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Eric Moore, Chiaro Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 145,578.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase I project will demonstrate
innovative new technology for high precision, non-contact 3D imaging and
metrology with order of magnitude improvement in lateral resolution, depth of
field, and measurement speed over existing commercial optical profiling methods.
This technology, called Multistatic Spectral Interferometry (MSI), combines
diverse cutting edge technological developments in swept-wavelength
interferometry (SWI) and multistatic radar processing. Unlike conventional
optical metrology approaches, MSI does not rely on lens based imaging, pixelated
image sensors, or mechanical scanning. As a result, MSI can perform 3D surface
profile measurements with nanometer level precision in all three dimensions
throughout an extended measurement volume, all acquired with a single wavelength
sweep of a tunable laser. This approach will enable new solutions to unmet
market needs for metrology of high-slope, high-aspect ratio components such as
molded aspheric optics. This program will demonstrate the feasibility of MSI
though detailed numerical simulation of the system together with experimental
verification. The anticipated results will demonstrate the capability of MSI to
meet critical market needs and provide a computational framework for design and
modeling of MSI systems.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes addressing a
critical commercial need within the multibillion dollar CMOS camera market and
strengthening research collaborations and technology transfer between industry
and academia. Ever increasing image quality requirements for cell phone cameras
and other miniature imaging systems have driven the need for new metrology
capabilities for rapidly testing diamond turned molds and molded aspheric
optics. These components require nanometer level shape tolerances in three
dimensions, while their high slopes and high aspect ratios render existing
surface profilometry solutions unsuitable. This program will demonstrate the
ability of MSI to meet critical market requirements, leading to
commercialization of MSI technology, associated job growth, and availability of
new measurement capabilities. Through collaboration between industry and
academia, this program will promote meaningful educational, research, and
mentorship opportunities for engineering students. Additionally, this program
will leverage and expand academic research infrastructure, improving available
research tools. Development of MSI technology and successful commercialization
will provide greatly increased metrological capabilities over current state of
the art instrumentation. Improved measurement technology drives improved
fabrication and manufacturing technologies, enabling further technological
advancement across a wide range of industries and providing new tools for
advancing discovery and understanding.