* 1248291
* Diversity and Classification of the poorly known Algal Class Eustigmatophyceae
* BIO,DEB
* 06/18/2012,05/31/2017
* Karen Fawley, University of Arkansas at Monticello
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 152,273.00

The Eustigmatophyceae are a little-known group of microalgae in a lineage that
includes the more familiar diatoms and kelps. Recent culture studies have
revealed that the Eustigmatophyceae are much more common and diverse than
previously thought. DNA sequence analyses from these strains and named
Eustigmatophyceae have shown that the existing morphologically-based taxonomy of
the class is flawed. In collaboration with scientists in Prague, Czech Republic,
this project will characterize new Eustigmatophyceae strains with the goals of
1) description of new genera and species; and 2) a revision of the higher-level
classification of the Eustigmatophyceae. A multi-faceted approach using analyses
of morphology, life history, pigments, and DNA sequence data will be used to
achieve these goals. Criteria for the identification of species, genera, and
families will be identified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Eustigmatophyceae have
significant potential for the biofuels industry, a current National priority.
Moreover, some species have high levels of omega fatty acids and could be used
to produce these lipids as nutritional supplements. Understanding the diversity
of the Eustigmatophyceae should positively impact the practical use of these
algae. The project will also significantly impact undergraduate training at UAM,
a minority-serving institution of approximately 3900 students located in
economically depressed southeast Arkansas.