* 1248108
* RCN-UBE Incubator Proposal: Animated Discussions: Biologists and Visual Artists Foster Learning through Animations
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Susan Keen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William Hoese
* 12/31/2017
* USD 41,189.00

Some processes in biology are difficult for novice learners to visualize. One
solution is to use biological animations as a learning tool to model sub-
cellular processes, create photo-realistic depictions of events, and simulate
conditions where users can vary parameters to compare outcomes. Animations can
convey information, allow users to visualize processes they could not otherwise
see, or challenge users to explain what they see. Current animation projects
involve interdisciplinary teams of biologists, media developers, and often
assessment specialists. However, at present, each team works in relative
isolation. This RCN-UBE project will bring together animation teams to discuss
multiple aspects of animation in biological education and to see if there is
potential for a large-scale collaborative network. Twenty-five invitees to a
two-day meeting will share approaches on both intellectual and technical levels
through small and large group interactions. Small group interactions will focus
on comparing methods of animation or assessment plans, whereas large group
interactions will focus on discussions of why an entire project is successful at
capturing the imagination of users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This new network will create a forum for comparing: 1) animation techniques; 2)
challenges and benefits associated with each technique; 3) assessment plans; and
4) the learning value of the resources created. A discussion of the process by
which animations are developed and refined is also expected. We presume that
commonalities in approach will emerge, and we plan to develop these in a white
paper that defines the current status of animation as a teaching tool for
biology and offers guidance to new users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The initial group invited to the incubator meeting is diverse in four ways: (1)
it includes scientists working at the cellular level, as well as organismal
biologists who study microbes, plants, and animals; (2) it includes faculty who
specialize in undergraduate education, museum science, and professional
training; (3) it involves the student perspective; and (4) it brings together
biologists, visual artists (animators), and assessment specialists. This
diversity will allow for technical discussions among animators and evaluators,
as well as broader discussions across areas of biology. Participants will learn
from each other, so their future work will be enhanced in scope, educational
value, and technique. The white paper will be valuable to others entering the
animation field in biology. Network members have experience in small and large-
scale dissemination of results, so interaction should be transformative for
meeting participants and widespread for the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts towards support of Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education.