* 1248693
* SBIR Phase I:  High Gain, Low Noise Integrated SiC Optoelectronic Isolation for High Temperature Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Matt Francis, Ozark Integrated Circuits, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,187.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of utilizing Silicon Carbide (SiC) based electronics to create wide-
temperature, low-noise, high-speed optoelectronic sensors for high-voltage power
electronics isolation applications. SiC electronics are a unique technology that
has begun to take hold for high efficiency, high power density electronics
capable of operating beyond 300 deg C. SiC has shown potential to provide
solutions for light generation and detection with the advent of SiC Light
Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and photodiodes. Existing photo-isolation components are
hampered by their need for supporting silicon-based (low temperature) circuits
required to amplify the small currents photodiodes generate. To achieve true
wide-temperature, high-gain, high-speed and low-noise operation, proposed is the
creation of an integrated SiC-based photo detector and pre-amplifier. Recent
developments in low-voltage SiC transistors in commercial processes provide the
path for this innovation, where the proposed photo detector may be directly
incorporated into a SiC-based preamplifier circuit on a single chip to produce
high-gain, low-noise photo detector capable of operating over a wide range of
temperature. The wide band-gap of SiC makes the proposed detector suitable for a
variety of light processing, control and transformation applications in the
ultraviolet, visible and infrared range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be evident in
industrial, automotive, aerospace, oil exploration, water purification and high-
voltage safety/control applications. The innovative application of advanced SiC
device structures proposed will create a SiC-based photo detector capable of
high-gain, low-noise, high-speed operation reliably over a very wide temperature
range (in excess of 225 deg C). The proposed device would have immediate impact
to applications requiring opto-electric isolation such as in high-voltage/high-
power power conversion systems. The practical temperature range of state-of-the
art optical isolators is limited by their silicon components to 125 deg C, which
complicates thermal management and limits application in extreme environments.
As such, state-of-the art high-temperature electronics applications typically
utilize slow and cumbersome magnetic approaches. Further, the developed
technology can be easily applied to UV source calibration commonly needed in
water and food purification and flame/arc detection circuits. This market
presents a unique challenge for current technologies such as Silicon or GaP, as
UV rays are a well-understood reliability problem in Si and GaP photo-detectors.
An opportunity thus exists to apply SiC to photo-detection/isolation
applications to fill a gap in existing technologies and provide new solutions in
support of the engineering design of systems used in these critical
applications.