* 1248474
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra High Energy Density Nanocomposite Capacitors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Keith Stegath, HARP Engineering LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
nanocomposite capacitor films with high energy density and low loss through the
use of a unique synthesis process for high aspect ratio nanowires of previously
unrealized compositions in this form. High power capacitors are a critical
energy technology, yet current state of the art materials only offer an energy
density of 1.2 J/cc and have seen only marginal performance gains in the past
decade. One method to increase the energy density of the capacitor is through
the use of nanocomposite that combines high breakdown strength polymers with
high dielectric fillers. Although historically nanocomposites have performed
poorly in high energy density capacitors, HARP Engineering?s recent
demonstration that nanowire fillers can improve the performance beyond the neat
polymer is expected to produce materials that meet commercial demands while
significantly reducing the capacitor size. The goal of these efforts will be to
produce high energy density materials with low loss such that they meet the
current demands for commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project lie in the development of high power
capacitors which form a critical technology for power inverters, smart grids,
electric drive vehicles and pulsed power systems. However the current state of
the art suffers from low energy density making them bulky and costly. This Small
Business Innovation Research effort will seek to eliminate the low energy
density of current materials through the use of nanocomposites that capitalize
on high aspect ratio fillers to create superior performance to the neat polymer.
The result of this research will also provide improved understanding of the
structure property relationships in dielectric nanocomposites and will advance
the processing science of nanowires.