* 1248334
* SBIR Phase I:  Acoustic Emission Technology on a Chip - AECHIP
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Thomas Hay, WavesInSolids LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 164,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) based acoustic emission (AE) sensors for
structural health monitoring. AE is a well-established nondestructive testing
technique commonly used to monitor for active fatigue cracks in metals, leaks in
pressurized lines and tanks, impact damage, and matrix and fiber damage in
composites. The project team will develop novel MEMS AE sensors to be applied
generically to concrete, steel, and composite structures and rotating machinery
in structural health monitoring applications. The primary goal is to design and
implement an array of high quality factor MEMS resonant-type capacitive
transducers in the frequency range between 100kHz and 1MHz, corresponding to the
frequency spectrum of the ultrasonic wave generated when elastic energy is
released in a structure during permanent and irreversible crack formation.
Secondly, the sensor packaging issues will be addressed in parallel with the
performance to ensure the development of a robust sensor for commercial
applications. The proposed research is an innovative and transformative effort
with anticipated performance enhancement particularly with regard to both the
mechanical resonant characteristics and sensor packaging aspects of the AE
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project related to the safe and economical operation of publically and privately
held assets (bridges, railroads, pressure vessels, etc.) around the world. This
infrastructure is aging and significant investment must be monitored
continuously. The proposed technology will be low-cost and high volume solution
to this massive aging infrastructure issue. Economically speaking, the objective
of the proposed technology is to monitor two orders of magnitude (100X) more
structures inspection budget levels. The technology, therefore, will have a
significant impact in bridge, pressure vessel, commercial and military aircraft,
vibrating machinery, etc. Non-proprietary information about the technology shall
be disseminated through journal and conference publications. Since there is a
large market for this technology a significant number of technical jobs will be
created by the successful development of the technology via engineering student
interns, post-docs, and professional engineers. Successful development of the
technology will also create significant amount of field technician employment
opportunities.