* 1248772
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantitative Space-time Control for High Contrast Multiphoton Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,11/30/2013
* Daniel Kane, Mesa Photonics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2013
* USD 148,959.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop improvements to multiphoton microscopy, especially two-photon excitation
fluorescence (TPEF). This technology has radically changed the manner in which
quantitative biological studies are performed. It is now the tool of choice in
dynamic, high-resolution (sub-micrometer) studies because scattering is
mitigated, penetration depths can reach 1 mm, and impact of the excitation
wavelength is minimized (near-infrared wavelengths are significantly less
harmful to living systems.) However, challenges that limit application of TPEF
imaging are setup time, image optimization and consistency. By rapidly measuring
pulse characteristics, in situ, within the imaged sample itself, using this
information to perfectly adjust pulse characteristics at the imaged point, in
situ, within the sample itself, sample setup times can be improved and images
can be made to be brighter, higher contrast and have better consistency. This
holds for both commercial imaging systems using pulse width ranges from 70-100
fs, as well as home-built systems using pulse widths of 50 fs or less. This
project will develop a novel, drop-in device, useable on any multiphoton
microscopy system that will enable completely automated sample setup for the
biologist to produce higher quality TPEF images faster, with better consistency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the development of instrumentation and control systems to facilitate
the improved utility of ultrafast lasers for new and important applications by
allowing the production of high-contrast femtosecond pulses. These pulses are
transform-limited in space and time, which not only impacts imaging, but all
commercial applications of femtosecond lasers. For example, plasma-mediated
ablation utilizes amplified femtosecond pulses and is a powerful process that is
incorporated in a broad range of industries includes microfluidic platforms, and
cataract surgeries, such as femtosecond laser assisted cataract surgery as well
as Laser-Assisted in Situ Keratomileusis (LASIK) procedures. Current
technologies only facilitate pulse optimization prior to the focus and
interaction region. In fact, present femtosecond laser eye-surgery is based on
twenty-year old technology. As industries begin to re-tool to take advantage of
the benefits of improved femtosecond lasers, new pulse enhancement tools, such
as proposed here, will be imperative to their successful implementation.