* 1248863
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra High Efficiency Top-emitting Quantum Dot light-emitting Display Incorporating Microlens Array
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Yixing Yang, NanoPhotonica
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to demonstrate
ultra high efficiency quantum dot light-emitting diodes (QD-LEDs) using a top-
emitting structure and micro-lens array for display applications. Two key
challenges will be addressed. First, a novel top-emitting structure will be
explored based on the previous efficient bottom-emitting QD-LEDs. Use of top-
emitting structure removes light trapped through the wave-guide mode within the
glass substrate, which improves light out-coupling. A micro-lens array will be
applied on top of the QD-LEDs to further enhance the light extraction. The
project will focus on a number of innovative approaches. Micro-lens arrays will
be fabricated using a novel stamp printing method. A small size micro-lens along
with a top-emitting structure will minimize the pixel blurring effect induced by
the conventional out-coupling micro-lens. Secondly, high refractive index
material will be used to fabricate a micro-lens to match the refractive index of
the transparent electrode, hence improving light extraction efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
lies is to enable the commercialization of QD-LED displays, solid-state lighting
and other applications. QD-LEDs provide intrinsically higher color purity
compared to LCD or organic light-emitting diode (OLED) technology and are
suitable for display applications. However, current QD-LED solutions suffer from
lower efficiency compared to LCD and OLED. The company?s innovative
nanomaterials and device architecture has enabled very efficient bottom-emitting
QD-LEDs with high external quantum efficiency. Additionally, the multi-layer
structure in the company?s QD-LED are deposited through solution processing,
which reduces the cost significantly. It is expected that a better performing
and substantially less expensive QD-LED will quickly gain considerable market
share in a $60B market that ships over 1.5B units a year.