* 1248064
* Travel/Symposium Grant: Joint Symposium on Sustainable Technologies for Energy and Environment Indian Chemical Engineering Congress (CHEMCON-2012), Jalandhar, India, 12/28-29/12
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Srinivas Palanki, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2013
* USD 35,000.00

PI: Srinivas Palanki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of South
Alabama&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Travel and Symposium Grant: Joint Symposium
on Sustainable Technologies for Energy and Environment Indian Chemical
Engineering Congress (CHEMCON-2012)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide funding to 10 academic
researchers from the USA to participate and present papers at the Joint
Symposium on Sustainable Technologies for Energy and Environment in the Indian
Chemical Engineering Congress (CHEMCON 2012), and pursue collaborative research
opportunities with faculty members in India. The symposium aims to provide a
communication and exhibition platform for experts, scholars, and entrepreneur in
the energy and environment field. The CHEMCON 2012 conference will include not
only renowned experts, scholars, and government officials, but also company
executives and professionals of investment institutions in Asia, Europe, and the
United States. At this event they will discuss and exchange their ideas on ?hot
spots??novel technologies?and commercial development so as to encourage
cooperative research on energy technologies between India and other countries,
and promote the integration of the Indian energy industry with international
enterprises and investment institutions. This conference will also provide new
development opportunities for international energy institutions and enterprises.
There is an urgent need to develop sustainable technologies for energy and
environment in process industries. Four sessions are planned in this joint
symposium, and are focused on various aspects of sustainable technologies for
energy and environment in the process industry. This symposium will fill a
critical need and also bring focus to joint efforts between USA and India. It is
expected that this symposium will result in a significant increase in the level
of cooperation between researchers in India and the US through joint projects,
student and faculty exchange and collaborative funding.