* 1248271
* SBIR Phase I:  Handheld Multiplex Immunoassay Microfluidic Device for Water-based Toxin Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Hong Jiao, HJ Science & Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,180.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
state-of-the-art microfluidic technology for pathogen and toxin diagnostics in
drinking water. The innovation stems from our ability to transfer enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to an integrated microfluidic format that has a
fully automated platform for microparticle label immunoassays. By using
fluorescence detection, we can achieve sub-ppb levels of detection sensitivities
for a variety of chemicals and toxins in low concentrations in water to meet the
stringent regulatory requirement. The proposed technology has a handheld
platform, designed to perform simultaneous detections of multiple toxins with a
degree of sensitivity and specificity only currently achievable with laboratory
based instruments. Compared with laboratory based methods, on site portable
detection platform offers these advantages: (1) reduction in time and cost, (2)
real-time data for better and timely decision making, and (3) reduction in
sample consumption. In Phase I, the technical feasibility will be demonstrated
through simultaneous detection and identification of microcystins and other
cyanobacteria toxins as a proof-of-concept. In the follow-on Phase II effort, we
will build and test a prototype and extend the diagnostics capability to other
water-based pathogens and toxins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project encompasses environmental monitoring
of Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB) toxins. Most of the current diagnostic methods that
have high detection sensitivity and specificity such as biological assays and
chromatography are all laboratory based. This requires having to take the
samples from the field to the laboratory for analysis, often a time consuming
and costly process. The lack of real-time data also hampers proper and timely
decision making such as an early warning system. Current portable technologies
such as electrochemical detections do not have the sensitivity and specificity
of laboratory based instruments. Our portable field deployable technology has a
miniature and automated format. Automation allows for precise fluid control,
real-time data collection and analysis, eliminates the need for manual sample
preparation, and prevents contamination between operations. Moreover, the
programmable nature of the platform enables the integrated microfluidic
technology to have broader commercial application to include diagnostics of a
broader class of pathogens and toxins beyond HAB toxins. If successful, the
technology can be a powerful analytical tool for monitoring a variety of toxins
present in food, water, and soil. The key target customers include resource
managers, public health officials, and aquaculture facilities.