* 1248603
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Cohort Identification Tool
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Daniel Riskin, Health Fidelity, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to address
the most significant and challenging software need in healthcare: Cohort
identification. A cohort is a group of patients with a common medical condition.
Cohorts underpin modern medical care, defining treatment algorithms, measuring
quality improvement, supporting government initiatives, and representing the
core organization for research trials. While manual techniques have been
developed to identify a cohort within a healthcare organization's electronic
medical record (EMR), all rely on a physician or coder identifying and marking
every record for every applicable medical condition. This manual process is
inaccurate and only addresses the most common conditions. The suggested novel
and revolutionary approach is to use big data techniques, utilizing the detailed
unstructured narrative notes recorded on every patient for every encounter in
every healthcare institution. The core technology required to extract and make
unstructured data usable in healthcare is natural language processing (NLP)
combined with coded representations of clinical concepts (ontologies). This
proposal brings together industry leading teams and technologies to tackle the
greatest data problem in healthcare, which offers a unique opportunity to
significantly influence care for decades to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes creating the
foundational infrastructure for the next generation of data-driven healthcare.
Just as Google and Yahoo required advanced information extraction and search
indexing techniques to make the vast amount of internet data usable, healthcare
requires similar enabling technology. The healthcare challenge is even more
complex given the multitude of natural language descriptions used by physicians
and the complex logic that defines potential cohorts and algorithms. To address
these issues, healthcare requires the category of technologies used in Google
and Yahoo, but specialized for the healthcare domain. In healthcare, quality
improvement requires recognizing at risk cohorts in a population. Missing these
cohorts and inadequately treating them can increase mortality by an order of
magnitude, as in the case of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in acute care. For
quality measures being implemented by the federal government, defining and
identifying cohorts is always the first step of tracking and reporting. Current
processes are manual, limited, and inaccurate. By bringing evidence derived from
clinical documentation which is created in current workflow to real-time and
population based treatment decisions, this intervention will form a foundation
for data-driven care, supporting improved outcomes, shorter hospitalizations,
and reduced direct medical costs.