* 1248485
* SBIR Phase I:  Achieving Mass Balance in Carbon Storage Soil Gas Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* David Bomse, Mesa Photonics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,417.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a new method for monitoring carbon capture and storage (CCS) sites. CCS reduces
global warming by using deep geological formations to store large amounts of
carbon dioxide formed at power plants or separated from natural gas. The
proposed measurement approach combines two recent innovations to create vadose-
zone (i.e., near surface) soil gas analyzers that can discern carbon dioxide
that is leaking from deep storage from the carbon dioxide that is formed by
biogeochemical processes in soil. Existing soil gas analysis protocols require a
year, or more, of baseline measurements to characterize seasonal variations in
naturally-occurring CO2 concentrations. The long-term baseline determinations
must be made prior to the start of carbon dioxide capture. The proposed
approach, in contrast, works immediately and is suitable for retrofit to
existing capture sites. Installation will be simple. Analyzers will be the size
of a gallon of milk, will not require consumable supplies, and can be powered
from small solar panels. Soil gas will be sampled automatically from small-
diameter, shallow monitoring wells. Gas analysis uses proven optical methods and
includes direct measurement of nitrogen, which is needed to obtain correct mass
balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercialization potential of
this project is to enable a realistic, near-term mitigation method for global
warming. Alternative energy sources cannot solve the problem quickly enough.
Limited supplies of rare earth metals constrain production of wind generators
and high-efficiency electric motors. Widespread use of solar photovoltaic panels
is constrained by the up-front energy requirements for panel production. Carbon
capture and storage, in comparison, relies to a large extent on existing
infrastructure. Established oil-field technology identifies suitable CCS sites
and to pump carbon dioxide deep underground. Coal-rich nations such as the
United States can minimize coal?s global warming impact while continuing to use
abundant, inexpensive fuel. Monitoring methods are needed to verify performance
of storage sites and to help assure the public of the reliability and safety of
CCS. Vadose zone measurements are important because it is CO2 mixing with air
that contributes to global warming. The initially targeted niche has a near-term
addressable market of $200 million. The planned product should capture 30% of
the addressable market. This addressable market comprises CCS sites co-located
with large coal-burning facilities. There are about 2500 such facilities world-
wide and 20% of their locations are geologically favorable for CCS.