* 1248755
* SBIR Phase I:  Pyroelectric Thermal Energy Harvester for Power Generation and Waste Heat Recovery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Kevin Lu, Pyro-E LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,874.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project focuses
on the development of an efficient energy harvester for waste heat recovery. The
device uses solid-state materials that can convert heat directly into
electricity in a reversible interaction that is 10-times cheaper and more
powerful than traditional devices. The target application is for small, but
highly distributed, energy sources (&lt;1 MW) such as mobile generators and
automobiles. The incumbent technology, the thermoelectric module, uses expensive
rare earth metals that lack the ability to scale. It remains cost prohibitive,
with a payback period &gt; 5 years, given the challenges in heat conversion,
extraction and removal. In contrast, the proposed concept is based on a closed
thermodynamic cycle where waste thermal energy is harvested at scale without
needing massive heat transfer components. Moreover, the power generating
material itself can leverage existing means of volume manufacturing capable of
scale. This yields an ROI of &lt; 2 years. The primary research objective is to
demonstrate cost-effective energy conversion that can outperform existing
thermal conversion methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to provide a unique solution to boost the
efficiency of small, distributed energy systems. Recently, advances in
photovoltaics have led a paradigm shift towards direct energy conversion. This
shift also points to the need for effective thermal-electric conversion where no
solution currently exists for one of the largest and most accessible energy
source in the country. That is, the US in 2010 released 56 percent of the total
energy produced into the atmosphere in the form of waste heat and pollution.
Yet, no viable solution exists given the engineering challenges in
manufacturability and cost. By overcoming the above, the proposed technology
will address the critical need for increasing the energy-use efficiency of 1)
fuel cell and diesel generators; 2) gasoline automobile and hybrids; and 3)
industrial furnaces and gas pipelines. The broad, long-term objective is to
achieve cost-parity with turbines for power generation, 4-times longer life, and
the equivalent savings on maintenance. This provides benefit to society in the
form of cheaper energy, less reliance on fossil fuel, and improved environmental
quality.