* 1248724
* SBIR Phase I:  An Innovative Robotic Jamming Gripper
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* John Amend, Empire Robotics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,888.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
innovative robotic gripper that leverages the unique jamming behavior of
granular materials to enable a device that can passively conform to objects of
varying shape and then vacuum harden to grip them rigidly. These jamming
grippers are a unique solution to the need for agile gripping and manipulation
of arbitrarily shaped objects with a single gripper ? a need that occurs in
manufacturing robotics, prosthetics, and increasingly in home and healthcare
robotics. Initial results published in top scientific journals have demonstrated
successful implementation of this technique in a laboratory setting. The
research objectives of this project are aimed at bringing this innovation out of
the lab and demonstrating commercial feasibility. The objectives are: 1)
iterative testing and optimization of the outer membrane material for
performance and durability that meet industrial thresholds; 2) testing and
optimization of granular materials to improve gripper performance and
manufacturability; 3) testing grippers of varying size to quantify the influence
of scaling on performance; and 4) demonstrating specific manufacturing tasks
requested by industry advisors and potential customers. Successful completion of
this project will position the team for immediate scale up and production of
deliverable units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is realized by comparing the proposed jamming gripper technology
to existing solutions. Alternative robotic gripping solutions range (in
increasing price) from vacuum suction cups, to basic jawed grippers, to
customized or specialty grippers, and finally to complex multi-fingered hands.
The simplicity of the proposed jamming gripper enables a one to two orders of
magnitude price reduction over current grippers that achieve similar
performance. The first target market will be industrial manufacturing, focusing
on tasks where variations in object shape are prevalent (e.g. food handling,
pharmaceuticals, bin picking, and kitting/assembly). This gripper is also
uniquely positioned to create its own niche market in the simple, repetitive
tasks in manufacturing that must currently be performed by human laborers due to
prohibitive costs of automation. This will take workers out of uncomfortable and
dangerous working conditions, and improve accuracy and efficiency for rate-
limiting manufacturing steps. With 3.6 jobs created for each robot employed,
this could revitalize small manufacturers struggling to compete today. The
flexibility and low cost of a jamming gripper makes it a more agile and reusable
component, allowing companies to vary their products more broadly without
manufacturing line changes or purchases of new equipment.