* 1248374
* I-Corps:  RetiCue: Interactive Retinal Imaging for Improved Global Eye Health
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Ramesh Raskar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed technology is a low-cost portable retinal imaging device to
diagnose and monitor forms of retinopathy, early enough for medical intervention
to prevent vision loss. Images are captured and visualized using computational
photography techniques and transmitted to a cloud-based server that performs
analysis and allows access to remote experts for evaluation. This approach is
not only intended as a substitute for present day cameras that retail for
$35,000, but also has the potential to changes the way retinal imaging is
performed and can achieve this detection accuracy with minimal prior training of
its software interface. Two novel strategies underlie the technology. The first
is a technique to utilize indirect diffused illumination of the retina through
the sclera instead of illumination with a focused beam through the pupil, thus
eliminating the need for a specialist to dilate the pupil and precisely focus
the beam. The beam is also used to illuminate different points on the retina. A
stimulus presented on a display in front of the opposing eye, not being screened
is used to vary the patient?s focus across his visual field to generate the full
retinal image. This second novel strategy exploits binocular coupling - the
phenomenon of both eyes moving together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With soaring
demand for health care in the coming decades, the proposed approach will provide
a cost-effective and simple way to monitor retinal health and can potentially
transform the $3 Billion estimated market for retinal imaging. The advantage in
price, portability, and simplicity dramatically increases accessibility to
retinal screening. The application can easily be expanded to detect and monitor
many other retina related disorders, such as glaucoma and age related macular
degeneration, as well as other diseases that manifest in the retina. Recent
advances in mobile computing, portable imaging, and wireless communication have
the potential to enable retinal imaging outside of clinical settings, which
could have significant impact on tele-medicine through mobile, non-invasive
health screenings. Future possibilities for frequent and out-of-clinic retinal
imaging on a large scale may provide new opportunities for the detection,
diagnosis and treatment of such diseases.