* 1248000
* EARS: Spectrum Efficiency Analysis using Multisite Spectrum Observatory Network
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dennis Roberson, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 484,767.00

The need for increased RF spectrum access for wireless broadband applications
continues within the commercial and government user domains. Since the usable RF
spectrum is fully allocated, the only options available are to: a) increase the
efficiency of current spectrum uses; b) re-purpose spectrum to higher value
uses; or c) institute spectrum sharing. While the FCC has a database of
authorized, licensed spectrum users, the ultimate success of any of these
options depends on knowledge of actual RF spectrum utilization in time,
frequency, and space. While snap-shot surveys of RF utilization have been
performed, and long-term observations of RF use have been made at single
locations, the impact of incorporating the spatial dimension to both improve the
accuracy of these estimates and model medium-scale geographic variations has not
been fully explored. Given the need to obtain mappings and models of the
temporal and spatial variations of the RF environment with sufficiently high
fidelity to estimate, characterize, and model spectrum utilization, the
resulting research objectives are: 1) create a sufficiently low-cost and
scalable approach to generating and accessing the necessary high quality RF
dataset; 2) provide new methods for analyzing, modeling, and visualizing the
resulting large, multi-dimensional information base; and 3) model spectrum
activity to test the feasibility of spectrum sharing in candidate bands in order
to facilitate decision making and innovation in spectrum repurposing and
sharing.