* 1248852
* SBIR Phase I:  Hyperosmotic Nanoemulsions as Therapeutics for the Prevention and Treatment of Infected Wounds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Sean Connell, Medtric Biotech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,577.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
novel hyperosmotic nanoemulsions for the prevention and treatment of infected
wounds. Wound infections, whether acute or chronic, affects millions of
Americans and have significant monetary and physiologic impacts on patient
quality of life. Current therapies that rely on antibiotics are becoming limited
due to the frequency of antibiotic drug resistance. For example, the CDC
estimates that drug resistance has increased 36% in the last twenty years. To
reduce the reliance on broad spectrum antibiotics, this research aims to develop
a new class (non-antibiotic) of topical therapeutics known as hyperosmotic
nanoemulsions. The intellectual merit of the proposed technology is the novel
mechanism of bactericidal action (for infection prevention/treatment) coupled to
the concomitant acceleration in wound healing. This proposal is intended to
define the optimal treatment dosage necessary to move the technology into human
clinical testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is the applicability of hyperosmotic nanoemulsions to become a
standard first option in wound management protocol. Currently, market products
either mitigate the infection or reduce healing times. However, hyperosmotic
nanoemulsions are intended to treat both the underlying infection and actively
promote the stages of wound healing. This dual-fold action is poised to disrupt
the market of advanced wound dressings, which is estimated to be $1.2B and
growing 10% annually. Other markets that may be addressed with the proposed
technology include topical acne, antiviral and antifungal segments. The proposed
platform technology may ultimately prove to be an alternative or supplement to
traditional drugs and reshape both veterinary and human clinical practice.