* 1248774
* SBIR Phase I:  Monolithic Integration of LED Arrays and Silicon TFTs for Super High Brightness Microdisplays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Vincent Lee, Lumiode, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Program (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
new high brightness light engine platform by monolithically integrating high
performance silicon transistors with compound semiconductor optoelectronic
materials. Dense arrays of light emitting diodes (LEDs) have been previously
fabricated to show the opportunity of using such arrays in microdisplay and
projection concepts. However, without active control circuits, the ultimate
brightness and resolution are limited. The technology developed in this SBIR
uniquely allows for the fabrication of LED arrays with integrated control
circuits on a single substrate enabling a light engine platform with high peak
brightness (20,000,000 cd/m2), high dynamic range (from low light to outdoor
sunlight), and high efficiency (80 lm/W). Prototype LED arrays have been
fabricated, and the next step to realize this platform is the development of
silicon circuitry to directly control the LED arrays. The anticipated results of
this SBIR Phase I project are a low-temperature thin-film transistor fabrication
process compatible with the LED arrays, appropriately scaled transistors, models
of device performance and uniformity, and fully developed control circuits that
will enable commercial demonstration devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a light engine
with a power efficiency, brightness, cost, and form factor unavailable in
incumbent systems. In particular, three markets are identified where this
technology significant advantages over current technologies, the $200 million
microdisplay market, the $490 million pico-projector market, and the $2 billion
projector market. This light engine platform offers a small form factor, long
lifetime, environmental robustness, and high energy efficiency, and the high
brightness required for sunlight readability. These features are necessary to
create truly ubiquitous display devices and enable new see-through augmented
reality experiences or smaller, more integrated projectors, not possible with
current technologies. Commercialization of this device will impact all of these
areas and enable a range of new downstream applications including other non-
display industries, such as, 3D scanning and novel user interfaces.