* 1248692
* SBIR Phase I:  High Capacity Li2S-Si Rechargeable Batteries for Energy Storage Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Surya Moganty, NOHMS Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,846.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
secondary battery platform based on a lithium sulfide-carbon composite cathode
and a silicon anode that demonstrates high energy density and long cycle life.
Today, mobile devices require faster performance and smaller sizes for greater
portability. However, the faster processors in these devices impose energy
density requirements that push today's lithium battery technologies to their
limits. Li2S/Si configuration offers the highest theoretical specific energy
(1.55 kWh/kg) based on the lithium-ion battery platform and furthermore is not
subject to the safety issues related to other secondary lithium battery systems
which employ metallic lithium. The development of the Li2S/Si battery has been
hindered by the limited cycle life of the cathode and the anode. On the cathode
side the company has developed methods of creating porous carbon hosts for
sequestering sulfur and on the anode side methods of synthesizing Si nanowires
to prevent pulverization, hence obtaining stable performance for both
electrodes. In the Phase I Project the company will optimize performance of
their electrodes and develop scalable processes for production. This research
will result in continued performance improvement of the Li2S/Si platform and
identify critical processing techniques and challenges for scale-
up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
is that it is able to bring about significant changes to the rechargeable
lithium battery technologies and the market because of their approximately three
fold energy density advantage over the current chemistry platforms (0.2-0.6
kWh/kg). Lithium-ion batteries (LIB) currently have a market of $11-13 billion
and the sales are expected to increase to at least $40 billion by 2020. LIBs are
widely employed in portable electronics and are expected to be the driving force
for development of the new generation of hybrid and electric vehicles. If the
proposed technology can be brought to commercialization, the improved
performance characteristics such as higher energy density, higher power and
longer cycle life will allow manufacturers/consumers to power their
devices/vehicles for longer periods of time and gain performance advantages in
their respective applications.