* 1248784
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Video-Based Software Application For Automatic And Accurate Roof Surveying
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* William Wilkins, Metalforming Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the technical and commercial feasibility of designing a video-based roof
surveying software. Roof surveying is an essential activity in sheet metal
roofing projects. Several technologies have been evolved over the years for this
purpose; however, none of them are safe, inexpensive, automatic, and accurate
enough at the same time. Tape measurement is therefore still the standard
practice despite its apparent limitations. This project will address this need
by automatically generating an accurate 3Dwirediagram of a roof which includes
necessary measurements. If successful, it will be the world?s first videobased
roof surveying software that fulfills all industry requirements (accuracy,
simplicity, cost, safety, and efficiency). When using it, a roofing contractor
simply collects stereo video from a roof and sends it to a server for
processing. Unlike existing vision-based software that only use point level
information, the software uses a hybrid formulation that combines points, lines,
and planes. This higher level information enhances the output accuracy to the
required level. Once measurements are automatically extracted and sent back, the
contractor uploads them to an on-site roll forming machine to roll form and cut
sheet metal coil into precise, ready to install panels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to address inherent
deficiencies of current technologies for roof surveying and bring the sheet
metal roofing trade up to the modern standards of CAD/CAM used in many other
industries. Compared to tape measuring, this project will significantly reduce
measuring costs and also eliminate the exposure of employees to fall hazards,
thereby decreasing the very high number of occupational injuries and fall deaths
which occur in the roofing industry (7% of private construction fatalities in
2009). The simplicity of the application will remove the need for trained
surveyors which are required for surveying with a total station. It could also
provide more accurate measurements compared to satellite imaging technology and
hence satisfy industry requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the target
industry (i.e., sheet metal roofing), this solution could be used by virtually
any roofing contractors worldwide. It could also be adapted to many of the other
building trades where as-built documentation is required to build components,
including metal fa√ßade manufacturers/installers and HVAC contractors. This, in
turn, will result in time and cost savings, which can improve the efficiency of
the construction industry. Surveying equipment manufacturers and surveying
companies are the other key players in the target market of this application.