* 1248867
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhancing the Viability of Emergency Alerting over Social Media via a Collaborative Computer-Aided System for Handling Incoming Citizen Messages
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Hisham Kassab, MobiLaps
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 155,000.00

The innovation is a software engine that empowers emergency managers to analyze
and process the high volume of incoming citizen messages (e.g., inquiries, calls
for help, etc.) on the emergency manager's social media site(s) (e.g., Facebook,
Twitter), typically experienced after an emergency alert is issued over one or
more social media sites. The core of the Internet-connected software engine
consists of two algorithms: a multivariate matching algorithm and a natural
language processing algorithm. The matching algorithm optimally selects, based
on a number of parameters, other emergency managers who can collaborate with the
affected jurisdiction's emergency manager on handling the incoming messages. The
natural language processing algorithm is employed to reorder incoming messages
based on an intelligent keyword-driven prioritization method. The
reprioritization is necessary since certain messages warrant more immediate
attention than others.

The broader/commercial impact of the innovation will be the societal benefit of
enhancing the nation's emergency notification capability and effectiveness,
which in turn bolsters the nation's emergency preparedness and response efforts,
potentially saving lives during life-threatening emergencies. Emergency managers
currently using social media for emergency alerting will attest to its power as
an alerting tool in terms of reaching targeted citizens quickly, inexpensively,
and with detailed information; while immediately establishing two-way
communication with citizens for the purpose of receiving requests for assistance
as well as eyewitness and first-hand accounts of situational developments. Yet,
the same emergency managers will warn that the already large number of incoming
messages is growing as more citizens join their social media accounts, which
will eventually make it unviable/unsustainable for emergency managers to
manually process all the incoming messages, especially during period after the
alert is issued, when their efforts are focused on responding to the emergency
incident. The proposed activity is aimed at developing an intelligent
collaboration-based system that will keep the social media message-processing
workload manageable during emergency response periods. The insurance-inspired
business model for the service ensures affordability to emergency managers and
commercial success for the business.