* 1248931
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced Voice Capture for Mobile Devices Using a Mixed-Response-Type Array
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Aaron Jones, Sonistic, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 147,349.00

The innovation is to develop very small audio subsystems for mobile audio
devices with unprecedented noise and interference reduction. Audio subsystems
are fundamental to many high-volume portable devices such as mobile phones,
media tablets, and digital voice recorders. Multiple microphones can enhance
audio capture and improve signal quality by reducing acoustic noise
interference, but current arrays of separated omni-directional microphones
require large spacing between microphones to achieve high discrimination. The
small size of mobile communication devices thus fundamentally degrades the
performance of existing array technologies. "Zero-aperture" mixed-response-type
arrays that retain high directional selectivity with very closely spaced
microphones coupled with innovative signal-processing methods may achieve
unprecedented background noise and interference reduction with high target
signal quality. The research will extend existing free-field arrays and adaptive
beamforming methods to the different acoustics when embedded in handheld
devices, will develop a novel real-time robust beamformer for small arrays, and
will greatly increase noise and interference reduction through new multichannel
noise-reduction processing. Successful research could fundamentally improve the
signal capture and noise rejection of small mobile electronic voice
communication devices, thus greatly improving their most fundamental function
and enabling their effective use in a wider range of environments.

The broader/commercial impact is to enhance and facilitate mobile voice
communication for mobile device users. The voice and audio subsystem is a
fundamental component of mobile devices including cell phones, smartphones and
media tablets. Background noise interference during voice communication presents
a major problem for many users, especially the millions of hearing impaired and
elderly individuals who often struggle to communicate using current voice
communications technology. Major device manufacturers have recently begun to
implement microphone arrays in commercial devices, yet current voice capture
systems fail to utilize the full potential of array technology for mobile
applications. Market research has predicted that dedicated voice processor sales
will grow to 1.6 billion units in 2015 from 63 million in 2010. Prior research
has enabled the development of innovative mixed-response-type array technology,
allowing arrays to be implemented effectively in smaller devices. However, a
number of unsolved technical problems have prevented commercialization of the
technology within the mobile market. This Phase I project will address these
problems to deliver a disruptive voice processing solution, setting a new
standard for voice capture performance in mobile devices.