* 1248162
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemical Conversion of Cellulosic Matters to Biofuel
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Thomas Tao, StannTron, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will validate a novel
single-chemical process called decarbonation of carbohydrates, which converts
ligno-cellulosic carbohydrates to liquid biofuels as a drop-in transportation
fuel. This novel process, proposed in this work, selectively removes CO2 from
carbohydrates with a chemical that preferably bonds with CO2 while suppressing
dehydration and pyrolysis. The feasibility of using simpler carbohydrates was
recently demonstrated in a liquid-phase-solid-state reaction at small lab scale.
Common sucrose was directly converted to organic liquids that contained
methanol, ethanol, acetone, propone hydroxyl, furans, HM furfural, gaseous and
liquid hydrocarbons, etc. However, ligno-cellulosic matter is a polymer and thus
has limited reactivity. In Phase I, this project will directly address this
issue by systematically selecting cellulosic solvents, including ionic liquids,
and optimizing their ability to be used in decarbonation. In Phase II, this
project will seek to achieve a higher conversion yield capable of reaching 100
gallons of biofuel per ton of cellulosic matter, all at a low production cost of
less than $2 per gallon. Successful demonstrations of Phase I and II milestones
will allow the commercial development of cellulosic matter to biofuel as a
direct drop-in fuel.

The broad impact/commercial potential of this project is potentially very
significant. Carbohydrates (saccharides) are the most abundant form of biomass
on earth, comprising more than 60% of total known plant mass. In the US over 1
billion tons of forest and agricultural resources are available each year, and
could provide 30% of all domestic transportation fuel needs. Converting
cellulosic carbohydrates to renewable biofuel is a technological holy grail with
enormous societal benefits. The federal revised Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS2)
mandate presents a direct market driving force. By 2022, the market for advanced
biofuels produced from ligno-cellulosic matter will reach 20 billion gallons and
$50 billion. The Biofuel proposed in this work carries significant advantages
over contemporary biofuel approaches such as ethanol and bio-diesel with several
broad potential benefits for sustainability as well as being competitive with
non-renewable fuels currently in use.