* 1248353
* SBIR Phase I:  Design and Cost Effective Manufacturing of Miniature Gas Chromatograph Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Yao-Tsan Tsai, Enervana Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,964.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project concerns the
design and high-throughput and low-cost manufacturing of metal-based miniature
gas chromatograph (mGC) sensor structures. The proposed mGC sensor design and
manufacturing is unique and offers competitive advantages as compared to current
"micro GC" devices/systems on the market. Miniaturized GC Sensors are envisioned
to become the building blocks for future GC instruments, in which each mGC
module can perform a separate analytical function. Analytical instruments
containing multiple mGCs can be tailored to provide analyses of compounds with
widely different chemical characteristics. Such instruments may become "niche
analyzers" for field analytical use not possible with current capabilities.
Design and efficient fabrication of high-reliability, low-cost, metal-based, mGC
sensors are critical for establishing the technical and commercial feasibility
of such devices. The project team combines extensive expertise on GC design,
testing, and applications as well as microfabrication of metal-based high-
aspect-ratio microscale structures (HARMS). Fabrication of metallic HARMS by
molding replication, combined with efficient microscale bonding, promises low-
cost, high-throughput, mGC device production with high reliability. The proposed
methodology offers competitive advantages compared to silicon-based integrated-
circuit processing techniques and represents a good opportunity for pushing
metal-based mGC sensors to commercially-viable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is multifaceted and significant. Miniature GC sensor modules can be a
device that promotes efficiency and improvements throughout industry and
society. For example, better monitoring improves the quality of chemical
products. On-site monitoring and processing of multi-point compositional
information improves chemical plant efficiencies and the control of process
upsets. Early detection of emissions from leaks prevents pollution, and helps
industry meet clean air compliance requirements. Effective monitoring assures
water quality and alleviates public health concerns. The availability of mGC
sensors will eliminate many field sampling activities connected to laboratory
analysis. Real-time monitoring lowers compliance cost of environmental
regulations and fines, and accelerates the permit process. Increased security at
airports and public facilities lessens public apprehension and reduce time
delays. Detection of disease earlier and more cheaply improves health care. As
such, significant market interest exists for the proposed technology. The
proposed mGC sensors may enable many new and yet unrealized applications. This
is where the mGC sensor modules will have it greatest potential for market
expansion. By focusing on such market expansion opportunities, the presently
proposed project combines technical innovation with commercial promise.