* 1248884
* SBIR Phase I:  Information Tracking and Trading as a Stimulus to Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Dawei Shen, Beonten, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation implements a theoretically pure, fair, and accurate credit
assignment mechanism whenever information content is reused. The technology is
implemented as an algorithm that recursively detects chains of reused content
regardless of how far back the chain proceeds. It accounts for changes in
authorship each time ideas are reused and for content perturbations in which the
essence of an idea is described using different language. A second part of the
algorithm uses market gamification to establish the relative value of reused and
novel content then apportion the value from reused content back to original
sources of novel content. Distinguishing value from quantity is essential
because it is often possible to develop a succinct expression of an important
idea and a long-winded expression of an unimportant idea. Further, this
technology accounts for complementary ideas whose value is greater than the sum
of the parts. Since the theoretical ideal is mathematically complex, the
algorithm also introduces several novel efficiency shortcuts. Finally, the
technology provides a visual display of reused content that helps motivate
original sources to share their ideas and aid users in finding related ideas.

The broader/commercial impact of this technology draws from its ability to
improve white-collar productivity. Numerous research studies show that people
who volunteer information thrive on recognition. Conversely, stealing a person's
ideas limits their willingness to share. A well functioning credit attribution
system therefore has the potential to improve idea sharing as well as the
opportunity to recombine ideas in new ways so as to foster profits and
innovation. For example, an unrelated MIT study showed firms that reuse their
information have 12% higher revenue growth. In a related study, document reuse
among a bank's loan officers increased productivity by as much as 10%. Virtually
all Fortune 500 firms use document repositories of one form or another. Adding
recognition and incentives can improve individual willingness to push valuable
information into systems where it can be repurposed by coworkers. These create
measurable economic gains in an identifiable and large market.