* 1248087
* Collaborative Research:  Synoptic Geospace Systems Analysis Utilizing Instrumentation from South Pole and McMurdo Stations
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Gary Bust, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 09/30/2016
* USD 170,690.00

The ionosphere-thermosphere-magnetosphere (ITM) region constitutes the Earth's
upper atmosphere that is part of larger Geospace environment, and ITM is a
portal upon which the solar wind energy and momentum enter and impact the entire
Geospace domain. Though space weather research over the past decade or so has
greatly increased understanding of a wide variety of phenomena associated with
the ITM physics, the sum of these individual processes occurring in Geospace
does not replicate the rich diversity and scope of this complex region. Thus a
more holistic approach to the ITM research is necessary, one that integrates
clustered instrumentation at multiple locations to have a simultaneous look at
the solar wind interactions within the entire Geospace system. This project will
support studies of interrelated ITM phenomena observed at high latitudes through
the coordinated and collaborative instruments deployed across Antarctica.
Specifically, the project will focus on continued operation of a suite of
geospace instrumentation currently deployed at both the South Pole (SPA) and
McMurdo (MCM) stations. This suite has a sustained track-record of robust
operation and community support: ground-based fluxgate and search-coils
magnetometers, ELF and VLF receivers, imaging and broadband riometers, sky-
looking optical systems, scintillation GPS receivers, and a number of other
instruments. Data from this suite will be synergistically combined to study: (a)
synoptic variability of the magnetospheric open-closed boundary (OCB) and
associated cusp structures (utilizing fluxgate, photometer, and all-sky imager
data); (b) simultaneous ELF whistler events at SPA and MCM and their
relationship to ionospheric conditions (using ELF receiver, fluxgate, and GPS
data); and (c) auroral and polar cap GPS signal scintillation occurrence,
strength, and relationship with the ITM activity (using GPS, fluxgate, riometer,
imager, ELF/VLF data). These particular topics are only a partial listing of the
work that can, and will, be performed with the data obtained from these
instruments, especially via established and planned collaborations with other
geospace projects taking place in the Antarctica and at magnetically conjugate
regions in the Arctic. These include (but not limit) the MCM lidar system,
southern hemisphere SuperDARN radars, Fabry-Perot interferometers, balloon
campaign, etc. The project will be utilizing (and also providing) data from/to
in-orbit satellites, namely the THEMIS suite of spacecraft and recently launched
RBSP spacecraft. This will make use of the ground- and space-based data to
provide the science context to proposed observations and reveal new insights
into underlying physics of the geospace phenomena. The project will train and
educate young scientists, graduate, and undergraduate students.