* 1248076
* INSPIRE: Symmetry Group-based Regularity Perception in Human and Computer Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Anthony Norcia, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Robust Intelligence (RI) Program
in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering, and the Perception, Action and
Cognition (PAC) Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in
the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.

This research integrates theoretical, experimental and algorithmic thrusts to
construct a novel conceptual framework for predicting and understanding the full
range of regularity perception, both in humans, by measuring human brain
activation and behavior, and in machines, through a computational framework for
adaptive symmetry detection in computer vision. The ability to detect patterns
in natural scenes serves critical biological needs while posing substantial
computational difficulties for machine intelligence. Research on human and
computer perception of pattern regularity has primarily focused on bilateral
symmetry, despite a wide variety of regular patterns beyond reflection. A unique
feature of the proposed project is to use symmetry group theory as an organizing
principle for the study of both human and computer perception of patterns.
Symmetry group theory, instantiated by its subgroup hierarchy, provides a formal
and exhaustive categorization of all regular patterns.

The project sits at an interdisciplinary nexus between computer science,
psychology, neuroscience, and mathematics. The outcomes of this research could
potentially transform the theory of human pattern perception and make a quantum
leap in robust automatic detection of real world regularities. Because patterns
are ubiquitous, this research impacts all information processing systems
challenged by large digital datasets that are hard to explore manually. Its
impact is strengthened further by a systemic outreach to the respective research
communities through interdisciplinary workshops, publications, data sharing,
classroom lectures, postdoc and student training. Applications include anomaly
detection in medicine and surveillance data; mobile robot localization in man-
made environments; and generic pattern indexing and retrieval.