* 1248211
* SBIR Phase I:  Evaluation of SCIENTASTIC! - A Trans-Media and Public Television Series for Ages 8 to 13
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* David Caldwell, Planet Earth Television, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 166,201.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of engaging children ages 8 to 13 in the wonders of science and
the application of scientific principles through the transmedia SCIENTASTIC!
project. The study will also demonstrate that the television series will help
students answer questions and solve problems for themselves and their community.
The American public supports the advancement of scientific knowledge and our
investment in scientific research leads the world. However, Americans are
falling behind in educating the next generation of scientists. Late elementary
school is an ideal time to capture students' attention and engage them in STEM
activities. Using rigorous evaluation techniques we will show that SCIENTASTIC!
encourages hands-on learning by exploration, questioning and thinking. The
innovative television program and integrated companion resources provide
scientific role models and demonstrate the scientific process in an entertaining
way. The associated web site, Apps, Web 2.0 repository and teaching aids allow
students, teachers, and parents to further explore concepts introduced in the
show. Preliminary analysis reveals that the SCIENTASTIC! target audience liked
the show, would watch the show and learned from the show. Further analysis will
demonstrate that the transmedia approach increases viewer interest and learning.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will play a
transformative role in encouraging students to take STEM courses in college,
pursue scientific careers, and become a scientifically informed electorate. By
developing the story beyond the story, transmedia SCIENTASTIC! has strong
commercial value. Dissemination through public television allows for a potential
audience of 250 million people. Commercial and noncommercial sponsorships will
be sold with associated on-air credits. Additional direct funding will be sought
from industries with interests in promoting science and health literacy. A
commercial version of the program will be offered to cable networks on a
licensing basis, with DVDs, Apps and study guides sold to schools,
homeschoolers, and parents. With a broad and commercially viable dissemination,
SCIENTASTIC! will show children the joys of science by demonstrating and
engaging in hands-on, team- based learning in real-world contexts. This process
will improve student retention and will show that SCIENTASTIC! introduces new
ways to learn. The SCIENTASTIC! project will evaluate teaching techniques
information that will be shared with policy-makers, educational institutions,
and teachers to improve education nationwide. By spreading successful methods
for engaging children in math and science, SCIENTASTIC! shoiuld have significant
societal benefit creating a generation of scientifically educated decision-
makers.