* 1248617
* SBIR Phase I:  UV Plasma-Shell Device for Novel Photocatalytic Process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Adeline Miermont, IMAGING SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,979.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
allow the optimization of the novel Plasma-shell technology for incorporation
into a large area Ultra-Violet (UV) emitting tile for use in germicidal
applications. Plasma-shells are small gas encapsulating devices that emit light
when energized. This research will focus on improving the transmissivity of the
hermetic outer wall of the Plasma-shell to improve overall efficiency. Plasma-
shells are lightweight, low cost and extremely rugged devices. The Plasma-shell
is the only UV technology that can offer ultra large area completely diffuse
(Lambertian) light output, which is very useful for conventional UV
sterilization. These attributes will have an even greater impact when used to
energize TiO2 in a photocatalytic process. UV activated TiO2 is a powerful
catalyst that can be used in the breakdown of chemicals and the destruction of
pathogens in contaminated water. However, the efficient scaling of the TiO2
photocatalytic process is dependent on efficiently coupling the UV light source
to the TiO2. The envisioned large area low cost Lambertian output from an array
of Plasma-shells will provide a previously unavailable lighting option that will
make possible the efficient scaling of a TiO2 based water purification system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes a novel technology that will provide a large area, efficient
and low cost Ultra-Violet (UV) light source. This research has high commercial
potential as the end product will be more efficient, environmentally safe,
rugged and more cost effective than the current state-of-the-art UV light
sources. Under this SBIR, the focus will be on the optimization of the Plasma-
shells as a powerful UV light source to stimulate photocatalytic processes,
primarily for water treatment. This will have an impact on a large growing
global market. The economic delivery of pure water has societal impact, as many
in the world still do not have access to clean water. Low cost, rugged,
efficient purification systems that will result from this research will help to
spread access to clean water. Additional promising applications for the UV light
emitting Plasma-shells include sterilization of surface areas, purification of
air, medical light therapy, protein analysis, drug discovery, polymer and ink
printing, optical sensors and instrumentation, UV ID verification, barcodes,
forensic and bodily fluid detection and analysis, counterfeit detection, and
superficial/cosmetic treatment.