* 1248109
* CREATIV: Towards Ubiquitous Adoption of Wireless Sensor Networks in Experimental Biology Research.
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Graciela Unguez, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2018
* USD 832,000.00

This CREATIV award is partially funded by the Networking Technologies and
Systems (NeTS) program in the Division of Computer Networks and Systems in the
Directorate of Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering, the Animal
Behavior program through the the Divisions of Integrative Organismal Systems and
Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate of Biological Sciences, the Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the Office of the Division
Director in CISE/CNS and the Office of the Assistant Director in CISE. This
project aims to address the major barriers to adoption of wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) in multiple cross-disciplinary domains, particularly high cost,
low customizability, lack of rugged designs and complex programming models. The
project team aims to surmount these barriers to provide a potentially
transformative wireless sensor network design framework that can be used by
anyone with minimal technical skills, and yet achieve the benefits of pervasive
monitoring and sensing through large-scale ubiquitous wireless sensor networks.
The PIs will leverage their multi-disciplinary and cross-domain expertise to
address these challenges using experimental biology research as their platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to provide and/or enable: 1)
a hardware framework for low-cost, rugged, and customizable sensor nodes, in a
wide range of form factors, 2) autonomous manipulation and monitoring of
electro-physiological parameters of electro-motor circuits in vivo and in vitro
using WSNs, 3) novel network protocols and algorithms for monitoring aquatic
animals in the field, and 4) a software framework that makes programming WSNs
easy and intuitive for users with minimal programming experience. By removing
the barriers to adoption through plug-and-play, and easy customization and
programming, this proposed research hopes to make WSNs ubiquitous in our daily
life in general and in biology research in particular. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the short term, this project will enable experimental researchers in labs and in
the field to stimulate and monitor animals/specimen in real-time and without
human intervention, which will significantly improve understanding of animal
responses to diverse stimuli. In the long term, the outcomes of this research
will help WSNs become ubiquitous in our daily life and as easy to use as
computers today. The project will provide undergraduate and graduate students
including women and minorities in the classes and labs of the PIs the benefit of
an unique interdisciplinary learning and research environment. It will leverage
NSF GK-12 DISSECT, BPC, and YWiC initiatives in the computer science department
of New Mexico State University to expose middle and high school students in the
city of Las Cruces to STEM research and teach them computational
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;