* 1248473
* SBIR Phase I:  Rething Recommendations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Devavrat Shah, Celect, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses
the&lt;br/&gt;problem of learning predictive models of individual choice
behavior using sparse&lt;br/&gt;information on the behavior of any single
individual. The intellectual merit of the&lt;br/&gt;project is developing a
novel parsimonious view of this problem by modeling&lt;br/&gt;choice behavior as
a distribution over permutations of alternatives, and making&lt;br/&gt;this view
implementable at scale. A unit of data in this paradigm is a
single&lt;br/&gt;comparison between two alternatives. Data of this sort can be
derived in a variety&lt;br/&gt;of contexts ranging from product reviews to
transaction data. While being a&lt;br/&gt;parsimonious modeling viewpoint, exact
computation, or even representing such&lt;br/&gt;models is intractable. The
project will focus on developing approximate solutions&lt;br/&gt;that, in the
spirit of recent advances in high-dimensional statistics, exploit
the&lt;br/&gt;potential of sparse approximations to such models. Given the vast
quantities of&lt;br/&gt;data available to build such models it will be important
for the algorithms&lt;br/&gt;developed to be amenable to parallelization in a
manner reminiscent of the&lt;br/&gt;Map/Reduce computational paradigm. The
algorithms developed will fit this&lt;br/&gt;paradigm with key algorithmic steps
decomposing across data collected for a&lt;br/&gt;single individual. In summary,
this project will develop a massively parallelizable&lt;br/&gt;approach to
modeling individual choice behavior using unstructured data from
a&lt;br/&gt;variety of sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project rests in enabling
the&lt;br/&gt;emerging, all pervasive transition from 'search' to 'discovery'.
This transition can&lt;br/&gt;be witnessed in sectors ranging from e-commerce to
offline retail to matching&lt;br/&gt;impressions to advertisers on demand side
platforms. The key stumbling block in&lt;br/&gt;this transition is the seeming
requirement to build attribute rich models for a given&lt;br/&gt;context as
opposed to a black box approach. The approach taken in this project&lt;br/&gt;is
of the latter variety. As a concrete example, the task of merchandising
requires&lt;br/&gt;an offline retailer to decide on the right assortment of
products to carry in&lt;br/&gt;segments ranging from tooth paste to clothing;
the approach here will power such&lt;br/&gt;decision making in an entirely data
driven fashion. In a different direction, serving&lt;br/&gt;ads based on models
that capture a surfer's preferences across the various silos&lt;br/&gt;of
products and topics on the web can be enabled at scale and
incredible&lt;br/&gt;granularity using the approach here. The level of
granularity made possible by&lt;br/&gt;the approach here cannot be achieved with
'parametric' attribute driven&lt;br/&gt;approaches. In summary, the tools
developed in this project have the potential to&lt;br/&gt;do for `discovery'
what the PageRank algorithm did for search.