* 1248803
* SBIR Phase I:  Metabolic Engineering of Moritella marina MP-1 for DHA Production
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* John Rathmacher, Metabolic Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to evaluate
the use of a marine organism for production of the polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). DHA is important for maintaining good health
and is in serious supply shortage worldwide. Metabolic engineering will be used
to increase DHA production in Moritella marina, which naturally produces DHA.
This will be accomplished by deletion of competing metabolic pathways to
increase expression of the DHA-producing pathway. The goal is to increase
production such that the overall DHA titer is 1.0 g/L. This work also will
provide insight into control of central metabolic flux and sensing and control
of fatty acid content and production. Thus, the intellectual merit of this work
extends to a variety of metabolic products.

The broader impact/commercial impact of this project is the development of an
alternative production system for DHA, a sustainable and safe nutraceutical that
is in serious supply shortage worldwide. Data suggest that omega-3 fatty acids,
such as DHA, play important roles in enhancing heart health, brain health, child
and infant development and preventing various chronic diseases, such as
rheumatoid arthritis, obesity and type-2 diabetes. It is recommended that the
general public consume at least 100-1000 mg of PUFA daily; the current primary
source for DHA is from cold water fish, which cannot meet global demand. The
commercial goal is to biomanufacture DHA, and then market a DHA-enriched oil to
nutritional supplement and food manufacturers to meet the growing demand for
this product.