* 1248295
* SBIR Phase I:  Koli: A Non-Surgical Treatment for Gallstone Disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Christopher Cheng, Koli
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase I Research project will support development
and testing of a novel medical technology to replace gallbladder surgery with a
minimally invasive solution. Gallstone disease affects over 20 million Americans
and carries a direct cost of more than $6 billion. Surgical removal of the organ
is currently the only definitive treatment for symptomatic gallstone disease and
many patients are unwilling or unfit for surgery. If successful, this project
will result in a validated device ready for use in animal studies in SBIR Phase
II as a critical step towards clinical studies in human
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is in addressing a critical and unmet need in management of gallstone
disease ? preventing recurrent attacks without the need for general anesthesia
and surgery while preserving organ function. Symptomatic gallstone disease
presents acutely and often requires urgent if not emergent intervention.
Patients are referred for surgery from their primary care provider or the
emergency room. With such a large referral base, scheduling logistics and
medical co-morbidities delay or prevent surgery in many patients. Without
definitive treatment, recurrence is common and especially dangerous in cases of
acute cholecystitis or pancreatitis. Commercialization of this novel
percutaneous device will also provide a significant economic benefit to the
healthcare system by reducing the number of surgical procedures, the number of
repeat admissions in patients who cannot have surgery, and increasing the
quality of life of patients.