* 1248151
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of Properly-Folded Recombinant Proteins in Eschericihia coli
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Donald O'Keefe, Da Yu Enterprises, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 145,036.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes a new
expression platform in Escherichia coli applicable to both drug discovery and
biopharmaceutical manufacturing. It solves and leverages recombinant protein
misfolding in E. coli. Small molecular weight compounds are used in conjunction
with high recombinant protein expression in E. coli to produce proteins with
their native structure. In the area of drug discovery this allows one to obtain
properly-folded proteins for structural and functional genomics, high-throughput
screening, and to identify specific protein stabilizers for protein-misfolding
diseases. For biopharmaceutical manufacturing, recombinant protein inclusion
body formation is prevented and refolding steps are eliminated. Cultures of E.
coli containing a plasmid encoding a gene for the recombinant protein of
interest are allowed to grow to a desired cell density and then an innovative
condition-dependent change is made that allows the passive influx of small
molecular weight compounds into the E. coli cytoplasm during protein synthesis
that support proper protein folding. This proposal will examine the feasibility
of this condition-dependent change and the alteration of the cell?s cytoplasm in
a prescribed way to produce properly-folded proteins by monitoring the soluble
and functional expression of selected recombinant
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be a gene expression platform that is an enabling technology that
has applications wherever properly-folded recombinant proteins are utilized. The
described system can produce recombinant proteins in E. coli that would
otherwise be toxic such as membrane proteins, which are highly desirable drug
targets but are recalcitrant proteins for functional and structural genomics
research. It is the first E. coli system described that can be leveraged to
screen for drugs directed against protein-misfolding diseases. It is a new
avenue for identifying drugs to treat devastating and costly diseases including
p53-mediated cancers, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Tay-Sachs, and amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. The proposed expression platform can potentially make these
proteins more research accessible. Inclusion body formation in E. coli may also
benefit from this technology. This is particularly applicable to recombinant
proteins intended as biopharmaceuticals. Preventing inclusion bodies increases
process yields, shortens process development timelines and reduces commercial
manufacturing costs. Hence, this proposal describes a new tool to discover drugs
for unmet medical needs, expedite drug discovery, and streamline
biopharmaceutical development and manufacturing; all of which will ultimately
provide economical and societal benefits.