* 1249341
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research:  Deconstructing diversity and ecosystem function at multiple spatial and genetic scales in a keystone plant-microbe symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kabir Peay, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2016
* USD 549,999.00

This work will provide the first continental-scale sample of taxonomic, genetic
and&lt;br/&gt;functional diversity of ectomycorrhizal fungi from pine
ecosystems. These fungi form symbiotic relationships with the roots of dominant
forest plants, and provide them with nutrients and water in exchange for
photosynthetically-fixed carbon. Despite the importance of ectomycorrhizal fungi
in global nutrient cycles, little is known about large-scale patterns of fungal
community structure relative to plants, animals, or even bacteria. This project
will establish patterns of gene flow and selection for multiple ectomycorrhizal
fungi across North America, use a hierarchical phylogenetic sampling design to
measure variation in functional enzyme production across individuals,
populations and species, and use RNA based metagenomics to measure functional
trait expression on mycorrhizal root tips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will result in a large, open access database of taxonomic barcode and functional
genes that can be used by researchers to generate predictive models of fungal
ecosystems. It will include training of graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars in cutting-edge techniques in an understudied field, will result in
outreach activities targeted toward the general public, and will include
activities for K-12 students and educators designed to foster early student
interests in fungi.&lt;br/&gt;