* 1249255
* A novel geochemical approach for environmental risk assessment of stray gas contamination in  shallow aquifers within active and prospective shale gas development zones
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

Advances in drilling technologies and production strategies, such as horizontal
drilling and hydraulic fracturing, have significantly improved the production of
natural gas and oil from unconventional hydrocarbon deposits. While these
activities have dramatically changed the energy landscape in the U.S., recent
research results suggests the potential for methane contamination in shallow
drinking water wells near some active shale gas wells in northeastern
Pennsylvania. These findings raise important issues about the potential safety
of drilling practices. However, other workers highlight that naturally occurring
methane occurs within shallow aquifers that overlie black shale deposits. These
competing interpretations provoke debate amongst academic, industry, and
regulatory scientists regarding the potential environmental impacts of hydraulic
fracturing and horizontal drilling. Stable carbon and hydrogen isotopes of
methane are commonly used to determine the source of methane. However, some
hydrocarbon producing black shales in the US and Canada have overlapping
isotopic ratios that mask potential differences between anthropogenic
contamination and the natural methane in the subsurface. Consequently, this
controversy highlights the need to develop independent and complementary
geochemical tools to constrain the source of natural gas and the mechanism of
transport in shallow drinking waters, specifically those potentially
contaminated by stray gas migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop noble gas geochemistry as a new geochemical tool, integrated with
traditional chemical and isotopic measurements, for delineating the sources of
hydrocarbons in shallow aquifers associated with shale gas exploration in the
Appalachian Basin. In particular, the project will establish more robust
criteria for distinguishing naturally occurring methane from that sourced by
drilling-related contamination. Investigators expect to be able to distinguish
between: 1) shallow uncontaminated groundwater; 2) groundwater that was affected
by natural hydrocarbon gas migration along natural fractures over geological
time; and c) groundwater contaminated by hydrocarbon gas migration out of
faulty/insufficiently installed wells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
importance of hydraulic fracturing and gas drilling in the U.S., significant
public interest is expected from this study. Outcomes from this project will
inform policy decisions toward establishing the appropriate balance between
economically sustainable shale gas development and the development of adequate
safeguard environmental regulations.