* 1249249
* California LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate  (BD) Activity
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Howard Gillman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

The University of California (UC) Berkeley proposes to host Cohort VIII of the
California LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) that will fund 12 underrepresented
minority STEM PhD students. The BD will enhance the diversity of STEM graduate
education on the Berkeley campus by robustly recruiting, enrolling, training,
and graduating a cohort of 12 talented doctoral students. This activity will
support LSAMP students exclusively and offer an opportunity to enroll in
graduate education without the financial burden of loans, providing stipends for
the first two years and cost-of-education funds and support from the academic
departments and/or external fellowship funding for the duration of the doctoral
program. UC Berkeley has embarked on a multi-faceted technology-rich campaign to
recruit highly motivated LSAMP students through a variety of methods (national
e-mail listserve, electronic flyers, website development, QR code creation,
Facebook, UC Berkeley graduate school phone hotline and YouTube videos).
Berkeley will build on academic department and faculty relationships as well as
collaboration with the Graduate Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The proposed Bridge to the Doctorate activity will provide a rich set of
graduate student development opportunities, which in addition to rigorous
training in specific STEM disciplines will also include on-going faculty
mentoring, professional development, and activities that promote networking and
leadership in the scientific and engineering communities. The nurturing and
supportive environment will ensure successful completion of the Ph.D. and
transition to competitive careers in academia and industry regionally,
nationally, and globally. This proposal highlights creative diversity strategies
and incorporates best practices for recruitment and retention of graduate
student researchers and builds upon lessons learned from other LSAMP BD host
sites. Berkeley ranks as one of the world's leading intellectual centers,
renowned for the size and quality of its libraries and laboratories, the scope
of its research and publications, and the distinction of its faculty and
students. Not only does Berkeley award more doctoral degrees each year than any
other university in the country, over the past 10 years Berkeley has awarded the
highest number of Ph.D.s (in non-education fields) in the nation to students who
are historically underrepresented in graduate education. UC Berkeley's
commitment to diversity encompasses admitting and educating a diverse
undergraduate and graduate student body and creating a nurturing climate of
inclusion, colleagiality, and excellence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project seeks to strengthen the linkages between existing LSAMP
undergraduate programs and UC Berkeley's STEM graduate programs with the goal of
creating a permanent shift in the pipeline leading to graduate school at UC
Berkeley. The BD students will be engaged in mentoring STEM undergraduates and
pre-college students to bolster excitement for STEM majors and exert their
influence to encourage youth toward STEM majors. The BD cohort is anticipated to
affect not only the perceptions of the next generation of underrepresented
minority STEM students, for whom they will serve as role models, but also exceed
the expectations of STEM faculty at institutions in the state and across the
nation. The findings, lessons learned, and impact of the activities will be
disseminated through social networks, webinars, publications, presentations at
national meetings, and data sharing processes with NSF-affiliated initiatives
and diversity consortiums. BD students will be expected to connect with the Bay
Area's rich science and technology network. They are expected to have a vital
and transformative impact far beyond minority education, STEM disciplines, and
the host campus. In addition, the on-line community, Google's gchats, and
webinars will connect BD students from the proposed cohort to those across the
nation, engendering a wide net of connectivity that broadens career
opportunities.