* 1249821
* Collaborative Research:   RUI:   Probing Caldera-Forming Magmatism: Crystal Accumulation in Large, Upper Crustal Silicic Magma Chambers
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jennifer Wenner, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 108,976.00

The next volcanic super-eruption will have global consequences for humanity.
During one of these large eruptions, the explosive potential and the amount of
lava and ash erupted are largely controlled by what happens in shallow magma
reservoirs in Earth's crust. This project combines the study of frozen magma
reservoirs trapped below-ground - plutons - with their associated above-ground
volcanic rocks for two ancient super-volcanoes: the Lake City Caldera, Southern
Rocky Mountain Volcanic Field in Colorado and the Turkey Creek Caldera in
Arizona. The results of this study will provide unprecedented insight into
processes occurring within shallow magma reservoirs that lead to super-
eruptions, and ultimately will be applied to predict the behavior of potentially
extremely hazardous active volcanic regions such as the Taupo Volcanic Zone, the
Bay of Naples, and the Aegean Arc.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis being
tested is that the plutonic porphyries in both the Lake City Caldera and the
Turkey Creek Caldera are the quenched magma reservoirs remaining in the crust
following caldera collapse. If this hypothesis is confirmed, these porphyries
provide a unique snapshot of the evolution and post-eruptive conditions of the
mushy rootzone associated with a super-eruption. The methods that will be
applied to the volcanic and plutonic lithologies are: (1) detailed field mapping
of the plutonic porphyries and field sampling of the volcanic units, (2)
geochemical characterization of all units, (3) quantitative investigation of
primary and accessory crystals in all units using electron microprobe analysis
(EPMA), laser ablation inductively coupled mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), and
electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), and (4) high resolution U-Pb dating
and trace element analysis of zircons (CA-TIMS-TEA) in selected lithologies.
This multi-analytical approach to the sub-volcanic intrusions and overlying
silicic volcanic units is applied to establish the genetic relationship between
the large, zoned ignimbrites and their plutonic roots, and to unravel the
processes involved in chemical differentiation of large silicic magma chambers.