* 1249579
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Las Minas Archaeometallurgical Project
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

With NSF support, Mr. Colin Thomas will excavate the smelting site of Las Minas.
Las Minas is a terraced natural hill site located along the Za√±a river in the
Department of Lambayeque, Peru. The primary purpose of the site appears to have
been the extraction of metal from ore material, and surface survey indicates
that Las Minas was inhabited from the Early Horizon (800-200 B.C.) to the Chimu
period (A.D. 1000-1470). Las Minas has the potential of being the earliest
smelting site yet excavated on the Peruvian coast as well as one of very few
Chimu metallurgical sites known to date. Thomas' research will focus on the
physical and chemical analysis of recovered smelting byproducts and furnace
remains to determine the exact physical processes that were used at Las Minas
through time. This project will also involve the excavation of the residences of
the metalworkers and the analysis of resulting ceramic and subsistence remains
in order to determine the social standing and affiliation of the smelters at Las
Minas. The laboratory component of this project will require the use of optical
metallography as well as elemental analysis techniques, and Mr. Thomas will
oversee the creation of a new optical metallography laboratory at a local museum
in Lambayeque, Peru to facilitate this analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The Andean region,
and the North Coast of Peru in particular, was the site of large scale and long-
term metallurgical activity. However, nearly all available information about the
nature of Andean metallurgy currently comes from the study of finished
artifacts. This stands in contrast to the understanding of metallurgical
developments in other regions, such as Africa, Anatolia and Europe, where the
development of smelting has played a central role. In order to advance the
understanding of metallurgy in Peruvian prehistory it is necessary to combine
the analysis of finished artifacts with the full range of steps necessary to
create them, including the preceding steps necessary to acquire ore and smelt it
to metal.&lt;br/&gt;Acquiring this detailed information about the physical
processes used at Las Minas is a first step towards understanding the broader
social context of smelting in the Andes. It is known that Andean smiths were
concerned with the use of certain colors to indicate social status and ritual
information as well as other guiding ideological principles. It is very likely
that the smelting processes were directed by a similarly intricate web of non-
technical meaning. Understanding this web requires a detailed study of the
remnants of smelting, so that one can identify the traces of technological
choice encoded within the physical data. &lt;br/&gt;Excavations at Las Minas
will also result in the creation of a new optical metallography lab in
Lambayeque as well as the training of several Peruvian graduate students in both
field and laboratory techniques. The research will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed journals both in the United States and Peru, and the raw data will be
made available to the public online. Mr. Thomas will also present the findings
of his research at the SAA meetings as well as other archaeological conferences.