* 1249858
* CDS&E: Collaborative Research:  Least-Squares Finite Element Methods for Data Assimilation in Large-Scale Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Thomas Manteuffel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 262,933.00

Abstract

#1249858 / Manteuffel, Thomas #1249950 / Jeffrey Heys

The role of computer simulations in scientific discovery continues to grow in
many fields, including biology, finance, chemistry, and medicine. In many cases,
these computer simulations are based on the solution of partial differential
equations, which are mathematical equations that can only be approximately
solved on large computers. Scientific discovery is also continuing through the
use of more advanced experimental techniques that are enabling us to obtain more
data than ever before and obtain new data that was not available previously. A
critical need for scientists now is an approach for combining the computer
simulations with the abundant data that is now available. To help address this
need, we are proposing the development of advanced least-square finite element
methods, which have a number of advantages for solving this problem of combining
computer simulations with experimental data. First, the approach is flexible
enough that it can assimilate data from any location in the simulation. If you
are simulating blood flow through a vessel, the experimental data can be located
anywhere, including near the wall or near the center of the vessel. Second, the
approach can account for the accuracy of the experimental data. If the blood
flow data is more accurate near the center of the vessel than near the wall, the
simulation will more closely match the accurate data near the center, and it
will not match the data near the wall as closely because the data likely
contains significant error. A final advantage for the proposed approach is that
it is computationally efficient. It has been designed from the beginning to work
well with scalable, multilevel mathematical techniques and work well on modern,
multiprocessor computer architectures. This is not an approach that will be
overwhelmed by large, complex problems, but it will be efficient on today's
computers and tomorrow's computers.

If a mechanic wishes to assess the condition of a cars engine, they will open up
the hood and inspect the critical parts of the engine. The assessment of the
health of the heart is a much more challenging problem because we cannot easily
and safely open up the hood. An alternative approach is for a cardiologist to
inject FDA approved microbubbles, these are bubbles that are smaller than red
blood cells, into the blood, and then these microbubbles can be safely
visualized using an external ultrasound machine. The movement of these
microbubbles gives an indication of the blood flow in the heart, but more
information is needed to properly assess the health of the heart. Specifically,
cardiologists are interested in pressure changes in the heart and the overall
efficiency of the heart. To obtain this additional information, we can simulate
the flow of blood in the heart on a computer, and, ideally, combine the data
from the moving microbubbles with the computer simulation so that we can obtain
information specific to each individuals own heart. Problems that require us to
combine a computer simulation with experimental data are becoming increasing
common in fields from medicine to microbiology to meteorology. The work
described in this proposal will provide a powerful new tool for combining
experimental data with computer simulations. The approach will allow scientist
to account for the accuracy of the data so that the more accurate data will be
matched closely by the simulation and less accurate data will not match the
simulation as well. The approach will be efficient on the next generation of
computers because it supports advanced mathematic techniques. Overall, the
positive impact of this approach should extent to many different scientific
fields. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students at both
Montana State University and the University of Colorado-Boulder, and these
students will interact extensively between universities. The project will also
include the development of new engineering and mathematics course content and
support scientific conferences.