* 1249256
* RAPID:  Using open-source ecology to examine tree physiological response and mortality across species during the 2012 United States drought
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Christopher Field, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 99,998.00

This exploratory project examines how drought affects tree death across the
continental United States. Research on drought and tree mortality is typically
carried out at particular locations and on few species, in part because major
droughts at the regional scale are relatively rare, hard to anticipate and hard
to study. In contrast, this project uses a uniquely collaborative approach,
referred to as open-source ecology, in order to develop a broader perspective of
tree vulnerability to water stress based on the on-going major western regional
drought of 2012. The project will document the physiological status, growth and
annual mortality of trees across a number of different locations and species,
leveraging data from national monitoring programs, such as the Forest Inventory
and Analysis and NEON, and involving many institutions, investigators and
students, to demonstrate how a coordinated continental measurement program could
be fully implemented in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drought-induced tree
mortality is an important but poorly understood process that leads to major
uncertainties regarding the impacts of climate change on biodiversity,
ecological communities, and the terrestrial carbon cycle. For example, current
models of the carbon cycle either assume long-term background rates of
mortality, or that mortality can be modeled in response to disturbances like
fire, not in response to particular stressors that are well known to be
important. In fact, no predictive model of drought-driven tree death across
species or ecosystems currently exists. To carry out this pilot, more than 45
scientists have committed to work with many undergraduate and graduate students
on field and lab measurements. A kick-off meeting at the 2012 Ecological Society
of America Meeting will galvanize these commitments and enable recruitment of a
more diverse national student group through the ESA program, Strategies for
Ecology Education, Diversity and Sustainability. The project will also lay the
foundation for national and potentially international coordination across
disciplines beyond ecology, including atmospheric modeling, physiology,
hydrology, remote sensing, and biogeochemistry. Finally, broad support from
multiple communities assembled by the project creates a unique intellectual
forum for a shared, collaborative, and open approach to developing the
understanding and tools necessary to predict and manage drought impacts on
forest ecosystems.