* 1249491
* Collaborative Research: Conference of Undergraduate Women in Physics; January 18-20, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Linda Reichl, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 10/31/2013
* USD 11,890.00

This award provides funding for the 8th annual Conferences for Undergraduate
Women in Physics and for a formative assessment of the effectiveness of the
conferences in meeting their goals. The next conferences will take place on
January 18-20, 2013, simultaneously at Caltech, Colorado School of Mines,
Cornell University, the University of Central Florida, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conferences have two overarching goals: 1) To give undergraduate women the
resources, motivation, and confidence to apply to graduate school and to
successfully complete a Ph.D. in physics or a related discipline; and 2) To
increase awareness by undergraduate women in physics of the wide range of career
opportunities available to them. Regional conferences are held simultaneously to
maximize student attendance by minimizing travel, to increase the excitement of
the participants in a joint national venture, and to allow the interactive
simulcast of a keynote address. The conference goals are achieved by providing a
series of inspiring talks by female physicists, panel discussions on graduate
school and physics careers, student presentation sessions, and ample opportunity
for networking and informal mentoring. The success of these goals will be
measured by surveys given to students before and after the conferences, as well
as by longitudinal studies following the students' post-graduation paths and
comparing them with female student cohorts who did not attend the conferences.