* 1249548
* P-adic aspects of the Langlands program
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Matthew Emerton, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2014
* USD 109,605.00

The goal of the proposed project is to investigate some of the p-adic aspects of
the Langlands program. The Langlands program studies the interrelations between
several subjects, including the representation theory of reductive groups (both
over local fields and over the adeles of a global field), automorphic forms,
global Galois representations, and L-functions. Each of these subjects has a
p-adic aspect: one may consider p-adic or adelic groups acting on topological
p-adic vector spaces, p-adic automorphic forms (or their close cousins,
cohomology classes with p-adic coefficients on arithmetic quotients of symmetric
spaces), p-adic representations of Galois groups and their deformation theory,
and p-adic L-functions. The proposed investigation will encompass all these.
Some of the particular results expected to follow from this investigation are:
new results regarding the structure of p-adically completed cohomology on
arithmetic quotients of symmetric spaces, and new results relating special
values of L-functions attached to modular forms to the arithmetic properties of
the associated Galois representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Number theory is the
branch of mathematics that studies phenomena related to properties of whole
numbers. A typical number theoretic question is to determine the number of whole
number solutions of some equation of interest. The answers to such questions can
often be encoded in certain mathematical functions known as L-functions. The
mathematician Robert Langlands has developed a series of conjectures(or
mathematical predictions) regarding L-functions, which predict that any
L-function should arise from another kind of mathematical function called an
automorphic form. (Number theorists refer to Langlands conjectured relationship
between L-functions and automorphic forms as a "reciprocity law".) Langlands
developed an array of powerful representation theoretic methods to study his
conjectures. These are methods that exploit the many symmetries of automorphic
forms and L-functions to analyze their mathematical properties; these methods
have been incorporated into a body of mathematics known as "the Langlands
program". A more recent approach to the study of automorphic forms and
L-functions is the use of p-adic methods. These are methods that involve using
divisibility properties with respect to some fixed prime number p to study the
Taylor series coefficients of the automorphic forms and L-functions. Recently,
the representation theoretic methods and p-adic methods have begun to be unified
into a so-called "p-adic Langlands program". The proposer aims to develop new
results and methods in the p-adic Langlands program, and to use them to
establish new results about L-functions, and to develop tools for establishing
new reciprocity laws.