* 1249146
* EAGER: Linking Pattern and Process in Cultural Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Anne Kandler, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2015
* USD 52,801.00

This research seeks to contribute to understanding the origins of cultural
diversity within and between human social groups. The researchers will develop
an agent-based simulation model to capture demographic and cultural dynamics
that affect the process of cultural evolution. The model will be used to perform
an exploratory analysis of the varied and interacting effects of demographic and
cultural factors on cultural diversity. The focus of the analysis will be on
whether different pathways for the transmission of information between
individuals (such as from parents to children or from peer to peer) result in
different patterns of diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the analysis
is two-fold: first, to generate general theoretical insights about the roles of
the different pathways of cultural transmission in shaping cultural diversity;
second, to establish whether and under what conditions different pathways of
transmission between individuals can be distinguished on the basis of data on
the patterns of diversity across groups. The rationale is that if underlying
processes cannot be accurately inferred from simulated data generated
experimentally it is unlikely that they can be accurately inferred from
empirical data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from the project will contribute
to social science theory by addressing a fundamental theoretical question in the
study of cultural evolution: the degree to which population-level patterns of
cultural diversity can be reliably linked to individual-level processes of
cultural transmission.The award is an Early-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) because the scale of the proposed modeling and analytical
efforts are unprecedented in this area. One undergraduate student will assist
with the analytical effort, thereby receiving training in the application of
theoretical approaches to anthropological research.