* 1249627
* EAGER: Predicting Wind-Aided Spread of Large-Area Fire in Real Time:  Toward an Objective Aid for Decision-Making
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Francis Fendell, Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 59,869.00

#1249627&lt;br/&gt;Francis Fendell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indiscriminate fighting
of wildland fire can be costly, unsafe, ineffective, counterproductive (may
result in soil-destruction), and ecologically more harmful in its execution and
consequences than the fire itself. At a large-area wildland-fire incident, under
the Incident Command System, the highest-priority information sought by the key
decision-maker regarding response, the Incident Commander (IC), concerns
firespread. Given where the actively flaming firefront is currently located, and
given locally pertinent information on topography and vegetation and
meteorology, where will the firefront be located six-to-seven hours in the
future, both in the absence of intervention with firefighting countermeasures
and with such intervention? Better guidance is continually sought from the in-
place Wildland Fire Decision Support System, created under the lead of the
United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, with assistance from the
United States Department of Interior land-management agencies. Can more adequate
objective prognostic aids be generated for real-time support of decision-making
by responders to wildland fire? Here, a systematic approach with three fairly
autonomous components is outlined: (1) collection of data on topography,
vegetation, and meteorology, with emphasis on meteorology, typically the
crucial, short-time-scale variable; (2) systematic laboratory-scale testing
under well-characterized, well-controlled conditions in a novel facility
dedicated to measurement of the quasisteady rate of firespread as a function of
the just-discussed data; and (3) utilization of level-set methods to evolve, in
real time, the firefront evolution under the just-discussed semi-empirical rate
of firespread, so that an ensemble of realizations permits the uncertainty
(robustness) of the forecast to be assessed. A treatment with a one-way
interaction between the weather and the firefront, idealized as without
structure, adequately encompasses the preponderance of wildland fires
encountered by wildland-fire responders. The third component, utilizing limited
but already-in-hand spread rates, is to be undertaken first. The goal is to
generate and validate an openly accessible, fast-running, robust, readily
portable, well documented, easily modified, fire-growth-prediction computer
code, useful to both a novice and a specialist in wildland-fire
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing a computer code that applies well-
suited level-set methods to firefront evolution, many basic issues impeding a
practically important implementation of what remains a mathematical prescription
will be addressed. An accurate, efficient quantitative aid for wildland-fire
growth has multiple pre-incident applications (e.g., siting of roads,
reservoirs, and firebreaks), during-incident applications (e.g., comparison of
alternate firefighting strategies and justification of evacuation orders), and
post-incident applications (e.g., certification of personnel and assistance with
wildfire-related litigation). The project is transformational re: use of
laboratory testing in firespread research; adoption of the ?fire-use?
(restrained-response) option by decision-makers; and expediting operational
firespread forecasts.