* 1249070
* SBIR Phase I:A Miniature Active Q-Switched Laser based on a Fast Space-Charge- Controlled Electro-Optic (SCC-EO) Deflector with Ultra-low Driving Voltage
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Pengfei Wu, Crystal Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Program (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel miniature actively Q-switched laser that can be driven by a simple low-
voltage circuit. Portable actively Q-switched lasers with adjustable repetition
rates delivering high-power pulses in nanoseconds have broad and significant
applications in scientific research, biomedicines, sensing, and measurements.
Existing active Q-switching techniques have either slow switching speed or high
driving voltage and thus not ideal for portable Q-switch lasers of high
performance and efficiency. The key innovation of this project is to exploit a
unique space-charge-controlled electro-optic effect by a low driving voltage in
a compact solid-state laser cavity to implement active Q-switching with fast
transition time, high dynamic loss and low insertion loss. The proposed research
involves innovations of both device design and electro-optic material
fabrication for pulsed laser generation with significant improvement in laser
efficiency, compactness and cost. Phase I will design and fabricate the novel
electro-optic Q-switch to develop portable Q-switched laser. The performance of
the device will be optimized in Phase II to yield a functional and robust
prototype with improved performance and cost reduction to support commercial
potential applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
new class of portable actively Q-switched laser with improvement in speed,
control and efficiency to enhance laser-related technologies and commercial
applications. The proposed laser employs a fast Q-switching technique to
generate high-power laser pulses with low driving voltage, enabling a simple
driving electronics, compact size, light weight and low cost, while maintaining
all parameters of performance required by applications in clinical treatments,
remote sensing, and information technology. The Q-switched laser with short
pulse duration, small size, low-driving voltage and ease of operation, has been
recognized as the gold standard for effective aesthetic and skin treatments.
Compact, portable Q-switched lasers are also critical transmitters for field
sensing and measurements including surveillance ladar, laser rangefinders,
atmospheric detection, laser-induced breakdown spectroscope, and laser bio-
chemical agent detections. Besides high-power laser pulse generation, the novel
electro-optic deflector device that manipulates the light propagation direction
will have significant impacts on the means of light control, processing and
transformation, offering great commercial opportunities in optical
communications and technologies of printers, copiers and displays.