* 1249364
* EAGER: Optimal Power Allocation and Relay Selection with Spatial Diversity in Wireless Relay Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kazem Sohraby, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

In wireless networks it is critical that power consumption by the communication
system is minimized. This calls for new exploratory approaches which incorporate
coding, power minimization, and transmission techniques integrated in a system
design beyond the current methods. Wireless relay networks in the context of
cooperative communications provide favorable platform to address this challenge.
Cooperative communications is regarded as one of the few enabling physical layer
technologies for wireless networking. By employing relays for joint power and
location optimization in cooperative communications, the potential benefits are
substantially enhanced. The goal of this proposal is to investigate a mixed-
integer nonlinear program (MINLP) which is NP hard, in the formulation and
solution of the problem of joint power allocation, relay location, and extended
to coding. Lower energy consumption is achieved due to smaller distances between
relays and the terminals, spatial diversity, and efficient signal processing
schemes such as distributed beam-forming and distributed space time coding. The
near optimal solution is found using the combinatorial problem under several
relaying architectures. The following cases are investigated: 1) BS-only
architecture, 2) single relay per MS, 3) multiple relays per MS, 4) distributed
beam-forming, and 5) distributed space-time coding. This project also develops
interdisciplinary educational material and courses on wireless communications
with the goal of bridging the gap between networking and wireless communications
curricula via new interdisciplinary courses. Undergraduate and graduate students
will be involved with components of the project that are applicable to their
level of interest and ability.