* 1249678
* Collaborative Research: Eager: An Application Delivery Platform for Mobile Apps on Global Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Arjan Durresi, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 59,998.00

In recent years, there has been an explosive growth in mobile applications, most
of which need to serve global audiences. Cloud computing provides unique
opportunities for the application service providers to manage and optimize
application delivery over geographically distributed computing resources. The
PIs of this project are developing an open application delivery network platform
which will allow Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to offer load balancing,
fault tolerance, and numerous other application delivery services to the
application service providers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs also plan to
augment the flow abstraction layer of Software Defined Networks to add adequate
support for application-level flows using several other recent innovations such
as cross-layer communication, ID/Locator split, MPLS-like label switching. The
claims will be validated through a proof-of-concept implementation of a use-case
scenario designed over a prototype switch implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of the proposed design is to be evolutionary in the
sense that it can coexist and is backward compatible with the current Internet
and can be deployed incrementally now with a small number of new devices. The
in-going research is designed to transform application delivery over the
Internet. It would make significant contributions towards developing a set of
generic architectural primitives that may be used for developing application
specific networks on shared network infrastructure.