* 1249348
* Workshop on Nano/Micro Manufacturing: Translational Research, Applications, and Industry Needs, at Ford Motor Conference Center in Dearborn, Michigan. (Date to be determined).
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Anastasios John Hart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2014
* USD 48,000.00

Yogesh Gianchandani, University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;Workshop on Nano/Micro
Manufacturing: Translational Research, Applications, and Industry
Needs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This workshop is intended as a first step toward developing a roadmap for
practical innovations in nano/micro-manufacturing. The workshop, to be held at
the Ford Motor Conference Center in Dearborn, Michigan, is aimed at having 150
attendees and will be a 2-day meeting with keynote talks, plenary sessions with
talks by distinguished academic and industry speakers, panel discussions,
breakout group discussions/reports, and debate. An important and distinguishing
feature of the workshop will be the emphasis on applications and the needs of
customers. The program and audience will represent the application domains of
biomedical technologies, communications and information technology, (non-
electronic) consumer products, defense and homeland security, electronics,
energy and environmental technologies, transportation, and infrastructure
development and monitoring. A technical report for the workshop will include
abstracts or slides of the presentations as well as the discussion summaries
generated by the breakout sessions. This workshop will also provide an
industrial outreach opportunity to academic researchers who are otherwise more
focused on fundamental science challenges in nano/micro-manufacturing. The
researchers will engage with practitioners in multiple industrial sectors, and
critically assesses the technical readiness necessary for applications in each
sector. Manufacturers and researchers will have the opportunity to discuss with
the system OEMs how they can better utilize their individual skills to identify
pathways that produce rapid commercialization of new technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A significant impact of this workshop
will be to unite the voices of stakeholders in nano- and micro-scale
manufacturing technologies-potential end-users, customers of original equipment
manufacturers (OEMs), device/material manufacturers, and researchers- in
defining a path forward for application-driven research and commercialization of
relevant manufacturing technologies. The participants will discuss the future
applications that the customers forecast, what research and development
priorities will be required to meet the customers' needs, and what technological
innovation will lead to rapid and effective translation of laboratory research
into commercial products. The intent is to identify the opportunities,
challenges, and pathways of meeting practical industrial needs by leveraging
fundamental findings that have resulted from the past decade of investment in
nano- and micro-scale research. As such, the workshop will serve to educate
students, professors, and industrial manufacturers and end-users of nano- and
micro-scale manufacturing technologies.