* 1249267
* I-Corps:  An Advanced Methodology for Evaluating Fire Suppression System Performance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Andre Marshall, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Cutting edge spray characterization research conducted at the University of
Maryland has deepened the current state of understanding of fire sprinkler spray
generation. This research and insight has been extended to the fire sprinkler
system design process resulting in a potentially disruptive design tool. The
design tool is based on advanced measurements of sprinkler sprays developed over
the past ten years of research in this area. This fire sprinkler spray research
has demonstrated that laser based Shadowgraphy/PTV measurement techniques paired
with a basis function data compression approach effectively characterizes the
complex stochastic behavior of sprinkler sprays. This efficient approach
provides a compact, computationally-inexpensive, physics-based representation of
the sprinkler spray not before possible. This high-fidelity sprinkler spray
description is well suited for use in the proposed computer based simulation. A
device database for commercially available fire sprinklers will be created using
this methodology and included into the software package allowing the user to
conveniently assess various types of sprinklers for the modern fire suppression
system design challenge of interest without needing to know the details of the
complex spray physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fire sprinkler industry
represents over a $40B market in the United States alone. These fire sprinkler
systems are ubiquitous and effective. The absence of analytical tools for
evaluating sprinkler system performance can result in unnecessary construction
expenses, excessive losses due to water damage, or even worse, needless loss of
life and property due to failed fire protection. The current prescriptive design
approach utilizes the NFPA fire code for the sprinkler system design. Although
straightforward, this pre-computer approach is resource intensive and offers
little opportunity to meet the design challenges of modern infrastructure. The
proposed approach combines innovative laser-based diagnostics; analytical
methods; modern software tools; and novel engineering practices all bundled into
a cutting-edge engineering design product. This fire sprinkler performance based
design tool offers an innovative computational approach, which addresses the
shortcomings of the prescriptive design method. The proposed design tool
provides a powerful and convenient design loop facilitating unprecedented system
optimization. The visual representation of the sprinkler wetting performance
allows users to evaluate the performance of sprinkler systems in protecting
standard and unconventional spaces, within the context of NFPA code compliance.
This software has the potential to be marketed to a wide range of engineers in
the consulting and insurance fields.