* 1249294
* Planning Workshops for the Development and Implementation of the University of California Natural Reserve System Strategic Plan
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Frank Davis, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2014
* USD 24,999.00

The University of California at Oakland is awarded a grant for planning
workshops develop and implement the University of California Natural Reserve
System (UC NRS) Strategic Plan that will build capacity in the UC NRS to improve
science by developing shared vision and expertise across the Reserve System.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1965 the UC NRS has offered unique opportunities to
study California's world-renowned, diverse ecosystems through a system of 38
natural reserves, research centers and gateway reserves dedicated to teaching,
research, and public service and spans more than 750,000 acres with access to
millions of additional acres of federal lands. The UC NRS provides strong
legacies of data, land, specimens, and accumulated knowledge, and promotes
convergence of disciplines and cross-fertilization typical of 21st-century
science. Such legacies represent an essential framework for documenting and
understanding the nature and pace of ecosystem, regional, and global changes in
environmental conditions, ecological processes, and biodiversity. As
California's population growth continues to be the highest in the country the UC
NRS is critical to understanding natural phenomena at multiple spatial scales
and informing stewardship of the state's resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
of today's most pressing scientific questions, including how climate change and
population growth will affect California's plant and animal species and
ecosystem functions providing essential ecosystem services. Planning for a fully
integrated informatics and collaboration infrastructure to catalyze more
effective long-term, cross-site integrative research motivated by comprehensive
scientific studies will capitalize on the diversity of data and intellectual
resources encompassed by the UC NRS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UC Natural
Reserves are well utilized by individuals and institutions at every educational
level within California, from K-12 up through all units of the state higher
education system. The reserves serve as important training centers for students
and teachers and as research platforms for a variety of individuals and
organizations concerned with advancing understanding and appreciation of the
natural environment. Research and education within the UC NRS are widely
publicized in scholarly journals and books, technical reports, conference
proceedings and presentations, and in media ranging from the web to radio,
television, documentaries, newspapers, and other forms of dissemination.
Strategic planning will help ensure that research and teaching conducted at the
UC NRS reserves uses collaborative technologies that enable integrative
ecological science research as well as informed resource
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more information on the University of
California Natural Reserve System please visit: http://nrs.ucop.edu/