* 1249225
* I-Corps:  Bioresorbable Conduits for Nerve Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Kacey Marra, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

There is a need for an ?off-the-shelf? nerve guide that can support the
regeneration of peripheral nerves over large gaps. While there are several nerve
guides on the market, none are approved for nerve gaps &gt; 3 cm in humans. The
innovation effort proposed will enhance efforts to commercialize a biodegradable
nerve guide for long gap peripheral nerve repair. The intellectual merit of this
proposal involves the development of a novel conduit that controllably delivers
of neurotrophic factors for ~ 60 days. The nerve guide being developed in this
project has the requisite components to promote both motor and sensory nerve
repair over long gaps. The PI and her team have been developing such a guide for
over a decade, and this project not only addresses a clinical need, but has
supported several students (from the high school level through the graduate
student level), resulting in an increased understanding of drug delivery
kinetics and the role of porosity on nerve regeneration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are, in addition to the clinical
significance, to enhance and stimulate scientific literacy in biomedical
engineering at both the undergraduate and graduate levels by involvement of
students in ongoing research and outreach activities, Through the I-Corps
program, the team seeks to enhance their network of commercial partners and
enhance their knowledge of commercialization concepts. Scientifically, the team
plans to deliver a therapeutic strategy which results in increased functional
recovery for large gap peripheral nerve injuries. If successfully deployed, this
technology could address a serious unmet need for clinical care of diseased and
damaged nerve tissue.