* 1249656
* International Workshop on Thermo-active Geotechnical Systems for Near-Surface Geothermal Energy : From Research To Practice January 10-12, 2013, Lausanne, Switzerland
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Guney Olgun, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,995.00

This award supports a 2.5 day international workshop in Lausanne, Switzerland,
January 10-12, 2013 for the purpose of exploring and advancing the use of
Thermo-active Geotechnical Systems for Near-surface Geothermal Energy as a
sustainable geotechnical engineering practice. Thermo-active geotechnical
systems are a novel approach to exploit the heat storage capacity of the ground
for efficient heating and cooling of structures. The venue of the workshop is
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in Switzerland. The workshop will be
held in a discussion forum format rather than in a conference style setting
dominated by presentations. About one-fifth of the event will consist of
overview presentations and rest of the time will be devoted to breakout sessions
and discussions on resolving contentious issues and exploring future
applications of this technology. The main motivation for this international
workshop is to discuss and identify the technical and non-technical barriers
involved in the implementation of thermo-active geotechnical systems. This
workshop will serve as a synergistic discussion platform to bring together
researchers from the academia, practitioners, and industry and public agencies
representatives, to identify and address the pressing issues. Participants will
come from the US, EU, Switzerland and Japan. The diverse mix of attendees from
different backgrounds will ensure that communication will be cross-disciplinary
and multi-dimensional, while the attendees from different parts of the world
will help in transferring practical experience from other countries which have
successfully implemented this technology. The technical issues to be addressed
in the workshop will include 1) Soil-structure interaction issues related to the
design of thermo-active foundation systems, 2) Testing, evaluation and non-
destructive verification of these systems, 3) Use of near-surface geothermal
energy in dense urban environments with congested and closely spaced
foundations, and 4) Future applications of thermo-active foundations; bridge-
deck deicing, thermal treatment etc. The non-technical issues that are critical
for the wider implementations of these systems are 1) Building code and green-
certification issues 2) Environmental impact calculations, 3) Cost-benefit
analysis, life-cycle cost analysis, long-term savings. Collectively, these
discussion themes will help develop a synergistic dialogue between the workshop
participants and create a platform for the discussion and synthesis of ideas for
the future direction of research in this field. The main outcome of this
workshop will be a series of technical papers along with a synthesis document
summarizing the results of the discussion sessions, and a workshop website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop focuses on this renewable energy technology.
This has far reaching impacts than geotechnical engineering through reductions
in energy use with wider implementation of this innovative technology. Utilizing
energy foundations can ultimately provide a more secure and stable energy source
than conventional energy sources, higher energy security for the electric power
system, and reduce harmful CO2 emissions. The results of this workshop will have
broad impact on the geotechnical engineering profession related to the use of
foundation systems for heating and cooling of structures. The workshop has the
potential to result in increased use of energy foundations on a broad scale in
the United States and globally.