* 1249143
* University of Arizona LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Maria Teresa Velez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 987,000.00

The LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) at The University of Arizona (UA)
proposes to recruit a cohort of 12 Underrepresented Minority Students (URMs) in
STEM to enter Master's programs in engineering, optical sciences, and the
physical sciences and prepare them to enter doctoral programs. BD students will
be recruited from the UA and other LSAMP Alliance institutions and will receive
funding, discipline-specific faculty mentoring, academic and career development
support to prepare and motivate them to pursue doctoral degrees in STEM. UA has
been very effective in increasing the number of underrepresented minorities in
graduate school and is ranked at the top of all other Research I, American
Association of Universities (AAU) members in the US in the percentage of
graduate students who are URM. The proposed BD program will address the physical
sciences and engineering where there continues to be an underrepresentation of
URMs, especially at the doctoral level. Faculty who volunteer to mentor BD
students are accomplished Hispanic or Native American tenured or tenure-eligible
professors in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
This project builds on the prior success of the UA's Graduate College, which
over the past 15 years has conducted an aggressive program of recruitment,
including visits to campuses of high minority enrollment; summer and year-round
undergraduate research training for approximately 120 upper-division URM and
first-generation/low-income students, and specific workshops on how to apply to
graduate school, including a GRE Prep workshop. Once the BD students begin Ph.D.
studies, it will be feasible to fund them by helping them become very
competitive for national fellowships such as NSF GRFs, DOD, NASA, Ford, as well
as and others provided by Arizona such as Science Arizona Fellowships, Graduate
Access Fellowships and Arizona Scholars grants. Doctoral students will also be
funded by existing grants (e.g., GAAN, VIGRE, PIRE), the Superfund Training
Core, several Science and Technology Centers and Centers of Excellence at UA;
and other grants awarded to participating faculty. The BD program will provide
special mentoring, a weekly seminar to develop specific skills required for
entrance to Ph.D. programs, assistance in crafting outstanding applications,
travel to conferences to present research and network with peers and other
faculty, tutoring in academic and science writing, and participation in a
community of scholars who possess a self-identity as Ph.D.-level scientists and
who understand the importance and career benefits of obtaining PhDs in STEM
disciplines and pursue careers in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Evidence of the UA's success in retaining URMs is
demonstrated by the fact that it ranks 1st in the number of Native American and
8th in the number of Hispanic Ph.D. recipients in the country (Survey of Earned
Doctorates, 2010). The extensive science and technology infrastructure available
at UA through numerous research centers will contribute to the discipline-
specific and interdisciplinary training for LSAMP-BD students, preparing them to
enter and succeed in doctoral programs.