* 1249259
* EAGER: Flame Synthesis of Graphene Films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Bernard Kear, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Carbon-based nanostructures and films define a new class of engineered materials
that display remarkable photonic, electrical, and mechanical properties.
Graphene is a monolayer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms in a two-dimensional (2-D)
structure. This layer of atoms can be wrapped into 0-D fullerenes, rolled into
1-D nanotubes, or stacked as in 3-D graphite. A novel technique to grow graphene
films in open environments on substrates has been developed using multiple
inverse-diffusion flames with methane as fuel. The post-flame hydrocarbon
species (rich in CHm and Cn), which serve as reagents for carbon-based growth,
are generated in quantities much greater than that achievable in stable, self-
sustained premixed flames. Moreover, the inverse diffusion flame geometry
ensures that oxygen is completely consumed at the flame front, permitting the
production of high-quality films. This flame synthesis configuration is
potentially transformative and breaks away from the conventional need for
confined synthesis (as in standard chambered Chemical Vapor Deposition), and is
capable of nanomaterials synthesis in open-atmosphere environments, affording
not only scalable large volume production, but also large-area growth over
different contoured surfaces (e.g. by rasterizing burner or translating
substrate) at high rates. This exploratory program is aimed at increasing
fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of graphene growth in flames, and
utilization of that understanding to define process conditions that enable high-
rate and high-quality synthesis of graphene films. Specifically, experiments
will be conducted to characterize the effects of fuel composition, flame
temperature, inert addition, hydrogen addition, oxygen concentration, pressure,
substrate material, substrate temperature, burner-substrate distance, and other
controllable process parameters on graphene growth and properties. In-situ
laser-based diagnostics, including spontaneous Raman spectroscopy, laser-induced
fluorescence, and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, will be used to
determine the local growth conditions, such key gas-phase chemical species
concentrations and temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isolating monolayer
graphene by microcleaving and discovering its amazing properties has generated
intense experimental research on its fabrication. However, widespread use of
graphene will require large-scale synthesis methods. Production methods that
currently exist are typically expensive, require long processing times, and are
limited to confined synthesis. The growth of these nanostructures and films over
large areas remains especially challenging. Accordingly, it is evident that
there is a strong need for better methods of synthesizing nanostructures,
particularly carbon-based nanostructures. Flame synthesis has demonstrated a
history of scalability and offers the potential for high-volume continuous
production at reduced costs. In utilizing combustion, a portion of the
hydrocarbon gas provides the elevated temperatures required, with the remaining
fuel serving as the hydrocarbon reagent, thereby constituting an efficient
source of both energy and hydrocarbon reactant. These aspects can be especially
important as the operating costs for producing advanced materials, especially in
the semiconductor industry, far exceed the equipment costs. In addition, the
research affords the possibility of coating large existing structures with
graphene in open environments, which is currently not possible.