* 1249669
* NSF EAGER: Pilot Study: Deep Electrical Structure of the Rio Grande Rift to Constrain Extent and Mechanisms of Rifting
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Anne Sheehan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 82,893.00

A wideband and long period magnetotelluric pilot experiment will be conducted
across the Rio Grande Rift in Colorado and New Mexico in order to provide
constraints on the thermal and rheological state of the lithosphere beneath this
region of intra-continental extension. Important questions about continental
rifting remain unresolved, including the role of magmatism, volatiles, and
inherited lithospheric structure in the initiation and development of rifting.
Recent seismic imaging studies show thinned crust and low seismic wavespeeds in
the upper mantle beneath the Rio Grande Rift. New geodetic work confirms the low
strain-rate environment of the region, and shows surprisingly broad and uniform
deformation over an area far wider than the rift?s physiographic expression.
Electrical conductivity models from the pilot magnetotelluric experiment will
provide information complementary to seismic studies, and will be combined with
seismic models can be used to assess the relative contribution of thermal and
compositional heterogeneity to the rifting process. A comparison of results from
northern and central rift segments will be used to assess extent and
hypothesized northward propagation of the rift. The magnetotellurics pilot
experiment will include two rift transects, and the results will be evaluated to
assess the need for an experiment with expanded or modified array design. In
addition to the societal importance of better understanding low strain-rate
environments, this project will support a PhD student and will involve
undergraduate researchers.