* 1249262
* Bridge to the Doctorate at UMCP, 2012-2014
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Rosemary Parker, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* tasha inniss
* 09/30/2015
* USD 987,000.00

The University System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program (cohort 7) is a
collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation and the USM
institutions to increase the quality and quantity of underrepresented minorities
matriculating and completing doctoral degrees in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Since the first BD cohort
matriculated at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) in 2005, 74
BD Fellows have enrolled in STEM graduate programs at UMBC and the University of
Maryland, College Park (UMCP). Since 2005, USM BD Fellows have earned 7 Ph.D.
and 27 M.S. degrees; 50 fellows are persisting in M.S. or Ph.D. programs, 8
students in masters programs and 42 students in doctoral
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the inception of the USM LSAMP in 1995, the
USM has remained a driving force in increasing the number of underrepresented
minority (URM) baccalaureate degree recipients in STEM disciplines, and 8,480
STEM bachelor degrees have been awarded to underrepresented students. As a
Senior-level Alliance, the USM LSAMP continues to work to increase the number of
STEM bachelor's degrees awarded to URM students and the number of undergraduate
URM students conducting scientific research and going on to pursue STEM
doctorates. The BD program provides a cohort of 12 students who have
participated in LSAMP Programs as undergraduates the opportunity to receive
substantial funding and other critical support to successfully pursue graduate
degrees in diverse STEM fields at the University of Maryland, College Park. The
participants also have the opportunity, early in their academic careers, to
conduct cutting-edge research with top research scientists on the UMCP campus
and at national laboratories located in close proximity to the campus. BD
Fellows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Participate in community meetings and individual
advising meetings;&lt;br/&gt;-Serve as role models to current undergraduate
LSAMP students in the process of applying for graduate
school;&lt;br/&gt;-Present research at national and local
conferences;&lt;br/&gt;-Present research and serve as mentors at the joint
LSAMP/LSAMP-BD Research Symposium;&lt;br/&gt;-Participate in various seminars on
campus in order to promote professional development and growth;
and&lt;br/&gt;-Participate in joint USM BD cohort events such as the Summer
Success Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many LSAMP students are members of
groups that traditionally have been underrepresented in STEM fields. The BD
Program increases the number of such students in the pipeline to earn doctoral
degrees in these fields. In addition, activities are planned that will provide
the participants with information about a variety of STEM career options, and
help to motivate some of them to prepare for careers in the professoriate.