* 1249918
* EAR-PF: Accounting for turbulent effects to improve prediction of sand and dust transport by wind
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Raleigh Martin, Martin                  Raleigh        L
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Raleigh Martin has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
California, Los Angeles. He will investigate the process of sand transport in
response to turbulent winds in natural desert and beach environments. This sand
transport forms sand dunes, and the bombardment of desert soils by bouncing sand
produces dust storms. It is therefore important to be able to predict how the
rate of sand transport is related to the speed of blowing wind. Existing theory
provides reasonable predictions for sand transport under constant winds, but
these predictions break down under the turbulent, rapidly-fluctuating wind
conditions characteristic of natural environments. Changes in the rate of sand
transport both lag and feed back onto changes in wind speed near the ground
surface. Through theoretical reasoning supported by field observations, this
project will quantify these complex interactions between fluctuating sand
transport and turbulent winds, with the ultimate goal of improving predictions
of sand transport in natural environments. The project will proceed from the
bottom up, beginning with a detailed analysis of wind-sand interactions, leading
into development of a new model for wind-blown sand, and culminating in a
linkage of this model to descriptions of turbulent winds in natural
environments. Development and validation of the wind-blown sand model will be
based on coupled high-resolution measurements of wind speed and sand transport
in natural environments. In addition to advancing our understanding of a basic
process that shapes deserts and coastal environments, this work will provide the
basis for addressing such issues as dust pollution, coastal protection, and
agricultural soil erosion. Research efforts will be coupled to initiatives to
improve the public availability and accessibility of research data. Furthermore,
educational outreach will be fostered through development of hands-on earth
science projects for fifth-grade students at a local elementary school.