* 1249488
* EAGER: Therabot - A Robotic Therapy Support System
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Cindy Bethel, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 234,681.00

An issue of growing concern in the United States is the prevalence of sexual
violence for women on college campuses, where up to one in four women report
experiencing an attempted or completed rape while a student. It is important for
these women to obtain therapeutic counseling to help them cope with the
aftermath of these traumatic events. Research indicates that traditional therapy
is beneficial in some instances, and additional benefits have been discovered
with the use of animal-assisted therapy (AAT); however, there are limitations to
AAT (e.g., training costs, availability, phobias, and allergies).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will explore an alternative called
the Therabot, a lightweight socially assistive robotic support system. The goal
is to design, implement and evaluate the efficacy of a prototype, which will
improve upon the benefits discovered with AAT. To this end, the Therabot will
have the appearance of a stuffed animal/toy and will exhibit affective behaviors
(including head and arm movements, and animal-like or rhythmic sounds), to
provide comfort and support during therapeutic interventions for the trauma
associated with sexual violence. It will be convenient and easy for patients to
use, not only in the clinic or lab but also in the home to provide support and
encourage home therapy practices, something which is not offered by current
forms of supplemental therapy support such as therapy
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This preliminary research will have three phases:
design and construction of the Therabot system; validation that the system works
as intended with human participants; and field testing with patients at the
Department of Outreach and Sexual Assault Services at the PI's institution.
Three hypotheses will be evaluated as part of this exploratory research: that
patients who use the Therabot in counseling will be more likely to communicate
with the therapist, and will feel more supported and comfortable during
counseling, compared to patients who do not use the Therabot or who use an
identical-looking but non-robotic Therabot in counseling; that patients will be
more likely to perform home therapy practice using the Therabot than patients
who do not use the Therabot or who use an identical non-robotic Therabot in home
therapy practice; and that patients using the Therabot will experience improved
therapeutic outcomes compared to those who are not using the Therabot or who use
an identical non-robotic Therabot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If the
PI's hypotheses are supported, this research will not only impact survivors of
sexual violence but will also be applicable to other therapeutic situations such
as soldiers returning from the battlefield with PTSD and survivors of natural
and man-made disasters. The PI expects that a lightweight socially assistive
technology system like the Therabot will provide beneficial support and
companionship to patients in hospitals, hospice facilities, and long-term care
environments. It will be easy to incorporate the Therabot into the curricula of
both undergraduate and graduate computer science, mechanical engineering, and
clinical psychology courses, and also to use it for class projects. The many
expected practical applications and potential societal impacts of the Therabot
will make it a tremendous resource for K-12 outreach activities whose goal is to
encourage interest in science and technology careers.