* 1249461
* Workshop: The Doctoral Colloquium at UbiComp 2012
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Anind Dey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 12,500.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 10 promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad
(up to 2 international students), along with 5 high profile faculty and
industrial researchers. The event will take place in conjunction with and
immediately following the 14th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing (UbiComp 2012), to be held September 5-8, in Pittsburgh, and which is
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery. The annual UbiComp
conference is the premier international forum for the presentation and
discussion of cutting edge research relating to both the technical and applied
aspects of ubiquitous computing technologies, systems and applications. This is
an interdisciplinary field of research and development that utilizes and
integrates pervasive, wireless, embedded, wearable and/or mobile technologies to
bridge the gaps between the digital and physical worlds. Thus, the conference
brings together researchers and practitioners from diverse areas that include
human-computer interaction, pervasive computing, distributed and mobile
computing, real world modeling, sensors and devices, middleware and systems,
programming models and tools, and human-centric validation and experience
characterization. More information about the conference may be found at
http://www.ubicomp.org/ubicomp2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three goals of the
full-day doctoral consortium are to increase the exposure and visibility of the
participants' work within the community, to help establish a sense of community
among this next generation of researchers, and to help foster their research
efforts by providing highly constructive feedback and guidance from senior
researchers in a supportive and interactive environment. To these ends, student
participants will each make a formal presentation of their work to the group,
with ample time allotted for questions and feedback from the faculty panel as
well as from the other student participants. The feedback is geared to helping
students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to
other research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Additional opportunities
for more informal discussion and networking will be during the doctoral
consortium's lunch and dinner events. Extended abstracts of the students' work
(up to 4 pages in length) will be included in the supplemental proceedings which
are distributed to all conference attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The doctoral colloquium will help expand the participation of young
researchers pursuing graduate studies in the various fields associated with
ubiquitous computing, by affording them an opportunity to gain wider exposure in
the community for their innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance from
senior members of the research community. It will further help foster a sense of
community among these young researchers, by allowing them to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. Several participants in past UbiComp doctoral
consortia have since gone on to high profile research careers. The event
organizers have committed to accept no more than one student from any given
institution, and they will make a special effort to attract students who are
diverse across a number of dimensions (e.g., research interests, gender and
ethnicity), so that the participants' horizons are broadened to the future
benefit of the field.