* 1249722
* EAGER: Scaling the Preprocessor and Making it More Intelligent in Deterministic Database Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Daniel Abadi, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This research aims to bridge the gap between the current reality and the
potential for database system deployments on large clusters of servers in a data
center or large numbers of virtual machines in the cloud. There does not exist a
scalable, elastic, ACID-compliant database system implementation today. In
general, applications that require elastic scalability are forced to program
around the lack of ACID guarantees of the database system, and many applications
are too complicated to be rewritten to work around these issues. The goal of
this project is to overcome these issues using the following approaches: (1)
Implementing a database system using an innovative deterministic architecture
that guarantees that nondeterministic processing events will not affect database
state, (2) Leveraging this new architecture to avoid "commit protocols" for
distributed transactions in a cluster, (3) Designing a scalable preprocessor for
the deterministic database that collects, analyzes, and dispatches transactions
to the database cluster in order to further improve scalability, and (4)
Developing a new lazy transaction evaluation approach in order to spread out
load and avoid damaging effects of database load spikes. Overall, this research
enables thousands of applications written for many different use-cases (such as
e-commerce, telecommunications, and online auctions) to achieve scalability "for
free" without having to rewrite the application code. This research involves
both Ph.D. students and undergraduates, with significant outreach efforts to
encourage undergraduates to get involved in research. Open source code,
publications, and technical reports from this research will be disseminated via
the project web site http://db.cs.yale.edu/determinism/.