* 1249199
* EAGER Proposal: Crowding-assisted biomolecular sensing with natural nanopores
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* V. Adrian Parsegian, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 209,522.00

Parsegian 1249199

Concerns over health and safety motivate the development of detectors to sense
and to identify toxic substances at concentrations of one part in a billion. For
reasons of robustness, reliable construction, abundance, accessibility, and
atomic characterization, natural membrane channels will be used for the sensor
of the intended detector. Already designed by evolution to withstand the strong
electric fields that drive materials through pores, natural channels offer a
practical alternative to artificial pores that can wear down under the stress of
electric fields applied to them.

Intellectual Merit: Using simple polymers and salts as "molecular crowding"
agents to drive suspect solutes into detector channels, the objective is to
identify these substances by the changes they make in electrical current so as
to create sensitive single-molecule-based detectors and to develop a strategy
for detecting and characterizing biologically relevant water-soluble molecules:
sugars, peptides, proteins, and other low-molecular and polymeric materials at
sub-nanomolar concentrations. Early results reveal a striking and unexpected
increase in rates of interaction between membrane-reconstituted ion channels and
various types of biologically relevant proteins and synthetic polymers as
various solution ?crowders,? including simple salts, are added. By monitoring
the small-ion current passing through these pores, it will be possible to detect
these interactions as individual, reproducible events of current interruption,
with characteristic times specific for each kind of material. The proposed
crowding method enhances the sensitivity of detection enough to allow
identification of species at sub-nanomolar concentrations. Such ?crowding-
driven? nanopore detection is expected to lead to construction of practical
versatile devices to identify minute amounts of water-soluble agents, including
harmful molecules, pathological agents, immune markers etc., in mixed samples
that reflect real situations.

Broader Impact: This project will explore how different classes of biologically
relevant materials, from simple polymers to complex protein assemblies, interact
with protein-based nanopores reconstituted into membranes to realize two large
goals: (i) Creation of a new class of single-molecule detectors by using
solution conditions to control sensitivity. These nanodevices will be applicable
to a broad range of bio- and nano-particle sensing and are expected to allow
exploration of mixed systems of polymers and salts or of polymers of different
types and sizes. (ii) Transport of large solutes driven from concentrated
solutions reveals unexpected properties of polymer and molecular packing in the
confined volumes typical of biological cells. In particular, it will become
possible to discriminate among mixtures of compounds under crowded conditions so
as to guide design for molecular separation and reaction at sub-nanomolar
concentrations.