* 1249999
* Constraining Tephra Aggregation Efficiency with Laboratory Experiments and Numerical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Leah Courtland, Courtland               Leah           M
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Leah Courtland has been awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a research and education plan at Georgia Institute of Technology.
This study will use a combination of laboratory experiments and numerical
modeling to better constrain the rate of tephra (volcanic ash) aggregation in
the uppermost regions of volcanic plumes. Laboratory experiments will utilize an
ice nucleation chamber to parameterize the rate of tephra aggregation under a
variety of relative humidities and applied electric field strengths. The main
goal is to improve our understanding of the response of tephra in the atmosphere
to the relative humidity conditions prevalent in volcanic plumes and the
presence of an electric field within these plumes. The result of experiments
will be a parameterization of the expected change in particle size distribution
for varying plume conditions (humidity, temperature, electrical field). If
successful, this will allow tephra dispersion models to use near-real- time
meteorological data to better forecast particle residence time in the
atmosphere. Research results will help to constrain tephra hazard models used in
crisis response scenarios. Improvement in these models should ultimately lead to
increased aviation safety and more effective hazard mitigation strategies for
far-field tephra impacts on the ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tephra fallout is
the most far reaching hazard of volcanic eruptions, capable of causing roof
collapse, polluting water supplies, damaging critical facilities, and
threatening the health of people and livestock. The 2010 eruption of
Eyjafjallaj√∂kull in Iceland spewed ash into the atmosphere for days, effectively
shutting down most of European air space, affecting hundreds of thousands of
travelers, and costing the aviation industry billions of dollars. The global
nature and high economic consequence of this event expose an urgent need for
accurate forecasts of the distribution of tephra in the atmosphere and on the
ground. While the study of the transport and sedimentation of volcanic ash over
the last forty years has greatly increased our understanding of these processes
and enabled the development of numerical models to simulate tephra dispersion,
the injection of large volumes of fine (&lt;63 um) ash into the atmosphere is
not yet captured in a meaningful way by the current generation of tephra models.
The discrepancy between model calculations and the true distribution of tephra
reflects the failure of the majority of models to account for natural processes
that rapidly remove the fine ash fraction of volcanic ejecta from the atmosphere
as constituent pieces of larger aggregates. To facilitate understanding of ash
aggregation while fostering model literacy and quantitative skills building
among university students, a series of educational modules will be designed and
implemented via the Vhub.org web platform. VHub.org is an online resource for
volcano modeling and education. The numerical parameterization of ash
aggregation to result from this work will ultimately be installed on Vhub.org as
well, in order facilitate use of the model by the larger scientific community.