* 1249025
* SBIR Phase I:  An Optically-Efficient Miniaturized Raman Optical System for Trending Glucose Levels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Raj Gupta, eLutions Integrated Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase I project proposes to
develop a handheld Raman optical system for monitoring blood glucose levels
noninvasively, continuously, and in real-time. Raman spectroscopy uses laser
light scattered by chemical species to distinguish, identify, and quantify them
based on the shifted spectrum found in their optical fingerprint. The
fingerprint of glucose can be used to key in and register its changes in
concentration over time in biological tissues, such as in the interstitial fluid
and in the blood. The objectives of this project are to miniaturize an existing
Raman bench-top system to one that is wearable, low-cost, and optimized for
blood glucose measurement in diabetic patients. Because this approach is
noninvasive, it has the potential to limit the multiple-daily finger prick
measurements required to draw blood for glucose measurement, and obviates
biofouling issues associated with existing commercial continuous glucose
monitors that require catheter inserts. Because it can measure continuously,
measurements can provide curve data instead of static single-shot measurements
from each finger prick. Glucose dynamics obtained from this data can then be
used to establish a better regimen for glucose control with a combination of
better diets and improved insulin dosage.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to help improve the
lives of 26 million American diabetics where blood glucose control is central to
their health. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) predicts one out three
Americans (almost 150 million) will be diabetic by 2050. The American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and CDC also estimate the existing cost in the United States
of diabetes, direct and indirect, to be $108B ~ $174B annually. These costs can
be significantly mitigated with better management of care, where accessibility
and adoption of newer, cost-effective, easy-to-integrate, and easy-to-use
technologies can reduce direct costs, and where preventative warnings could
reduce indirect costs. If this program's miniaturization thrust succeeds, there
are multiple blood analytes that a handheld platform could address, including
ketones, lactates, urea, cholesterol, hematocrit, and alcohol. As an example,
law enforcement could use it in the field to detect illegal substances in the
bloodstream. Miniaturization also enables mobile self-diagnostics and patient
compliance, two enormous emerging markets. The ability to relay diagnostic data
to clinicians remotely and in real-time for analysis to portend medical
emergencies would be revolutionary.