* 1249898
* EAR-PF: Mechanisms and Isotopic Signatures of Iron-Silica Adsorptive Interactions in the Precambrian Ocean
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Steven Chemtob, Chemtob                 Steven         M
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Steven Chemtob has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at Washington University
in St. Louis. Dr. Chemtob will perform laboratory experiments to characterize
the structures, chemistries and stable isotope compositions of primary iron-
silica precipitates that contributed to banded-iron formation (BIF). The
presence of BIFs, iron- and silica-rich chemical sediments found in Precambrian
successions, is tied to the oxygenation of Earth's early oceans and the
development of the photosynthesizing biosphere. An outstanding issue in the
study of BIF genesis is the mechanism for transport of iron and silica to
depositional centers. Silica could have been transported to the BIF deposition
site by efficient adsorption on iron oxide surfaces; alternatively, Fe and Si
could have coprecipitated as a single oxyhydroxide phase. The impacts of
specific mechanisms of iron-silica interaction on observable geochemical
signatures, such as Fe and Si isotope composition, are unknown. The objectives
of the proposed work are to characterize the molecular mechanisms of silica
adsorption on iron oxide surfaces using X-ray scattering techniques and to
identify site-specific silicon isotope fractionation factors for each adsorptive
mechanism. This research will reveal fundamental mechanisms of aqueous Fe-Si
interaction in Precambrian oceans, assist in the interpretation of chemical and
isotopic analyses of BIFs, and place quantitative constraints on the role of
silica adsorption in BIF deposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies
will provide insight into the chemistry of ancient oceans but are also
applicable to problems relevant to water chemistry and human health. The silicon
isotope composition of modern natural waters is frequently used as a proxy for
chemical weathering; these results will allow for improved quantification of the
weathering process. Additionally, aqueous silica competes with other aqueous
chemical species for adsorptive sites, impacting the capacity of iron oxide to
adsorb nutrients, trace elements and toxic contaminants. Understanding silica
adsorption mechanisms in Fe- and Si-rich waters is important for predicting
trace element behavior and for developing effective remediation techniques. Dr.
Chemtob's education plan will include mentoring high school and undergraduate
students on authentic research experiences, giving public lectures in the St.
Louis area, and participating in a teaching-as-research program, culminating in
the development and presentation of new course content using novel pedagogical
techniques.