* 1249008
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanofibrillar Scaffolds for Tissue Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Michael Paukshto, Fibralign Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,964.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate
manufacturability of the proposed innovation in the field of tissue engineering,
overcome related research challenges, and estimate the market opportunity. We
have developed, tested and patented novel process to induce self-assembly of
molecular collagen into a number of collagen scaffolds with the organizations
found in human tissues. The process is computer controlled and highly
reproducible. The scaffolds with aligned-crimp fibrils have been implanted with
and without cells into animals and have been found to induce the formation of
new functional vasculature mostly aligned along the fibrils and maintain
implanted cells viable for extended times in the ischemic tissue. We believe
that our scaffolds could improve vascular function in conditions such as
lymphedema and peripheral ischemia and be adaptable for diverse uses in tissue
engineering. Therefore the goal of the project is to focus on the development of
scalable manufacturing process for the preparation of nanofibrillar collagen
scaffolds in a thread-like multi-luminal format and test them in-vitro and in-
vivo in suitable animal models with and without plated cells. Scale-up system
will include a novel collagen delivery device, semi-automated tooling to
manufacture longer threads and both optical and laser inspection tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
based on the nature of our platform technology. Many current repair operations,
such as rotator cuff repair and ligament replacement, use cadaver derived
materials. Utilizing our approach, we can produce safe, strong, biocompatible
replacements whose dimensions match those of the patient. Further, our materials
should be less expensive. Stem cell applications in regenerative medicine have
been limited by poor survival and lack of retention in target tissue. When
delivered on our multi-luminal thread-like scaffolds, we achieve good survival
and localization with the potential to enhance repair and facilitate stem cell
application. The issue of cell and material retention in injectable gels, as
well as vascularization and nutrient diffusion in three-dimensional scaffolds,
remains a challenge. Advantages of our thread-like scaffolds are: large surface
area for cell attachment due to their open, multi-luminal structure; fibril
alignment directing cell alignment and migration; extended survival and
maintenance of cells implanted on the threads; tunable mechanical properties to
achieve the desired function and persistence. Our scaffolds will be used alone
as well as loaded with cells for repair and regeneration of vascular and
lymphatic systems and represent a significant step toward a major unmet medical
need.