* 1249068
* SBIR Phase I:  Magnetic Sifter for Rapid Isolation of Rare Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Matthew Kerby, CytoMag, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,992.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
improved device for the detection and analysis of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs). CTCs provide a window into the metastatic process, and are key to early
detection and treatment of metastatic cancer. Detection, quantification, and
characterization of CTCs has the potential to transform oncology, yet their
isolation under routine conditions remains problematic. The CTC sample
preparation technology under development is rapid, potentially highly
informative through genotyping or phenotypic analysis of captured cells, and low
cost. It will enable a new generation of oncodiagnostics that impact patient
care. During this Phase I project, the goal is to build a prototype device, then
evaluate its ability to capture and recover small numbers of cancer cells from
whole blood. The preliminary data demonstrates the feasibility of this approach.
The results of this study will evaluate alternative means of capturing and
recovering CTCs, with the goal of >90% recovery of cells in a procedure
requiring 60 minutes or less.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a device to
recover rare cells that can then be analyzed for informative mutations and
chromosomal rearrangements that can inform patient therapy. First generation CTC
tests provide only cell counts. While the prognostic value of CTC counts is
accepted, many clinicians view the value of these relatively expensive tests
with skepticism. The goal of this project is a second generation CTC test that
facilitates cell counts, but also recovers captured cells for analysis. Through
a simple blood draw, a cancer patient's tumor can be genotyped, and therapy can
be tailored accordingly. We describe a versatile platform with many research and
clinical applications beyond CTCs. These applications include noninvasive
prenatal diagnostics using fetal cells in maternal blood, and stem cell
isolation for regenerative medicine. A device based on the same separation
principles could be used to isolate stem cells for implantation in infarcted
myocardium, non-union bone fractures, and many other tissues. This cell
separation device will enable the translation of stem cell research to clinical
application by simplifying the cell isolation process.