* 1249283
* Northeast LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mun Choi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 986,954.00

The University of Massachusetts Amherst is requesting financial support for
twelve students from African American, Hispanic, and/or Native American
populations who are pursuing doctoral degrees in various science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields at the University of Connecticut
(lead institution). The University of Connecticut was selected by the Northeast
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (NELSAMP) to propose a
comprehensive highly integrated suite of Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
activities. The principal investigators are proposing the following activities:
the development of a Husky STEM Bridge to the Doctorate website, cohort meetings
among BD fellows, professional development in teaching sessions, K-12
mentoring/outreach opportunities, and career preparation. During the two year
project, the principal investigators will administer surveys, which will be
conducted to determine the success of the individual and overall strategies of
the project.

The proposed suite of activities offers several innovative features, including
advanced training in professional development, ethics, technology
commercialization, teaching pedagogy, and mentorship; and the development of a
Web-based tool highlighting possible faculty/project proposals, which
prospective BD Fellows may preview before applying to the University of
Connecticut. Furthermore, the faculty advisors to be recruited for the BD
activities must agree to not only advise the BD Fellows but also to serve as
engaged, hands-on mentors; participate in assessment surveys and meetings
associated with the BD Activity; provide financial support beyond the two-year
BD funding period; and foster their BD Fellow's participation in skills-building
workshops and training courses to further polish their academic skills. The BD
Activity at the University of Connecticut will demonstrate that a proactive,
intensive, results-oriented campaign to recruit, prepare, mentor, train and
support doctoral candidates from traditionally underrepresented populations in
the STEM areas affords one avenue for resolving social, economic and
technological challenges.