* 1249496
* Sedimentary and tectonic controls on strath terrace formation in bedrock channels
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Christian Braudrick, Braudrick               Christian      A
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Christian Braudrick has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to be implemented at the University of California Santa Cruz. This
study will use laboratory river channels to explore how changes in climate and
tectonic uplift rate alter the formation of bedrock river terraces. He will test
the relative importance of these two hypotheses using a sinuous laboratory
channel that is able to erode both laterally and vertically. A series of
experiments will investigate how bedrock terrace occurrence and morphology
reflects changes in sediment supply, base level fall, and whether strath
terraces arise under constant boundary conditions. These experiments will also
provide a robust dataset linking sediment supply, flow hydraulics, and sediment
cover in meandering bedrock channels that can be used to test and develop
numerical models of bedrock river erosion. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Bedrock river
terraces form when channel incision decreases and lateral erosion dominates
vertical erosion. They are widespread features in tectonically active areas and
are often used to infer tectonic and/or climate history, but isolating the role
of climate versus tectonics has proven difficult. The study will introduce an
undergraduate student interested in academic research to conduct experiments and
analyze how changes in sediment supply affect the amount of the bed covered by
sediment. We will also incorporate a one-day field trip to the laboratory
facility as part of the geomorphology class at UC Santa Cruz and provide a field
trip for land managers interested in the evolution of streams in the Central
California Coast, many of which are lined by bedrock terraces.