* 1249947
* SIAM Conferences in the Mathematical and Computational Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* James Crowley, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2015
* USD 669,540.00

Under this grant, the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) will
organize and run a series of interdisciplinary conferences in the mathematical
and computational sciences during the three year period between April 2013
through March 2016. Conferences to be held in the first year of the award are as
follows: SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (Austin, TX), SIAM
Conference on Applications of Dynamical Systems (Snowbird, UT), SIAM Conference
on Mathematical Aspects of Materials Science (Philadelphia, PA), SIAM Conference
on Control and Its Applications (San Diego, CA), Applied Algebraic Geometry
(Fort Collins, CO), SIAM Conference on Geometric and Physical Modeling (place to
be determined), Analysis of Partial Differential Equations (place to be
determined), and Parallel Processing for Scientific Computing (place to be
determined.) The funding will support travel of students, early career
professionals and invited speakers to SIAM conferences and dissemination of
invited conference presentations and tutorials to the wider community.

SIAM interdisciplinary conferences are distinguished from other conferences in
the mathematical and computational sciences by the extent to which they
routinely attract researchers and practitioners from within the mathematical and
computational sciences and simultaneously from within other sciences, industrial
organizations and government laboratories. As a result they contribute to
advances in the sciences, in government programs, and to the economic
competitiveness of the United States. The conferences in the series address a
broad range of topics and applications, giving them intellectual vibrancy,
timeliness, and reach, and they utilize an open format to identify and incubate
emerging areas through community proposed sessions. The conferences provide a
welcoming environment for students and early career professionals, integrating
education with research. Oversight of the conferences by SIAM officers promotes
diversity by forceful and supportive encouragement of diversity among organizing
committees and invited speakers. In addition, a special focus on diversity is
provided by the SIAM Workshops Celebrating Diversity.