* 1249672
* Research Workshop: Greening of Cities; Auckland, New Zealand; 30 November 3 December 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Patrick Miller, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2013
* USD 54,631.00

In 1950, less than 30 percent of the world's population lived in cities. This
number grew to 47 percent in the year 2000 (2.8 billion people), and it is
expected to grow to 60 percent by the year 2025. The functional infrastructure
services needed to accommodate this growth is staggering. If nothing is done,
the potential effect on natural ecosystems could be catastrophic, both locally
and globally. To avoid this will require the expertise of multiple disciplines
(engineering, ecology, landscape architecture and urban planning) and new ways
of thinking about urban infrastructure. The Research Workshop, Greening of
Cities, will bring together experts from multiple fields, across the globe. They
will identify and prioritize the range of issues that need to be addressed and
assess the sufficiency of existing knowledge needed to find solutions. They will
identify green technologies, such as green roofs, green walls, constructed
wetlands, greenways, green streets and others that hold promise for solving
these problems. Workshop attendees will identify ways of quantifying the
potential functionality of Green Infrastructure, such as cleaning water, climate
modification and filtering air, as well as the multiple values that come from
these services, including improving human health, reducing energy consumption,
moving people and increasing sustainable economic development. The attendees
will also identify important intangible values that come from green urban
infrastructure, such as increased wildlife diversity, visual quality and other
contributors to quality of urban life. The implications of these issues will be
examined at both a local and global scale. In order to understand the potential
for incorporating Green Infrastructure into cities, workshop participants will
examine selected case examples from around the world. The result of the workshop
will be a set of research needs and strategies that will include collaborative
research efforts that will provide the knowledge needed to better understand how
green infrastructure can benefit the built environment, both quantitatively and
qualitatively, and its communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cities provide
important social and economic opportunities for people, which is why cities
around the world are growing at a phenomenal rate. With such growth, we need to
ensure that cities are healthy places to live, providing clean water,
transportation and energy through urban infrastructure while ensuring people
have clean air and healthy places to live and work. In order to achieve
affordable, sustainable infrastructure, scientists and engineers are looking at
green technologies and regenerative systems, such as green roofs, green walls,
constructed wetlands and greenways. For these new, green technologies to be
adopted by urban planners and others who build cities, experts must be able to
demonstrate the value of these new technologies and how they can be implemented,
both through research as well as practical experience. The purpose of this
workshop is to gather experts from different fields around the world to examine
the problems cities face, to identify potential green infrastructure solutions
and to identify the research needed to demonstrate their value.