* 1249157
* Fossil Finders: Using Fossils to Teach about Evolution, Inquiry and Nature of Science
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Barbara Crawford, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 12/31/2015
* USD 376,735.00

The Fossil Finders project engages children in classrooms across the country in
an authentic investigation of Devonian fossils. Goals include supporting
children in the use of evidence in constructing explanations of natural
phenomena, and motivating culturally and linguistically diverse groups of
children to engage in learning science. The four-year project is a collaboration
of Cornell University Department of Education and the Paleontological Research
Institution (PRI) in Ithaca, New York. Classrooms from two grade spans (5th/6th
and 7th/8th) receive shipped samples of layers of shale from an Upstate New York
outcrop. Deliverables include development and testing of an interactive website
where children learn how to identify the fossils they find and add their own
data to an emerging database. A key focus is on classrooms with a high
proportion of underrepresented groups of children (English language learners,
[ELL] and children whose race and gender are not well represented in the
sciences). Developed materials involve cutting-edge STEM interdisciplinary
science content, including environmental science, global climate change,
variation, adaptation, biological evolution, and the fossil record. Two groups
of pilot teachers receive professional development and contribute to materials
development during summer work sessions and field test curriculum the following
school year.

Fossil Finders is assessing learning progressions of children and teacher
understandings of evolutionary science concepts, nature of science, and inquiry.
The project is helping children and teachers understand how scientists use
evidence to build theory, enhancing abilities to do inquiry, and stimulating
interest in paleontology, biology, and geology in target demographics (females,
low SES, and ELL students). Fossil Finder's broader impacts include providing a
viable national model for informal-formal partnerships in which natural history
museums connect with classrooms; providing inquiry-based, authentic science
experiences; and potentially broadening participation among underserved groups
of students.