* 1249112
* MEETING:  The Shape of the Future: A Workshop To Consolidate and Advance the Field of Evolutionary Developmental Biology. NESCent, Durham, NC - 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Cassandra Extavour, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,998.00

Evolutionary developmental biology (more commonly called 'EvoDevo') seeks to
understand the form of living organisms by examining how evolutionary history
has shaped the way such organisms develop and grow. The traditions and
techniques of experimental embryology, functional morphology, population
genetics, developmental biology, and evolutionary ecology are all major
contributors to the field. Advances in life-science technologies provide
significant new opportunities for exploring questions that are integral to
EvoDevo and that cross these traditional disciplinary boundaries. The National
Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent) will hold a workshop that brings
together EvoDevo researchers with the aims of reviewing the current state of
evodevo, attending to the opportunities and challenges that new technologies
bring to the field, and mapping a future for the science. The workshop will
generate a community-driven set of recommendations for best practices in the
experimental and observational approaches to EvoDevo research. Workshop outcomes
will also include identification of current gaps in training infrastructure, and
suggested potential community-based solutions to these problems. The workshop
report will become or serve as a template for an EvoDevo white paper, reflecting
the definition, priorities, needs and future outlook of the EvoDevo field.