* 1249546
* EAGER:   Structure-Function Relationships at the Motor Nerve Terminal Active Zone
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Stephen Meriney, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2014
* USD 197,076.00

Decades of work comparing neuromuscular synapses in both crayfish and lizards
have led to a general acceptance of the dogma that the structure of a synapse
has little impact on its function. As a result, the study of structure-function
relationships at synapses has been stymied, and, instead, investigators have
focused mechanistic studies on the identification of differences in molecules
and events associated with transmitter release and calcium signaling. In this
project, a comparative study of neuromuscular junctions from frog and mouse
skeletal muscle will be carried out using new techniques and a predictive
computational model developed in the project collaborators' laboratories. These
animal models offer several important advantages. The neuromuscular junctions of
frogs and mice serve similar roles (as opposed to previously studied synapses
that served different roles in the crayfish and lizard animal models) and yet,
have distinct differences in their physiological properties and pre-synaptic
structure and organization. The driving hypothesis is that key physiological
features of neuromuscular synapses are determined by the structural arrangement
of basic building blocks of synaptic structure. This work will offer
opportunities for training undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate students,
and high school teachers. Because this is a collaborative project, all trainees
will have the unique opportunity to learn both experimental and computational
approaches. Importantly, it is expected that the MCell computational model will
provide an example of unprecedented scale and realism for the illustration of
nerve terminal structure and function with the potential to literally transform
a student's grasp of difficult biochemical concepts in space and time. This
model will also illustrate and teach the use of Monte Carlo simulations,
sophisticated visualization and animation software, and a variety of statistical
analysis methods.