* 1249313
* Tephra layers and early warning signals for critical transitions
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Thomas McGovern, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2016
* USD 102,553.00

This project seeks to develop new measures of land surface resilience through a
novel study of layers of volcanic ash (tephra). Changes in vegetation patterns
are known to indicate changing land surface resilience and indicate proximity to
threshold change. The morphology of cm-scale thicknesses of tephra is shaped by
the pre-existing vegetation cover, in particular its depth, density, extent or
patchiness. Thus, when tephra deposition is of a similar depth to the height of
the pre-existing vegetation, tephra layer morphology can be used to assess
relative land surface resilience at the time of tephra deposition. The
researchers aim to develop new measures of resilience firstly through study of
tephra layers created by recent Icelandic eruptions- the 2010 eruption of
Eyjafjallajökull and the 2011 eruption of Grímsvötn. Secondly, they will apply
the new understandings gained from the study of very recent ash falls to the
natural archive presented by the numerous past tephra layers preserved within
the soil. Measures of land surface resilience and indications of proximity to
threshold-crossing could make important contributions to understanding the
interplay of changes driven by people and by the environment, and to the
evolving field of sustainability science. In southern Iceland up to 21 tephra
layers have been deposited since the Norse settlement, and these layers are
clearly separated by intervening layers of aeolian sediment. We know that
landscapes in these areas have been subject to directional drivers of change
(such as falling temperatures and increasing grazing pressures) that have pushed
land surfaces close to, and at times across, tipping points between one
persistent state and another. Knowledge of ?near misses? in the past derived
from novel uses of tephra layers could help us to understand the circumstances
under which communities backed away from the brink of change, and the tradeoffs
between adaptation and resilience, short term and long term robustness, and the
effects of cross-scale conjunctures. This project will involve an international,
multidisciplinary team, combine theoretical and methodological innovation with
fieldwork and laboratory analysis, and provide research opportunities for early
career scholars.