* 1249353
* Collaborative Research: the role of fluids in intermediate-depth seismicity and wedge anisotropy: Case studies for Cascadia and Alaska, with a comparison to Japan
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Peter van Keken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2017
* USD 176,865.00

The main goal of this study is to determine whether the presence of fluids
within Earth's mantle is a controlling factor determining where earthquakes
occur within subduction zones, specifically along the fault that enables the
down-going tectonic plate to slip deeper into surrounding viscous mantle. The
fact that this seismicity is located within the crust at 'cool' subduction
zones, such as Alaska and Tohoku, versus in the mantle at 'warm' subduction
zones, such as Cascadia and Nankai, suggests that fluids play an important role.
Directional dependence of seismic wave propagation speeds will be assessed, so
that possible bias in earthquake locations can be accounted for. Simultaneously,
information about deformation within the viscously flowing mantle will be
obtained. Ratios of shear and compressional wave velocities will suggest where
fluids are present or not. These constraints will guide computer modeling of
mantle flow and temperature in the subduction zones. These results will be
linked to petrologic models of mineral phase change associated with plate
dehydration that introduce fluids near the plate interface and lead to the
generation of arc volcanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-depth collaboration by
three geoscientists- a geodynamist, petrologist, and seismologist, serves as a
model of interdisciplinary Earth System research. Graduate and undergraduate
students will receive training in the use of state-of-the-art methods in their
sub-discipline as well as learning how to address interplay with evolving
results from complementary sub disciplines. The international collaboration with
Japanese scientists provides access to the best instrumented and well-studied
Japanese subduction system. The study leverages ongoing work in the NSF
GeoPRISMS and EarthScope Programs at Cascadia and that planned for Alaska.