* 1249263
* Learning sparse representations for restoration and classification: Theory, Computations, and Applications in Image, Video, and Multimodal Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Guillermo Sapiro, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 110,397.00

Efficient signal representation is critical in virtually all disciplines of
science. Sparse representations have recently drawn much attention from the
signal processing community. The basic model consists of considering that
natural signals admit a sparse decomposition as a combination of very few atoms
in some redundant dictionary. Recent results have shown that learning
overcomplete non-parametric dictionaries for image representation, instead of
using classical off-the-shelf ones, significantly improves numerous image and
video processing tasks. This research aims at developing a comprehensive
theoretical, computational, and practical framework for learning sparse
representations for numerous signal analysis tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First,
the research concentrates on learning sparse representations for global and
local robust image classification tasks, proposing formulations with both sparse
reconstruction and class discrimination components, jointly optimized during
dictionary learning. Multiscale dictionary learning and investigating a number
of critical optimization challenges are integral components of this project as
well. The framework of learning multiscale sparse representations is then
extended to multimodal data. As in the work with images and video, the energies
proposed for multimodality consider both reconstructive and discriminative
terms, learning the optimal representations both for the given data and the
given tasks. In addition to image, video, and audio, other signal modalities
studied include tensors, which are critical in diffusion MRI, and bring the
additional challenge of developing sparse representations for non-flat data. The
proposed work is also extended to learning to sense, where combined with the
learning of the optimal dictionaries the learning of the best linear sensing
procedures is studied.