* 1249029
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Security Audit of Third-Party Software
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Jimmy Su, Ensighta Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,978.00

The innovation of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is the
automatic security audit of third-party software. To demonstrate the
capabilities of the technology, this project will build a security audit Cloud
service, BitTurner, to automatically discover vulnerabilities and conduct
security audits of third-party software. This cloud service will be fully
automated; it will apply to programs for which source code is not available such
as commercial binaries; and because every vulnerability report it generates will
be accompanied by a test case demonstrating the vulnerability, it will have no
false positives. This combination of attributes should revolutionize the process
of software auditing and make it much faster and more cost effective. This is
made possible by a novel combination of state-of-the-art program analysis
techniques. The BitTurner Cloud service will incorporate white-box fuzzing using
two different symbolic execution engines, black-box fuzzing enhanced with taint-
directed fuzzing, and static vulnerability analysis to direct white-box fuzzing.
The proposed highly parallel architecture will let us achieve high throughput
and low latency while minimizing cost. The team also plans to extend the
technology and infrastructure for security audit of mobile apps.

The broader/commercial impact of automatic security audit of third-party
software addresses an enormous market that has a dire and immediate need for
innovative solutions. Security breaches cost businesses billions of dollars
every year, and a majority of attacks are due to vulnerabilities in software.
However, many barriers stand in the way of taking the steps needed to ensure
software security. Manual auditing is prohibitively expensive because of the
time and specialized skills required. Techniques based on source code are
inapplicable to third-party software in binary form. Existing techniques based
on static analysis can report so many false positive warnings that their results
overwhelm developers and analysts and waste huge resources to weed out false
positives. BitTurner's disruptive Cloud-based security audit technology should
change this landscape by allowing fully automatic auditing of third-party
software with no false positives, based on low-cost distributed computing.
Security auditing as a service is already a large market, but existing
commercial offerings are often an inadequate match for customer needs.
BitTurner's technology may provide more comprehensive results at a competitive
price point, and so both capture existing customers and make auditing available
for software where it is currently infeasible.