* 1249399
* The function of meaning
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Laura King, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 03/31/2016
* USD 196,211.00

People who judge their lives to be highly meaningful are better off compared to
those who rate their lives to be less meaningful in a host of important ways,
including higher quality of life, slower age-related cognitive decline, and
decreased risk of mortality. However, understanding exactly what people mean
when they rate the meaningfulness of their lives has proven difficult. Moreover,
no research has directly addressed why the experience of meaning in life is
potentially adaptive: What adaptive function does this experience serve? The
proposed studies address these important issues, focusing on a potentially
unexpected source of meaning in life: The existence of pattern and regularity in
the environment. In this sense, the feeling of meaning can be attached to an
important adaptive problem - identifying reliable pattern in the environment -
which is a central goal for all species. This perspective highlights the
relevance of associative learning and basic processes of perception to the
experience of meaning in life. A series of 11 studies will test the prediction
that meaning in life ratings track the coherence of environmental stimuli. The
studies involve exposing participants to stimuli that are characterized by
pattern (or randomness) and measuring meaning in life. In some studies, the
stimuli are presented explicitly and in others implicitly, allowing a test of
whether awareness is required for these effects. A final study examines the
effects of systematic variation in a discriminative stimulus in an operant
conditioning paradigm on subsequent meaning in life. These studies would suggest
that the feeling that life is meaningful provides important information for
person: It tells us when the world is making sense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program of research promises to demystify the human experience of meaning in
life and provide experimental evidence for the potential adaptive function of
this experience. The proposed studies provide a foundation for future research
integrating meaning in life, a cornerstone of psychological well-being, with
cognitive science, neuroscience, and perception. Further, this research lays the
groundwork for potentially innovative approaches for applied settings; for
example, routine and habit may be viewed as sources meaning in life, which is an
important possibility for populations that lack the introspective capacities
more commonly viewed as important to meaning in life. This research aims to
inform a broader perspective on meaning in life, embedded in the natural world
and informed by the adaptive problems faced by human beings.