* 1249600
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Craft Specialization and Animal Products at the Late Neolithic Longshan Period Sites of Taosi and Zhoujiazhuang, Shanxi Province, China
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* P. Jeffrey Brantingham, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 17,609.00

Under the direction of Dr. P. Jeffrey Brantingham, Ms. Katherine Brunson will
conduct a seven month fieldwork project to study the zooarchaeological record at
the Late Neolithic Longshan period sites of Taosi and Zhoujiazhuang in Shanxi
Province, China. Ms. Brunson's research will explore the possibility that animal
exploitation strategies and animal products played a key role in the processes
of craft specialization and state formation in ancient China. Unlike stone,
clay, or metal resources, animals are uniquely vulnerable to environmental
fluctuations and disease. This raises the question of whether complexity based
on craft specialization in animal products is more fragile that that based on
ceramics or bronze manufacturing. By studying evidence for secondary (ante-
mortem) product use and bone working during the late third millennium and early
second millennium BC at Taosi and Zhoujiazhuang, Ms. Brunson will examine the
relationship between animal products, craft specialization, increased social
complexity, environmental change, and societal collapse during the Longshan
period.

The research is significant because it provides insight into the complex
interactions between environment, subsistence and other human behaviors which
led to the rise of social complexity. Archaeology provides a unique set of data
which permits scientists to examine this unfolding process over extended periods
of time.

Increasing social complexity during the Longshan period coincided with several
changes in the zooarchaeological record. During the Early and Middle Neolithic,
pigs and dogs were the main indigenous Chinese domesticates. During the Late
Neolithic, sheep and cattle were introduced to China, likely through trade
routes from West Asia. Whereas pigs and dogs are primarily used for meat, sheep
and cattle may be used for secondary products such as wool and milk or as
draught animals. The availability of new animal resources may have created
opportunities for people to diversify their herd management strategies during
times of environmental stress. New animal resources may have also promoted
specialized craft production in crafts such as bone working. Ms. Brunson's
previous research at Taosi revealed that kill-off patterns for sheep match a
wool exploitation pattern, that there is evidence for cattle bone tool
production, and that herding strategies changed significantly after political
collapse at Taosi. Ms. Brunson will further examine these trends by creating
more refined age and sex profiles, conducting a detailed analysis of bone craft
production organization, and by analyzing faunal assemblages from nearby sites
such as Zhoujiazhuang. Her research will form an important point of comparison
with studies that emphasize prestige goods and bronze production in the
formation of ancient Chinese states. Because many animal products were
utilitarian or subsistence goods, they hold important information for how craft
production was organized in different ways and why certain types of crafts are
more resistant to political, economic, or environmental changes, while other
crafts are less so.

The broader impacts of Ms. Brunson's work include facilitating international
scholarly exchange and contributing to the developing field of zooarchaeology in
China. Ms. Brunson will build upon existing collaborations with Chinese scholars
as she learns methods that will be important to her future work in China. She
plans to publish her dissertation results in both English and Chinese language
journals in order to make her findings available to a wide audience. Finally,
Ms. Brunson will upload her data to an online open access archive so that
researchers from around the world can have access to the faunal data from these
important sites.