* 1249156
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Ocean Dynamical Feedback and Air-Sea Interaction in the Climate Response to Global Warming
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Barry Klinger, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2017
* USD 57,061.00

This project considers changes in regional climate occurring primarily in and
over the tropical oceans, due to greenhouse gas increases. Among the robust
regional climate changes found in ensembles of climate model simulations, three
are addressed here: a pattern of "El Nino-like" sea surface temperature (SST)
changes in the tropical Pacific; a minimum in the warming of SSTs in the
tropical North Atlantic area which is the main development region (MDR) for
Atlantic tropical cyclones, accompanied by an increase in vertical wind shear in
the region (which would presumably inhibit tropical cyclone formation); and the
meridional shift in the intertropical convergence zone (ICTZ) which has been
tentatively ascribed to the slowdown of the Atlantic meridional overturning
circulation (AMOC) caused by global warming. These regional changes will be
examined by decomposing local SST change into components forced separately by 1)
the increase in local surface radiation; 2) redistribution of changes in near-
surface heat ocean content by the mean ocean circulation; 3) redistribution of
the mean near-surface heat content by changes in the wind-driven surface
currents; and 4) changes in evaporative cooling due to changes in surface wind
speed. The four terms, which come from a linearization of the perturbation
surface energy balance equation, have been previously associated with specific
mechanisms of regional SST change. In particular term 4 expresses the dynamics
of the wind-evaporation-SST (WES) feedback, in which the quadratic dependence of
evaporation on surface wind speed cause evaporative cooling to vary regionally
according to the strength of the mean winds and their direction relative to
changes in wind. Likewise term 2 encapsulates the ocean dynamical thermostat
(ODT) mechanism, in which a uniform increase in surface energy input causes less
local SST increase in a region of divergent surface currents as the additional
heat is transported out of the region. This mechanism would be expected to yield
a reduction in SST warming in the Eastern Pacific cold tongue region relative to
the western Pacific, thereby acting to oppose the El Nino-like warming pattern
found in climate change simulations. The methodology for determining the
relative contributions of the terms involves numerical integrations of a climate
model in configurations in which the terms are selectively enabled and disabled.

Beyond its intrinsic scientific value, the work has broader impacts due to the
consequences of changes in tropical ocean conditions have for fisheries, marine
ecology, and the formation of tropical cyclones. The work will also help to
determine the extent to which climate model simulations can be confidently used
to anticipate climate change at regional scales.