* 1249607
* INSPIRE: ENABLING TRANSFORMATION IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES, GEOSCIENCES, AND CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE THROUGH STAKEHOLDER ALIGNMENT AND NEW INSTITUTIONAL THEORY, METHODS, AND ANALYTICS
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2016
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Directorate of Geosciences and
Office of Cyberinfrastructure as part of their committment to EarthCube, a major
new NSF cyberinfrastructure activity to create a bold, integrated, geoscience
data and knowledge management system for the 21st Century, and by three Programs
in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (Science of
Science and Innovation Policy; Science, Technology, and Society; and Science of
Organizations). This is transformative, interdisciplinary, research that enables
more effective design and implementation of community-driven cyberinsrastructure
that will create an interoperable system of data systems and data types that
serve a broad and disparate community of geoscience users with different
backgrounds, needs, and scientific cultures. The research will also pioneer new
social and behavioral science theory, methods, and analytics that address new
and emerging ways that stakeholders are aligned around big, complex,
infrastructure projects. The research is transformative in nature because it is
a first-of-its kind project in which a major NSF community-driven infrastructure
project of this magnitude has incorporated, as an integral part of its project
structure, social science and an analysis of the community/stakeholder building
process. It also breaks new ground in the developing of quantitative approaches
to measure the evolution of collective community and individual perceptions over
time. This type of understanding is critical when building trust and
partnerships between science and technology communities that rarely, if ever,
interact. The project involves the intimate interaction of social scientists,
geoscientists, and cyberinfrastructure and computer science experts, with the
results of the stakeholder studies being used to help improve the
cyberinfrastructure design-and-build process, as well as guide the formation of
the organizational and governance structures that will be needed to effectively
manage community engagement and implementation of the final system. This
research employs novel visualization tools and will develop innovative
quantitative means for assessing stakeholder agreement and its evolution over
time. The analysis of data and results will assist in identifing the most
effective targets for infrastructure investment and understanding and improving
community engagement in the design process, thus ensuring that whatever is
created adequately serves end-user needs. Broader impacts of the work include
the training of PhD students, accelerating progress in large NSF-initiated
science and technology projects, and generating insights that will inform
policy, planning, and resource allocation.