* 1249423
* Research on American Indian Science Education
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Sievert Regina, Salish Kootenai College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2017
* USD 333,203.00

The Research on American Indian Science Education (RAISE) project is an
empirical research study whose overarching objective is to investigate the
efficacy of culturally congruent instruction (CCI) for improving American Indian
college students? science achievement. American Indians as a group are currently
underachieving on nearly every metric of science achievement, from standardized
tests, to high school and college graduation rates, to entry into science
related professions. A small but growing number of studies is providing
preliminary evidence of the efficacy of CCI in improving Indigenous students'
achievement in math and science, but additional and rigorously designed
empirical studies like RAISE are necessary in order to further elucidate the
nature of the relationship between CCI and student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;A recent
product stemming from research in CCI is the Culturally Congruent Instruction
Survey (CCIS). Designed and validated by tribal elders, teachers, and faculty
working with pre college students from three American Indian reservations in
Montana, the survey operationalizes the nature of CCI for five Montana tribal
cultures by outlining the specifics of CCI in three main categories - science
content, pedagogy and instructional environment. The study described here tests
the efficacy of CCI by systematically infusing specific elements of CCI, as
found on the CCIS, into select college science courses, and investigating their
effects on student outcomes. The study employs a mixed methods quasi
experimental design, comparing pre and post treatment data such as course
completion rates, course grades, quality of student work samples, student
attitude surveys and focus group responses, graduation rates and entry into
science professions. Course content, instruction and environment are thoroughly
documented through classroom instruction observations, course syllabi and
outlines, and interviews with course instructors. Multiple regression analyses
are used to identify correlations between specific CCI course elements and
student outcomes data, with additional analyses conducted to further
characterize these relationships, such as interactions between
variables.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The RAISE project, by providing
evidence of the nature of CCI and its efficacy for improving American Indian
students' achievement in college science, holds potential for broad impacts.
Application of the findings from the study to transform the SKC science
curriculum and instruction will translate into higher levels of science
achievement and greater numbers of students pursuing science related
professions. The active engagement of SKC science faculty in the study will
improve their understanding of education research and of effective science
instruction, thus contributing to their professional development both as science
educators and researchers. The dissemination of the study?s findings through
publications and presentations to a broad audience of STEM faculty and education
researchers expands its potential nationally and globally for improving college
STEM instruction and student achievement. The increased number of STEM graduates
will help ameliorate the shortage of STEM professionals in the United States.