* 1249273
* New Constraints on Size-resolved Submicron Sea-salt Particle Production from Ocean Breaking Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Robert Reed, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 403,436.00

Marine aerosols play an important role in controlling the Earth's radiation
balance, cloud formation and microphysics. One particular knowledge gap in sea
spray aerosol emissions resides in the incompletely characterized contribution
of sea-salt to the cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) budget in the marine boundary
layer (MBL). The chemical composition of 50 to 200 nm sized sea spray particles,
most critical to climate models, is variously described as purely organic,
purely sea-salt or mixtures of both. The production fluxes of these sub-micron
particles is of particular interest. This project will help developing improved
parameterizations for size- and composition-dependent production fluxes of sea
spray particles needed to constrain the CCN fluxes of natural aerosols in
regional and climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State
University (NCSU) investigators will deploy a relaxed eddy accumulation (REA)
flux system specifically designed to measure turbulent fluxes of size-resolved
dry sea-salt (inner) cores. The REA-S flux system will be deployed at the U.S.
Army Corps of&lt;br/&gt;Engineers (USACE) 560 m long research pier facility at
Duck, NC, chosen to sample representative MBL conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
ship based environmental education program designed for secondary and high
school students and their teachers, and development of university and K-12
learning materials and curricula that integrate data analysis into classroom
instruction will be used. A goal of this is for increased understanding of
factors affecting atmospheric and marine science processes as related to cloud
formation and subsequent effects on climate.