* 1249775
* EAR-PF:  Spectral morphology and source characteristics of low-frequency earthquakes near Parkfield, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Amanda Thomas, Thomas                  Amanda         M
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Amanda Thomas has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral fellowship
to carry out a research and education plan at Stanford University. Her research
efforts will primarily focus on better constraining source properties of
recently discovered low-frequency earthquakes (LFEs) in Parkfield, CA. LFEs are
the seismic manifestation of deep fault slip and are typically depleted in high-
frequency energy relative to shallow earthquakes. The goals of this project are
to determine focal mechanism solutions for each low-frequency earthquake family,
to isolate LFE source spectra and quantify spectral parameters such as corner
frequency, and to explore the spatial variability of spectral morphology of both
regular and low-frequency earthquakes in Parkfield.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquake forecasts and ground motion predictions
estimate the probability of a large earthquake, the intensity of shaking, and
its potential impact on a region of interest. These tools rely heavily on
parameters such as magnitude, recurrence interval, and rupture area. While deep
slip could potentially influence each of these, its effect is excluded from
rupture forecasts because it is neither well characterized nor well understood.
Incorporating the results gleaned from studies of slow-slip phenomena into
earthquake forecasts and ground motion simulations may improve such models. The
proposed education plan involves two components: directing a graduate seminar on
seismic sources and teaching an entry level field course on geologic hazards in
California. The goal of the graduate seminar will be to develop a comprehensive
understanding of the earthquake source through discussion of classic and recent
literature in the field. The undergraduate field course will expose students to
earth science and promote awareness of geologic hazards, such as rock falls,
earthquakes, and volcanoes. Students will use simple data collection and
analysis techniques coupled with collective discussion and interpretation to
determine how the tectonic evolution of California gave rise to such threats and
to quantify their potential impact.