* 1249577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Archaeology of the Norte Chico Site
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Matthew Piscitelli, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2013
* USD 22,104.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Jonathan Haas, Matthew Piscitelli will excavate a
series of small-scale temples at the Late Archaic (3,000-1,800 B.C.) site of
Huaricanga in the Fortaleza Valley, Peru to explore variation in religious
practices in the evolving complex polities on the Peruvian coast. The study of
ancient religions presents unique challenges to the archaeologist. In the
absence of writing, religious ideas tend to be expressed only indirectly and
symbolically. Those indirect and symbolic manifestations of religion can also be
difficult, even impossible to accurately interpret. However, in the emergence of
the earliest complex societies in Andean South America, the ceremonial behavior
associated with religion is broadly manifested in two very different
architectural complexes: monumental, public platform mounds and associated
circular courts and much smaller scale, private temple complexes.

During the Late Archaic Period, the first sedentary agricultural communities
developed along the north central coast of Peru, where inhabitants constructed
the earliest monumental architecture in the New World. In addition, recent
preliminary excavations at Huaricanga suggest the presence of much smaller scale
temple structures that bear many similarities to a particular type of ceremonial
architecture found exclusively in the Andean highlands known as Mito temples.
The presence of a Mito temple on the coast would challenge a 40-year-old
understanding of the Mito Tradition and its associated rituals. Mr. Piscitelli
will apply innovative techniques such as pollen analysis, micromorphology, and
X-Ray Fluorescence to reconstruct ancient ritual practices. Furthermore, this
project's thorough radiocarbon dating program will situate these small-scale
temples at Huaricanga within a regional chronological context.

This research will clarify cultural connections between coastal and highland
Peru during the Late Archaic Period by looking at the nature and chronology of
possible Mito temples on the coast. Such comparisons will explore an instance of
ancient social interaction on a regional scale within the context of the
prehistoric Andes. The data collected from this fieldwork will also enhance
understanding of ceremonial activities beyond the large platform mounds and
sunken circular courts that have previously garnered much attention. In
addition, this research will test models concerning the development of social
inequality within emergent complex polities. Through a better understanding of
ritual practices we can investigate how early leaders negotiated the social
milieu through ritual performance and, as a result, we can develop theoretical
models relating religion and society.

The project will have a positive impact on the community surrounding Huaricanga.
Team members will distribute written information to the town such as site maps
and annual reports published in Spanish. The project is expected to yield
employment opportunities for the local community since workmen will be hired to
assist in excavation and the initial processing of artifacts. "Community" days
at the site and school tours will stimulate interest in the local cultural
heritage and raise awareness about contemporary issues that are particularly
salient in Peru such as looting. The project will also continue the tradition of
strong collaboration between Peruvian and American scholars. In addition, thesis
and publication opportunities will also be available to project members and
collaborators while the research will allow Mr. Piscitelli to fulfill the
requirements of his Ph.D. dissertation.