* 1249763
* 15th GENI Engineering Conference (GEC15)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Deniz Gurkan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 09/30/2013
* USD 161,215.00

This projects supports hosting the three day fifteenth edition of the GENI
Engineering conference, including organizing and hosting the demo session to be
held on the University of Houston campus. The Global Environment for Network
Innovations (GENI) is a virtual laboratory that is rapidly emerging in prototype
form across the United States. GENI aims to transform experimental research in
networking and distributed systems, as well as emerging research into very large
socio-technical systems, by providing a suite of infrastructure for 'at scale'
experiments in future internets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GENI Project Office
organizes three major GENI Engineering conferences (GEC) per year, in which the
entire GENI community meets to review current status, and to decide on
subsequent steps in GENI's evolution. These GECs include community-based working
groups leading GENI's design and planning, and demonstrating progress with live
experiments. About 300 leading researchers and Ph.D. students from diverse US
institutions will gather in Houston to showcase their ideas and results. In the
demo session each demo will be provided with a wired connection to the GENI
infrastructure. Additionally, wireless connectivity will be available for
demonstrations and participants. The 3-day conference will be held at a local
conference-oriented hotel, with organizational oversight by an experienced UH
event coordinator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The GEC
meeting and Demo sessions provide graduate students with both an opportunity to
demonstrate and explain their work to the GENI community prior to formal
publication. It is a key part of helping new graduate students understand what
is being done with GENI and who amongst their peers at other institutions might
be valuable resources. It also supports outreach to new community members,
including the emerging US Ignite community. GENI is already being used as an
instrument for research. This proposal supports the development and use of the
research instrument.