* 1249270
* Physical Links between Coronal Mass Ejection (CME) Velocity and Source Region Parameters
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Jie Zhang, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 12/31/2016
* USD 390,444.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and his team will investigate the physical
relationship between the height profile (or decay index) of the magnetic flux in
the corona above a given solar source region and the known 'torus instability'
of magnetic flux ropes. They intend to establish that this interaction provides
a key link between the magnetic structure of the source region of a coronal mass
ejection (CME) and that CME's ultimate eruption velocity. The team expects to
determine that this physical influence affects the coronal field's polarity
structure at great heights, as well as the association of CME velocity with
solar source region size and complexity, the occurrence of precursor CMEs, and
the Sun's large-scale coronal density structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
parametric numerical investigation will quantify how the height profile and the
coronal density structure control the peak rise velocity of unstable magnetic
flux ropes, which represent the erupting magnetic flux in CMEs. The steepness of
the height profile will be investigated in relation to the structure of the
photospheric field while considering bipolar, quadrupolar, and more complex flux
distributions, in order to establish quantitative dependencies of the CME
velocity on the directly observable source region parameters. These results will
be verified by several means, including numerical modeling of selected CME
events under realistic thermal and magnetic conditions with events covering a
range of moderate to extremely high velocities, and statistical studies of CME
velocities that will include, for the first time, the height profiles of the
coronal magnetic field (obtained by extrapolations) and newly identified source
region parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The peak CME velocity in the solar
corona is a key parameter for effective space weather forecasting, since the
arrival time and potential impact of CMEs may threaten the nation's astronauts,
satellites, and ground-based technologies. This project will build research
infrastructure in solar physics by creating a new partnership between Predictive
Science, Inc. (PSI) and George Mason University (GMU). These research results
will be broadly disseminated in the refereed literature as well as at science
workshops and conferences. A catalog of studied CME events, including source
region parameters, field extrapolations, and height profiles, will be provided
on PSI and GMU web pages for community access, and the PI's simulation output
will also be made available upon request. This project will train a graduate
student at GMU and support the professional development of a postdoctoral solar
physicist at PSI.