* 1249831
* News Tools for Conservation Paleobiology: Taphonomic Mismatch to Identify Degraded Habitats and Trait-Based Paleoenvironmental Inference Models
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Andrew Michelson, Michelson               Andrew         V
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Andrew V. Michelson has been granted the NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why species live in one area and not another is a
central question of ecology that has broad implications for conservationists,
scientists, and entrepreneurs. The investigation will explore the hypothesis
that that certain species no longer live in areas near human settlement, while
different species may have invaded those same areas. This species turnover
results in a mismatch between the species living in an area and the species
preserved in the fossil record of the same area since fossil species lived in
the area before it was modified by people. This hypothesis will be tested by
sampling across lakes on three Bahamian islands that have experienced different
levels of human settlement: New Providence (highest impact), San Salvador
(intermediate impact), and Rum Cay (least impact) using small crustaceans that
are easily preserved in lake sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, he
hopes to understand why certain species have invaded areas with high levels of
human settlement and why others have gone locally extinct in those same areas.
It is assumed that certain traits (such as body size and shape, presence of
defensive structures, etc.) of species influence whether or not they can survive
in modified environments. Dr. Michelson will use preserved records of the
species (extending back about 5000 years) living in both modified and unmodified
lakes to understand which traits of species allow them to live or go locally
extinct in environments disturbed by people. By understanding the biological
reasons for why some species can live in disturbed environments while other
cannot will produce evidence-based conservation plans for species and
ecosystems. This increased understanding will greatly improve conservation
efforts in the Bahamas and be applicable to other areas across the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, Dr. Michelson will create a freely-
available podcast to broadcast widely the results of this research and the
research of other scientists. He will interview scientists about their research
and how it relates to issues of broader interest like conservation and energy
exploration. Undergraduate and/or graduate students will be involved in all
aspects of this project, so will receive valuable training and experience in
scientific research and how to communicate to the public the results of
scientific research.