* 1249334
* 2013 Physical Metallurgy GRC; University of New England; Biddeford, Maine; July 28 -August 2, 2013
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Michael Mills, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological development is paced by
the creation and putting into service of materials that are ever-more capable of
withstanding extreme conditions, such as high stress, temperature, radiation and
long-term service. This Gordon Research Conference on Physical Metallurgy
provides a forum for the presentation of cutting-edge experimental and modeling
research on materials at extremes, such materials with ultra-high strengths
relative to their ideal strengths and materials that can operate at high
temperatures relative to their melting points. Understanding the effects of
extremes in the physical size-scale and microstructure is critical to advancing
the performance of materials under demanding conditions. Presentations will
describe developments in state-of-the-art experimental techniques for evaluating
material behavior and microstructure, and complementary computational and
modeling efforts aimed at fundamental understanding of materials under these
extreme conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological development is paced by the creation
and putting into service of materials that are ever-more capable of withstanding
extreme conditions, such as high stress, temperature, radiation and long-term
service. This Gordon Research Conference on Physical Metallurgy provides a forum
for the presentation of cutting-edge experimental and modeling research on
materials at extremes, such materials with ultra-high strengths relative to
their ideal strengths and materials that can operate at high temperatures
relative to their melting points. Understanding the effects of extremes in the
physical size-scale and microstructure is critical to advancing the performance
of materials under demanding conditions. Presentations will describe
developments in state-of-the-art experimental techniques for evaluating material
behavior and microstructure, and complementary computational and modeling
efforts aimed at fundamental understanding of materials under these extreme
conditions.