* 1249737
* Mechanisms and Longevity of Strain Localization during Dynamic Recrystallization of Olivine
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Whitney Behr, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 228,126.00

This project investigates the role of grain size reduction by dynamic
recrystallization in promoting strain localization in dry olivine aggregates
using a suite of laboratory experiments coupled with detailed microstructural
analyses. There are two primary goals of the project. The first is to identify
the ways in which dynamic recrystallization can lead to localization under
different conditions of stress, temperature, grain size, and strain magnitude.
The processes that are most commonly proposed in the literature include a)
geometric softening, b) a switch to grain size- sensitive deformation
mechanisms, either diffusion creep or grain boundary sliding, and c) recovery by
grain boundary migration. One or all of these mechanisms may contribute to the
pronounced weakening observed in olivine under specific experimental conditions
and in nature, and each should exhibit unique mechanical and microstructural
signatures. The investigators will integrate detailed microstructural and
mechanical observations over a range of experimental conditions, to
systematically determine which of these mechanisms are dominant. The second goal
is to examine the conditions under which dynamic recrystallization will result
in permanent, as opposed to transient localization, by evaluating the role of
syn-deformational grain growth. The project uses several unique ways of
quantifying the role of grain growth in dynamically recrystallizing olivine
aggregates, and of distinguishing between surface energy and strain energy
driven grain boundary migration for a range of experimental conditions. The
results of this research will have several important implications for
geodynamics and mantle rheology, including the following. 1) The mechanical data
will improve current deformation mechanism maps for dry olivine and can be
incorporated into both large-scale mantle convection models and smaller-scale
models of transient instabilities and mantle seismicity. 2) The processes
identified as contributing to the development of olivine lattice preferred
orientation can be input into models of olivine olivine lattice preferred
orientation evolution and associated seismic anisotropy. 3) Distinguishing the
conditions under which grain growth will counteract grain size reduction will
allow evaluation of theoretical descriptions of the relationship between stress
and grain size (the piezometric relationship). 4) The identification of
microstructural criteria that are diagnostic of specific localization processes
can be extrapolated to naturally deformed rocks and used to infer localization
mechanisms and associated mechanical behavior of rocks under natural
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding why deformation in Earth's rigid
outer shell, the lithosphere, is commonly localized into faults and shear zones,
rather than distributed over wide distances, is a fundamental question in
geodynamics. These localized faults and shear zones are unique to planet Earth
and are the reason parts of Earth exhibit rigid, plate-like behavior, in
contrast to the more distributed deformation typically observed on other
planets. Decades of observation of faults and shear zones where they cut the
crust and upper mantle reveals that they are almost always associated with a
significant reduction in grain size, which suggests that grain size reduction
may be one of the most efficient mechanisms of localizing deformation. This
project investigates mechanisms of grain size reduction in mantle rocks.
Specific questions to be addressed include: under what conditions does grain
size reduction lead to localization in mantle rocks? By what processes does the
grain size reduction cause localization? And how long will the localization last
on geological timescales? These questions will be addressed through integrated
rock deformation experiments on olivine as well as detailed microstructural
analysis of the experimentally deformed products.