* 1249016
* SBIR Phase I:  EI/ES6: Low Power Consumption Digital IC Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Richard Rubinstein, Granite Mountain Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Program (SBIR) Phase I project commercializes a
technology that reduces the energy consumption in digital electronics on average
by a factor of three. The solution applies across the complete semiconductor
marketplace. The power advantages are derived based on designing multi-
synchronous digital electronics. A next generation design flow is developed for
multi-synchronous systems based on a novel method called relative timing.
Relative timing enables the application of the standard single clock frequency
Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools and flows to be seamlessly applied to
the design of multiple timing domains in a single digital integrated circuit. No
modifications to the standard cell libraries are required. Some additional EDA
is necessary to support the extended concurrency and synchronization provided by
additional multi-synchronous circuit Intellectual Property (IP) primitives.
These IP blocks enable lower power, reduced area, and higher performance than
single frequency designs. Timing constraints in these multi-synchronous systems
are based on formal verification and therefore are proven correct and complete.
System design productivity is enhanced due to design modularity. This project
validates the method by developing a product-ready semiconductor design that
demonstrates a significant competitive advantage in power, area, and performance
against a traditional single frequency design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project addresses the need for reduced energy consumption in digital electronics
and is rooted in the exponential growth in transistors on integrated circuits.
Previously, as designs became power limited, new transistor technologies were
introduced. Each logic family provided lower power and better performance. No
new transistor technology is on the horizon, making design contributions to
energy efficiency critical. The localized efficiency of multi-synchronous design
is one of very few design methods that provide significant energy reduction.
Successful commercialization will result in this technology being applied across
the semiconductor industry to products ranging from performance cloud compute
servers to medical electronics and sensors. Industry wide growth will occur
through EDA and custom circuit IP products that enable the development of multi-
synchronous architectures. Open market and strategic partnerships with world
class semiconductor companies for training, consulting, and early product
development will reduce early risk and develop market acceptance. Ultra-low
power medical applications such as digital hearing aid devices particularly
benefit from multi-synchronous technology. Increased battery life reduces
product cost and improves the quality of life for seniors and the disabled.
Similarly, ultra-low power biomedical wireless sensors likewise provide societal
benefit.