* 1249134
* EAGER: New approach to rational design of efficient electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in hydrogen fuel cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Sergey Stolbov, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2013
* USD 89,194.00

Fuel cells are devices for direct conversion of the chemical energy of a fuel
into electricity through electrochemical reactions. If successful, practical
fuel cells would be a key enabling technology for movement to a green economy.
However successful application of fuel cells has been hindered by factors
relating to the kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction. Expensive platinum-
based catalysts seem to be required to catalyze these oxygen reduction
reactions. Platinum is of course rare and expensive and is susceptible to
poisoning by molecules such as carbon monoxide, leading to reduced catalyst
lifetimes. Despite many decades of research, very few non-precious metal
catalysts have been found with promising oxygen reduction catalytic activity and
none have exhibited sufficient performance stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; One
difficulty in developing new cost-effective materials which are better catalysts
for ORR is that there are a limited set of elements that can endure the reaction
environment of the PEM FC, which is highly acidic and at high operating
potential. These elements are platinum, iridium, gold and palladium, all
precious and rare. To reduce the costliness of these electrode materials,
studies have taken place on the use of platinum-based alloys or platinum
monolayers on platinum-free substrates. Success has been limited due to the
necessity of high platinum percentage in these alloys. Nonetheless, these
studies offer information useful in understanding the relationship between
composition, geometry, surface electronic structure, and the ORR activity. Given
this data, many combinatorial computational screening experiments for new
materials have been made. These experiments lack a rational basis in general,
and do not add much to the understanding of the factors controlling performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Sergey Stolbov at the University of Central Florida
proposes to use rational material design approaches to direct his computational
catalyst studies. Several selected materials and composites have been chosen for
this initial study. The work is based on earlier published computational results
pointing to multiple metal approaches. Instead of platinum, silver is selected
as the main electrode material. Although somewhat less stable to the reaction
medium, the Stolbov's calculations have indicated that supporting the metal on a
suitable substrate will increase the stability of the top layer to the fuel-cell
chemical conditions. Furthermore, Stolbov has computational results which
suggest that this substrate material may help tune the performance in the ORR
reaction. A third metal may be added to further optimize the stability and
behavior of this electrode sandwich. The PI, a female research associate, and a
graduate student will conduct appropriate computation for the following sandwich
systems: silver/ruthenium/niobium, silver/niobium, silver/tungsten,
silver/molybdenum, and silver/chromium nitride. What will result from this EAGER
award is a set of computations and data which will be used in the subsequent
fabrication of these sandwich electrodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS
&lt;br/&gt;The PI and associates are providing these computational directions to
a group at Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is attempting to fabricate and
evaluate these electrode systems predicted by the rational computational
approach. A working relationship is already present, and these new materials
will be subject to evaluation by these experts in the course of their program on
fuel cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems with PEM FCs are well-known and
correctly characterized by the PI. Several agencies have invested many dollars
in research to circumvent these problems. No solution is yet in hand. Stolbov
proposes an interesting approach and has dialed the initial experimentation to
accommodate the question of electrode expense. He believes the computational
results will also read on the stability of the materials to the fuel-cell
reaction medium, and will also allow for performance optimization based on
composition. The PI realizes the evaluation will require expertise that is not
available in his group, and has arranged for a recognized research group to
actualize the results of the computations. Thus, if successful, the results may
truly be transformative, and further rational design through computation may
offer even better solutions to the PEM FC electrode problem. This approach may
be viewed as high-risk in that the computational studies may lead only to
performance or material stability that is no better than the current precious
metal electrode approach. However if successful, the rewards will truly be worth
the investment in this EAGER proposal.