* 1249494
* EAGER: Nitrogen-Selective Membrane for Carbon Capture with Simultaneous Ammonia Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Jennifer Wilcox, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2013
* USD 25,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1249494&lt;br/&gt;Wilcox,
Jennifer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
represents a continuation of the first attempts to synthesize and test membranes
that selectively separate N2 from gas mixtures by Professor Jennifer Wilcox at
Stanford University. This novel, crosscutting technology will have numerous
applications at the industrial scale, including CO2 capture from flue gas,
natural gas purification, air separation, and ammonia synthesis. In the proposed
work, metallic membranes made from alloys of ruthenium and earth-abundant Group
V metals, such as vanadium and niobium, are proposed for catalytic selective N2
separation. The effort includes both theoretical modeling with electronic
structure theory calculations and experimental testing using a high-temperature
benchscale membrane reactor. Including both theory and experiment will allow for
the design of a metallic membrane material with optimal selectivity and
permeability for a given application. The strength of the modeling component to
this work is that many alloys can be screened with only the most promising
candidates synthesized and tested. The computations by Wilcox predict the alloys
with Ru will allow for an increase in transport through the
membrane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An EAGER award was made last year to carry out
this potentially exciting experimentation. A bench-scale high-temperature
membrane reactor was designed and built to investigate N2 permeabilities and
selectivities of membrane foils comprised of Nb and V metals and their
&lt;br/&gt;varying-composition alloys with Ru. The PI has been able to measure
N2 flux and permeance using 40 m-thick membrane foils of pure V and Nb supplied
by a vendor (Goodfellow). However, there have been significant challenges
associated with material synthesis of the VRu and NbRu alloys, despite the
thermodynamic stability of the bcc phase up to 40 at. % Ru in each of these
alloys. Two different vendors, i.e.,the Materials Preparation Center at Ames
Laboratory and Goodfellow, were asked to synthesize RuV and RuNb alloys at
varying compositions. Despite their efforts, neither was able to fabricate
alloys of varying compositions into micron-thick foils due to the brittleness of
the alloys. This prevented the evaluations at the heart of the Project from
being made. An alternative vendor and fabrication methodology has been found.
The PI will be working with Dr. Kent Coulter of Southwest Research Institute to
sputter deposit alloys of V/Nb with Ru on porous Hastelloy X supports. This
EAGER proposal allows for the fabrications to be conducted and the preliminary
data to be taken to allow completion of the proof of concept.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
the results of the proposed work are many. Carbon dioxide abatement from point
sources such as coal-fired power plants through the design of cost-effective
membrane technology will result in a decrease of CO2 emitted into the
atmosphere. In addition to carboncapture, this technology may provide a route to
carry out the ammonia synthesis process at atmospheric pressures, adding huge
savings to the agricultural industry. Nearly half of the hydrogen produced
globally is used for ammonia synthesis, which is primarily used for agriculture,
a demand that is directly proportional to world population increase. Fertilizers
are one of the most important factors in securing sufficient global food
production. Through the application of selective-N2 membrane technology, ammonia
could be produced at a lower energy cost than the traditional high-pressure
Haber-Bosch process and the ammonia can be used directly to advance the
agriculture industry.