* 1249787
* EAGER: Plasma-Soft Matter interactions: Towards understanding the effect of nonequilibrium, cold plasma on liquid phase chemical reactions in cells using novel chemical sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Raoul Kopelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 69,531.00

1249787&lt;br/&gt;Foster&lt;br/&gt;Plasma medicine is a new and emerging
subfield of healthcare in which ionized gas (plasma) is used for the purpose of
therapy and the treatment of disease. Because the ionized gas or plasma is
produced at normal atmospheric pressure and room temperature, it can readily be
applied to injured or diseased human tissue. The scope of plasma medicine
includes 1) sterilization of medical instruments or human tissue?directly
addressing ?super bugs? such as flesh eating bacteria 2) wound healing 3) dental
care?from tooth cleaning to root canals 4) topical skin treatment 5) anti-fungal
therapies 6) treatment of chronic disease such as Crohn?s syndrome 7) management
of blood coagulation 8) cosmetic surgery, and even 9) the treatment of cancer.
It is clear that plasma medicine holds great potential and new vistas for the
field of medicine in general. While the transformational potential of plasmas
for therapy and sterilization in the medical field is well documented, a
systematic investigation into the effects of plasma irradiation on living tissue
has yet to be carried out. Missing is a systematic study that truly elucidates
the healing mechanisms. Further it can be argued that lacking are adequate tools
necessary to observe and measure the plasma-induced changes within cells (soft
matter) directly. This research aims to differentiate between the cause and the
effect of plasma exposure on cell chemistry by identifying the plasma species
that are incident on and returning from biological tissues treated by plasmas,
and characterizing the plasma-driven reactions within the cell itself. It is
this plasma-soft matter interaction that is of paramount importance. In this
investigation, free-standing, chemistry-sensitive nano-probes injected into the
cells under study will be used to investigate and quantify intracellular
chemical changes brought on by plasma exposure. Changes in fluorescence signal
from the injected nano-probes dispersed within the cell reflect specific changes
in internal cell conditions such as pH level, oxygen, or radical concentration.
The ionized gas source to be used in this research is a ?cold? plasma jet. The
jet is highly collimated and highly directional, making application to the cell
substrate relatively straightforward. Internal cell changes will be correlated
with plasma conditions, which in turn will be characterized using microwave and
optical diagnostics. The proposed methodology is novel and groundbreaking in
that it paves the way for real time analysis of the effect of plasma on cell
chemistry thereby leading to an understanding of the curative properties of
plasmas. This research effort is high payoff in that it has the potential to lay
the foundation for a direct assessment of plasma-induced conditions within the
cell as a function of plasma exposure time, thereby truly quantifying and
ultimately understanding the effect of plasma exposure on the cell.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed work is broad in that it
investigates a novel approach to assessing effects induced at the intercellular
level when living cells are exposed to plasma. The data obtained in this study
is expected to provide a basis for understanding the therapeutic effects
associated with plasma medicine. The understanding gained from this effort will
also be useful in tailoring plasma therapy equipment as the relationship between
the plasma generator settings and effects induced at the cellular level will be
well quantified. To date, plasma medicine development has been somewhat
?Edisonian? in approach. While in any new and emerging field, this approach can
be effective early on, to obtain an understanding of mechanisms involved from a
human therapy standpoint, diagnostics are needed to guide the development and
provide the foundations for predictive theory. The effort is expected to
contribute to the growth and potential mainstreaming of the exciting new field
of plasma medicine by providing a direct, near real-time diagnostics for
measuring plasma-induced effects within the cell itself. This work contributes
to the field of healthcare as it has been demonstrated that plasma medicine
among other things clearly enhances wound healing. Outpatient wound treatment is
a many-billion dollar field worldwide (20 billion dollars annually in the U.S.
alone) addressing those who suffer from chronic wounds (diabetics for
example)?nearly 6 million in the US alone.