* 1249459
* Collaborative Research:  Investigation of Anion Incompatibility in the Ca10(PO4)6(OH,F,Cl)2 Apatite Atomic Arrangement
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* John Hughes, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2016
* USD 33,982.00

Apatite, Ca10(PO4)6(OH,F,Cl)2, is the tenth most abundant mineral on Earth and
one with fundamental importance in geology, materials science, medicine,
dentistry, pollutant mitigation, and as the foundation of the Earth's phosphorus
cycle; indeed, all hard tissue of the human body except small parts of the inner
ear are made of apatite. All of these applications of apatite require
understanding of the atomic arrangement of the mineral. Despite the extensive
multidisciplinary literature on apatite crystal chemistry, the atomic
arrangements of members of the (OH,F,Cl) binary and ternary systems are not well
understood and our current knowledge is full of inconsistencies that must be
resolved; apatite is one of the rare minerals for which the atomic arrangement
of the solid solutions cannot be predicted from the end-member
arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixing of the end-member atomic arrangements
suggests, for example, that binary members of the system must undergo symmetry
breaking, possess immiscibility gaps, incorporate essential vacancies with an
unknown method of charge balance, and/or possess anion positions that are not
currently recognized. This multi-faceted proposed study will couple mineral
synthesis and detailed compositional characterization with single-crystal X-ray
structure analysis and Magic-Angle-Spinning Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
spectroscopic studies in order to elucidate the nature of solid solution among
and between the OH, F, Cl ternary apatites, and provide a better fundamental
understanding of anionic substitution and phase behavior. The results of this
study will have applications in the fields of geology, materials science,
medicine, and dentistry. A proof-of-concept study demonstrates that miscibility
along the F-Cl join is achieved by the creation of at least four anion sites in
the F-Cl anion column, and confirms the efficacy of the proposed synthesis and
analysis methods.