* 1249776
* EAR-PF: Structure of the North American craton from joint inversion of receiver functions, body waves, and surface waves
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Robert Porritt, Porritt                 Robert         W
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Robert Porritt has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral fellowship to
carry out a research and education plan at the University of Southern
California. He will study the internal structure of the North American Craton
through seismic imaging methods. The project aims to delineate sub-horizontal
layering in the continental lithosphere, which would indicate formation of the
craton by successively stacking oceanic lithosphere. To accomplish this,
receiver function, surface wave, and body wave imaging techniques will be
brought together in a consistent joint inversion framework. The three methods
have complementary sensitivities such that where one method is ambiguous; the
other two provide unique constraints. Together, the joint inversion will
constrain velocity structure and highlight internal layers. The project will
start by imaging the Hudson's Bay region at the heart of the craton and then
will expand to include the contiguous United States by utilizing the USArray of
EarthScope. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanism of creating long standing
continental crust is an outstanding fundamental question in earth science.
Seismic wavespeed models provide physical constraints necessary for placing
geochemical observations, initiating geodynamic models, and can be compared with
other geophysical observations. To facilitate this cross-disciplinary work, the
models generated through this work will be readily available to the public and
other researchers. The education arm of the fellowship contains elements at both
the graduate and undergraduate level. Competitive proposals for interns will be
submitted to the IRIS Internship and SCEC Internship programs to pair
enthusiastic undergraduates with the project. Additional undergraduate outreach
will include interaction with a USC field course in Morocco. The graduate level
component is through the USArray short course, which brings together graduate
students from across the globe to spread ideas and best practices for seismic
data processing with the insurmountable dataset being generated by EarthScope
and its USArray component.