* 1249034
* SBIR Phase I:  DNA Laser Printing for Low Cost Gene & Genome Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Anselm Levskaya, Cambrian Genomics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project attempts to
radically reduce the cost of error-free oligonucleotides for use with gene
synthesis. DNA Synthesis of large molecules is done by the assembly of many
short oligonucleotide fragments of DNA 60-100bp in length. Currently, each DNA
fragment is synthesized in relatively small numbers at an excessive macroscopic
scale that incurs a large manufacturing overhead in its production costs. This
sets a high cost floor for the entire DNA synthesis process. One route to making
cheaper oligonucleotides is to synthesize them in large sets on microarrays.
However, array-synthesized DNA is both extremely error-prone and produced as
dilute, complex mixtures. This proposed project will use massively parallel
sequencers to sequence clonally amplified copies of DNA species sampled from the
microarray in order to sort every species apart from one another as well as to
identify correctly synthesized oligonucleotides from incorrect ones. Further, it
is proposed to use focused laser pulses in a custom laser ejection device to
eject and recover desired subsets of perfect oligos from micron-scale sequenced
colonies into multiwell plates for assembly into genes. The goal is to be able
to recover tens of thousands of sequence-verified oligonucleotides in several
hours from sequencer flowcells.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to achieve truly
disruptive cost decreases in the DNA synthesis of arbitrary genetic information.
With the abundance of sequencing data, it is possible to imagine entering a new
era of "constructive" biology, where in addition to classical reductive
experiments on components, it will be possible to test our understanding of
genetic- and protein-based circuits by synthesizing new designs and measuring
their discrepancy from predicted behaviors. The low-cost industrial production
of arbitrary synthetic DNA has the potential to change the practice of biology
such that it becomes cost effective to engineer whole genetic pathways and even
genomes, accelerating the development of bioengineering, synthetic biomaterials
production, as well as medical and research applications.