* 1249141
* EAGER:  PULSE Project Management
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Mark Brodl, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 253,768.00

Trinity University of San Antonio, TX is awarded a grant to support the
Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE). PULSE will bring
together 40 Vision and Change Leadership Fellows in a year-long, facilitated
effort to identify the environment necessary for constant and robust evolution
in undergraduate life science education in response to the call for action
articulated in the Vision and Change report published in 2011. Fellows will be
selected from among our nation's most driven, passionate, and accomplished
chairs, former chairs, and deans - people in a position to initiate and sustain
change. The process starts with a workshop to identify approaches and coordinate
efforts. It is followed by an intense period of "field work" where initial ideas
are tried, assessed and refined. And it culminates in a second workshop aimed at
refining thinking, tools, documents, and approaches. The goal is to understand
and establish an environment in departments and institutions that has the right
selective pressures to foster the constant evolution of learning approaches for
undergraduate life science education.

The PI team from Trinity University proposes to support this complex, year-long
activity by serving as mentors for the Fellows and by coordinating communication
and logistics between NSF and KnowInnovation (KI). KI will play a crucial role
in overall project oversight, PULSE website development, and assistance in
selecting the Vision and Change Leadership Fellows. The website, in particular,
will be the location for announcing the PULSE project, collecting application
information in collaboration with the American Institute for Biological
Sciences, and facilitating communication during the eight month fieldwork period
via discussion groups, blogs, file sharing, social networking between the
Fellows and between Fellows and the life sciences community at large. The
Project Manager at KI will be responsible for the day-to-day oversight of this
effort and for coordinating communication among the PULSE partners. The
experience of KI is a strong addition to this unique and exciting program
designed to mobilize change in undergraduate life sciences education. The award
fits the EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) because of its
high potential for producing an implementation framework for transforming
biology departments within the nation's colleges and universities.

The results of the Vision and Change Leadership Fellows project will move
institutional reform efforts forward. Fellows will be a diverse group of leaders
from research universities, comprehensive/public universities, liberal arts
colleges, and community colleges. The proposed activities are expected to make a
significant contribution to an unprecedented transformation of the undergraduate
biology education community's understanding of institutional barriers to change
and of strategies for overcoming them. It is possible that the focus on
department chairs for catalyzing educational reforms in biology might be a model
for other disciplines as they work on issues of attracting and retaining
undergraduate students in STEM disciplines.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.