* 1249946
* IGERT: Coasts and Communities - Natural and Human Systems in Urbanizing Environments
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Robert Chen, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 09/30/2019
* USD 3,065,143.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
prepares Ph.D. students at the University of Massachusetts Boston with the
skills to understand the interactions between natural and human systems and to
develop appropriate policy solutions for urban and urbanizing environments. By
emphasizing interdisciplinary collaboration and communication, this program aims
to enable trainees to apply their innovative and sustainable solutions across
geographical, political, and economic contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This program aims to increase
understanding of the ways in which human activities impact coastal systems as
well as the ways in which changes in coastal ecosystems affect human systems.
Trainees will conduct research both in the Boston Harbor watersheds and in the
Horn of Africa, in order to assess and address the environmental risks that
emerge when natural and human systems interact. The program will engage four
Ph.D. programs at the University of Massachusetts Boston ? environmental
science, environmental biology, global governance and human security, and
organizations and social change ? in the study of these two world regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This traineeship will promote
environmental stewardship and innovation on a global scale by supporting
comparative research in the Horn of Africa and in Boston. Trainees will learn
from a diverse range of disciplines and perspectives as they become effective
problem solvers of complex global environmental issues. Additionally, as a
minority-serving institution, the University of Massachusetts Boston will
attract underrepresented students to this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is
an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
establish new models for graduate education and training in a fertile
environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries, and to engage students in understanding the processes by which
research is translated to innovations for societal benefit.