* 1249250
* RAPID: Flood-related pathogen risk models appropriate for low resource settings
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Justin Remais, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

1249250&lt;br/&gt;Remais&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent severe flooding in southern
China has affected millions of people in Hunan province and has raised the
threat of waterborne infectious diseases. Pathogens can be mobilized by flood
conditions as urban sewerage systems and rural latrines overflow, and manure
from agricultural animals is washed into rivers and streams. This RAPID project
aims to improve our understanding of, and our ability to predict, the
microbiological risks that follow a major flood event. Emergency responders are
faced with the significant challenge of estimating the scale "in time and space"
of microbiological risk following a flooding event, especially where
environmental data are limited. At the same time, questions arise as to when
elevated microbiological risks return to normal - that is, when is it safe to
return to flooded areas? The researchers will collaborate closely with
colleagues in Hunan and neighboring provinces to develop models capable of
estimating the risk of Cryptosporidium exposure in drinking water following the
flood. Cryptosporidium is an important organism to study because it is a high
priority pathogen for US and Chinese risk managers, it is a documented cause of
acute diarrhea during floods, it persists in the environment under harsh
conditions, and it is highly resistant to disinfectants used to treat drinking
water. Even under non-flood conditions, the pathogen threatens delivery of safe
water in China, the US, and in drinking water systems throughout the world. The
emergency situation in Hunan provides a narrow window of data availability in
which environmental monitoring data can be obtained at key locations throughout
the flood zone. These data will be used to develop and evaluate models of flood
discharge, and Cryptosporidium contamination, fate and transport. The risk of
Cryptosporidium oocyst ingestion through drinking water will be calculated under
flood conditions and compared to nominal flow conditions to assess the role of
the flood in elevating or lowering risk. Researchers will examine the role of
specific landscapes in attenuating or intensifying risk under flood conditions.
Finally, the models will be used to isolate the role of specific processes (like
dilution of pathogens under heavy flows) that drive flood-related risks, and the
time required for Cryptosporidium oocyst concentration to return to pre-flood
will be examined in relation to the location of sources of contamination and
factors that affect Cryptosporidium survival in the water
column.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the project will be highly relevant to
devising strategies to moderate future flood risks in flood-prone regions. The
researchers will develop new tools for the modeling and prediction of flood-
related microbiological risks that will improve our understanding of how extreme
events can alter microbiological water quality. The research will immediately
benefit the residents of southern China through improved characterization of
flood-related risks in the flood-prone regions of Hunan. Significant benefits
will also accrue to populations affected by flooding in the US and elsewhere.
Determining when it was safe to return post-flooding was a challenge following
Hurricane Katrina, the Mississippi river floods in 2011 and in many similar
circumstances historically. Thus, the fundamental advancements of scientific
knowledge on flood-related microbiological risks from this project will have
benefits outside of Asia, improving our response to flood conditions in the US
and elsewhere through improved understanding of how pathogens spread during
floods, and how the associated microbiological risks can be minimized.