* 1249504
* EAGER: Designing a molecular scale spin-switch
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Ranjit Pati, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 69,128.00

Intellectual merit: With the silicon based computing devices approaching its
fundamental limit of miniaturization, quantum controlled molecular scale
electronics bears the only possible hope to meet the physical challenges imposed
by quantum mechanics in the ultimate miniaturization of electronic devices.
Learning how to control the electron transport in molecular systems offered by
electron?s spin degrees of freedom would add a new dimension to the emerging
field of molecular-scale electronics. There are several advantages. First, the
weak spin-orbit and hyperfine interaction in carbon based molecular systems with
atoms having low atomic numbers (Z) lead them to have a longer spin coherence
length than that in conventional metals and semiconductors. Second, the low cost
production, chemical flexibility, and self-assembly approach offer tremendous
advantages for molecules as a viable interconnects for spin transport. Third,
since spin is the ultimate logic bit where we can store information,
manipulating the spin in a molecular circuit for a desired device behavior would
be beneficial for computing as both information storing and processing can be
integrated within a single chip. The objectives of the proposed project are to
explore an innovative architecture for a molecular scale spin switch and
identify the basic molecular building blocks for this device. The goal is in
fundamental understanding of the spin modulated electron transport which would
form the basis for functional device design. Transition metals like Ni and Co
will be used as spin polarizer and analyzer (filter), molecular complex with
low-Z atoms will be used as a bridge between the magnetic electrodes, and
organo-metallic molecule and carbon nanotube structures for possible
interconnect. The reason behind the choice of organo-metallic molecular complex
as the interconnect lies in the fact that it can easily tune the electronic spin
state of the metal link in the molecule by gate field providing additional
electrical control of spin polarized electronic current-an effect prerequisite
for a spin switch. Carbon nanotube (CNT) will be another candidate for spin
transport as spin-flip scattering length in CNT has been reported to be much
higher. First principles density functional theory together with a parameter
free single particle Green?s function approach will be used to provide
predictive capability to understand the controlled transport of spin polarized
electrons in this device. The role of electronic structure and magnetic
configurations at the interface and at the contact points will be systematically
studied to optimize maximum modulation in magneto-resistance for device design.
The proposed feasibility study will guide the future theoretical and
experimental endeavors towards a successful realization of such a device.

Broader Impact: This project will yield several broader impacts: a) Identify a
novel architecture for a molecular spin-switch for multi-functional applications
ranging from ultra-small magnetic sensors to spin logic based molecular
computing that goes far beyond the technology roadmap for the year 2020; b)
Develop fundamental understanding of spin modulated electron transport in this
device, which will be helpful in guiding the future theoretical and experimental
efforts aimed at realizing such devices; c) Stimulate multi-disciplinary
research and collaborations; d) Train graduate students in getting first-hand
experience in first-principles modeling; e) Provide avenues to integrate
education with research; f) broad dissemination of project results (both
research and education) and long-term high-reward benefits to society. Since the
proposed project is expected to venture into an emerging research idea in
advanced molecular spintronics, it satisfies the important criteria for EAGER
grant.