* 1249406
* EAGER: A Teachable Robot for Mathematics Learning in Middle School Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Winslow Burleson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 265,998.00

In robotics activities, students are theorized to benefit from "learning-by-
doing" activities where they set their own goals, but in practice, these
activities have failed to produce the expected effects on STEM outcomes. To
improve learning from robotics, this project will leverage teachable agent
technologies, where students learn about a domain by teaching a computer agent.
The agent interacts with students to expose misconceptions and encourage them to
persist in the face of failure. By integrating the structure of teachable agents
with the exploratory and engaging features of learning from robotics, the
project will enhance the benefits of both approaches. The investigators will
implement a robot that students can teach about the concepts they are learning
in their middle school mathematics class. They will engage in design exercises
with teachers and students to identify features of the robot that might be
particularly important for improving student motivation and learning. Finally,
they will conduct two studies, one in the laboratory and one in the classroom,
to explore how students react to the robot in a realistic setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project will improve understanding
of what features students respond to in a teachable robot for mathematics, and
of the potential educational benefits such a robot might have. The project will
make a technological contribution by inventing methods for integrating teachable
agents and robotic learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The project will impact middle school students from underrepresented groups who
will help design and test the teachable robot, exposing them to new technologies
and engaging aspects of STEM careers. The project will also lead to a better
understanding of the impact of teachable robots in the classroom and pave the
way for these technologies to be adopted more widely in education.