* 1249177
* Greater Philadelphia Region LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort X) Project
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2016
* USD 987,000.00

Drexel University, as a representative of the Greater Philadelphia Region Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Philadelphia AMP), requests Bridge
to the Doctorate (BTD) funding for a two-year period for a Cohort X program, to
expand and intensify the consortium's on-going efforts to substantially increase
the number of qualified African American, Hispanic and Native American
(hereafter referred to as "minority") students entering graduate study in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), attaining doctoral
degrees, and moving into the professoriate. The Philadelphia AMP represents a
diverse alliance of nine institutions consisting of public and private, 2- and
4-year research and non-research, Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and majority institutions.

The New Jersey Institute of Technology has been selected to host the Bridge to
the Doctorate Cohort X activities because of: 1) the key role it has played in
the successful development and implementation of the Alliance's BTD Cohort I-IX
programs, 2) its institution-wide commitment to diversity in STEM at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels, and 3) its advancements in the research
enterprise. The goals of Philadelphia AMP's Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort X)
project are to: (1) recruit twelve students into Master's or PhD degree programs
at the New Jersey Institute of Technology; (2) retain these students through the
completion of the Master's or PhD program, providing the Master's students with
full qualifications for admission into a highly regarded PhD program in their
chosen STEM specialty with full financial support; (3) enable the Master's
students' admission and smooth transition into a PhD program; and (4) monitor
all student progress through PhD completion into the professoriate and beyond.

Intellectual Merit includes management expertise and advancing knowledge and
understanding in the STEM fields. The proposed Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort
X) program rests on a solid foundation of partnerships, resources, effective
practices and experiences derived from seventeen (17) years of collaboration,
cooperation and concerted efforts focused on minority student achievement under
the current Philadelphia AMP and Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort I-IX
programs. In particular, this experience has helped the Alliance's STEM graduate
programs mature considerably, to the benefit of all STEM graduate students, not
just the BTD Fellows. This synergy, which would continue with the proposed
Cohort X program, leverages NSF's investment in a powerful and innovative way.
The proposed effort builds upon the existing infrastructure to advance
underrepresented minority students into participation in engineering and the
sciences at the highest levels. Philadelphia AMP has centered its efforts on
catalyzing changes in institutional, departmental, and organizational culture
and practices in order to achieve sustainable and significant increases in
recruitment, retention, and degree attainment in STEM disciplines for minority
students.