* 1249202
* Getting the PhD 2012-2014
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2015
* USD 987,000.00

The Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program at the University of Florida (UF) is
funded primarily by the National Science Foundation through the Florida-Georgia
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (FG-LSAMP) with additional
support from UF Office of Research. The UF Graduate School directs the program
with the assistance of the four UF colleges with STEM disciplines: the Colleges
of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Engineering, Agricultural and Life Sciences, and
Medicine. The BD will integrate students into UF's research networks and
education programs to ensure that they are properly trained, mentored and
developed for research careers in the STEM fields. UF is strongly committed to
increasing diversity at all levels, with a particular emphasis on enhancing
diversity in PhD programs and expanding the PhD student population. The BD
program at UF ensures Fellows at least five years of support. It provides a
variety of professional development components, including regularly scheduled
meetings with the UF BD cohort and the University of South Florida BD cohorts,
to help retain the participants and facilitate the Fellows' transitions into the
scientific workforce. BD Fellows at UF will benefit from the support of the
campus community that is committed to providing them with the assistance they
need to complete their PhDs and make the transition into professional careers in
STEM fields. The expectation is that the UF BD will develop the Fellows as a
well-bonded cohort that is able to move successfully from undergraduate to
graduate programs, and then move into professional positions in the workforce
upon completion of the PhD.

The broader impacts embedded in the overall design and structure of the UF BD
Program fosters activities that benefit the fellows and the broader community.
Through linkages with numerous K-12 classroom activities, the BD Program will
encourage youth and incoming college students to consider STEM disciplines and
careers. The BD at UF also will cultivate a climate that will allow a number of
the Fellows to enter the professoriate and further diversify STEM departments in
colleges and universities. Such individuals will become role models and mentors
for the next generation of STEM students.