* 1249412
* Collaborative Research: Virginia's Volcanoes: a Window into Eastern North America Mantle Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Esteban Gazel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2018
* USD 271,612.00

The recent magnitude 5.8 earthquakes in Mineral, VA, impacted major metropolitan
areas on the East Coast of the U.S. and sparked a need to better understand the
geologic characteristics the of Eastern North America Margin (ENAM). A group of
more than 100 volcanic bodies approximately 47-49 million years old exposed in
Virginia and West Virginia are the youngest known eruptions on the East Coast of
the U.S. These magmas and the fragments of rock they collected from the crust
and mantle during their ascent and eruption are the only direct samples of the
crust and the mantle in recent geologic times. The results from this study will
be used in conjunction with data from the EarthScope Transportable Array of
seismometers currently being deployed along the East Coast as well as other
seismic studies to create a comprehensive picture of the state of the crust and
mantle underneath the Eastern U.S., providing context for the potential of
future seismic hazards. This project will support graduate and undergraduate
research at Virginia Tech and James Madison University. The proximity of the
field site to both universities makes field characterization and sampling highly
accessible. A field trip for middle and high school students and an outreach
course through the Lifelong Learning Institute will be developed in addition to
course materials for general education. An exhibit will be created for the
Museum of Geociences at Virginia Tech. Data from this research will be shared
with the public, the GeoPRISMS and EarthScope communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few constraints currently exist on the composition and
structure of the asthenosphere and lithosphere under the ENAM. Geochemical and
petrologic data are critical for interpretation of seismic data in the region
and understanding the long-term, continued evolution of the rift-to-drift
transition for ENAM, as well as for rift margins worldwide. A swarm of Eocene
volcanic bodies exposed in Virginia and West Virginia are the youngest known
magmatism in the Eastern U.S. and are the only petrologic window into Cenozoic
processes in the mantle and lower crust in ENAM. We hypothesize that: 1) The
Eocene magmas were generated through adiabatic melting of shallow asthenosphere
(e.g., lithospheric delamination, edge-driven convection, or effects from deep
subduction), 2) Melting is related to the lithospheric response to the breakup
of Pangaea and/or Farallon subduction that continued under this passive margin
at least through the Eocene. We will test these hypotheses with an array of
geochemical, spectroscopic, and petrologic observations and modeling.
Geochronology of the melts and basement xenoliths will evaluate melting
processes, constrain the structure and evolution of the lithosphere, and
evaluate the age of the volcanic activity relative to the age of the xenoliths.
The EarthScope Transportable Array is currently being deployed along the East
Coast through 2013 and the location of our project lies within the ?Richmond
Transect? proposed for concentrated seismic studies. Our data will produce a
vertical cross-section deep into the ENAM that will provide important
constraints on basement and mantle composition, lithospheric and asthenospheric
structures, and volatile contents for large-scale geodynamic and seismic
studies.