* 1249370
* EAGER:   Comparison of Amino-Acid and Bulk-Tissue Stable Isotope Techniques for Analyzing Modern and Historical Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* James Thorp, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

Food web structure is an important indicator of ecosystem health because it
reflects both species richness and functional diversity. Recent attempts to use
compound-specific stable isotopes rather than bulk-tissue techniques to evaluate
food webs promise to improve understanding of food web dynamics and trophic
interactions. These new methods, which rely on amino acid isotope analyses, need
to be validated experimentally before this promising advance can be applied to
natural food webs. This study relies on a laboratory multi-level food chain
experiment to compare the ecological sensitivity and the costs and benefits of
new amino acid techniques and common bulk-tissue methods. The researchers will
create a realistic, four-level food chain in the laboratory that allows
consumers to integrate prey isotopic signatures into their tissues. At the end
of the experiment, both amino acid and bulk tissue stable isotopes will be
analyzed to determine whether amino acids provide a more accurate measure of
trophic position than bulk tissue methods.

The broader impacts of this project lie primarily in advancing a new method for
evaluating natural food webs. If successful, the method could eventually be
applied to terrestrial and aquatic communities, and would advance the general
field of food web ecology. It also could be applied to museum specimens,
allowing researchers to examine historical as well as contemporary food webs.