* 1249885
* Collaborative Research: A Late Cenozoic Record of Restraining Bend Initiation and Evolution along the Denali Fault at Mount McKinley, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Jeff Benowitz, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2016
* USD 193,965.00

This project targets the Mount McKinley restraining bend of the Denali fault in
Alaska in order to examine the linkages between structural slip rates and
regional exhumation rates and how restraining bends can form and evolve in a
strain-partitioned transpressional system. The highest mountain in North
America, Mount McKinley (6,196 m), is situated on the inside of a 17 degree bend
in the mapped trace of the Denali fault. North of the Denali fault, on the
outside of this bend, the highest peak is Peter's Dome (3,221 m) with elevations
rapidly decreasing away from the Denali fault to an aggradational basin less
than 15 km to the north. This topographic asymmetry suggests a strong structural
control on local exhumation patterns and that this restraining bend has been a
primary control on regional orogenic development for several million years. The
study will apply a multi-thermochronometer approach to constraining exhumation
rates and timing along the Mount McKinley restraining bend in conjunction with a
neotectonic/structural analysis of fault patterns and slip rates. The
researchers will employ radiocarbon, optically stimulated luminescence, and in-
situ terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide surface exposure dating techniques to
provide age control for the major deformed landforms in this study area.
Furthermore, insights from this study will be compared to the evolution of
complex fault geometries along other strike-slip faults and the recognition of
transient and persistent uplift/exhumation phenomena in the geologic
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major intracontinental strike-slip faults around
the world exhibit abrupt changes in the fault geometry over relatively short
distances, often occurring as bends or step-over zones between fault segments.
These zones of complex fault geometry are often associated with significant
uplift or subsidence adjacent to the fault. Understanding how the horizontal
displacement along the broader strike-slip system is partitioned into horizontal
and vertical components in these complex fault zones is an ongoing focus of
research in tectonics. In particular, contractional zones (i.e., restraining
bends) that result from a change in fault geometry along a strike-slip fault
require significant deformation adjacent to the fault for the crust to continue
along the path of long-term horizontal motion. Therefore, it would seem that
these zones would evolve toward a straight fault segment: yet restraining bends
persist. Developing new slip rate data for the Denali fault and adjacent faults
will provide key insights into the modern tectonic framework and constrain
potential boundaries of proposed crustal blocks. Furthermore, insights from this
study will: 1) allow comparison to the structural complexities along other
strike-slip faults such as the San Andreas and Alpine faults; 2) help further
understanding of how crustal blocks interact within broad deforming zones of
continental crust 3) aid the recognition of transient and persistent
uplift/exhumation phenomena in the geologic record. The research team will work
closely with educators at the Watershed School in Fairbanks, Alaska, to develop
educational plans and materials to foster student interest in science through
place-based education. The communication of the scientific advances made through
this project will be promoted through close collaboration with Denali National
Park and Preserve staff. With numerous previously unknown faults occurring in
this seismically-active region, results from this study will contribute
significantly to regional seismic hazard assessments.