* 1249281
* EAGER: Genetic Diversity and Population History in Svanetia, Northwestern Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Theodore Schurr, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2013
* USD 18,844.00

Dr. Theodore G. Schurr and doctoral candidate Aram Yardumian, both of the
University of Pennsylvania, will collaborate with Georgian researchers Dr. Lia
Bitadze (Laboratory for Anthropologic Studies, Institute of History and
Ethnology), Dr. David Chitanava (Institute of History and Ethnology), and Dr.
Shengelia (T'bilisi State Medical University) to initiate a long-term study of
genetic ancestry and ethnogenesis in Georgia. The goal is to develop a model for
the peopling of the region. While much is known about the various archaeological
horizons in Georgia and the South Caucasus, relatively little is known about the
biological and cultural relationships of Georgian ethnic groups with populations
from the Near East, Anatolia and the Russian steppe. Thus, the project will
elucidate the cultural, genetic and linguistic contributions to the diversity of
populations in Georgia.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will initially explore
the history of the Svan-speaking population in northwestern Georgia. The
American-Georgian team will collect genealogical information and DNA samples
from ~350 individuals in the three regions of Svanetia for genetic analysis, and
Georgian researchers will conduct concerted ethno-historical research into
Svanetian population history. The team will further examine the diversification
of Kartvelian languages in Georgia through historical linguistic methods, and
determine the extent to which patterns of genetic and linguistic diversity
correlate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this multidisciplinary project
will contribute to a better understanding of the pattern of genetic diversity in
Svanetia and assess the manner in which the current ethno-linguistic groups
might reflect deeper biological patterns within Georgia. For Svanetia, it is
hypothesized that a historical engagement between the ancient autochthonous
descendants of western Georgia, the movement of Kartvelian-speakers from
Anatolia, and the later arrival of North Caucasus steppe populations has
produced the ethnic diversity seen there today. This project will further
provide a foundation for long-term collaboration research with Georgian scholars
that will yield novel insights into the history of this region and the Caucasus
more broadly, and build on Georgian efforts to develop a more thorough picture
of its national history. In addition, funding this research supports the
education of an American graduate student.