* 1249434
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Tumor and Organs at Risk Motion: An Opportunity for Better DMLC IMRT Delivery Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Lech Papiez, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 240,612.00

The objective of this research is to develop algorithms and software for
treatment planning in intensity modulated radiation therapy under assumption of
tumor and healthy organs motion. The current approach to addressing tumor motion
in radiation therapy is to treat it as a problem and not as a therapeutic
opportunity. However, it is possible that during tumor and healthy organs motion
the tumor is better exposed for treatment, allowing for the prescribed dose
treatment of the tumor (target) while reducing the exposure of healthy organs to
radiation. The approach is to treat tumor and healthy organs motion as an
opportunity to improve the treatment outcome, rather than as an obstacle that
needs to be overcome. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The leading intellectual
merit of this proposal is to develop treatment planning and delivery algorithms
for motion-optimized intensity modulated radiation therapy that exploit
differential organ motion to provide a dose distribution that surpasses the
static case. This work will show that the proposed motion-optimized IMRT
treatment planning paradigm provides superior dose distributions when compared
to current state-of-the art motion management protocols. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Successful completion of the project will mark a major step for clinical
applications of intensity modulated radiation therapy and will help to improve
the quality of life of many cancer patients. The results could be integrated
within existing devices and could be used for training of students and
practitioners. The visualization software for dose accumulation could be used to
train medical students in radiation therapy treatment planning.