* 1249275
* CIF: EAGER:  Everlasting Security in Disadvantaged Wireless Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Dennis Goeckel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 141,939.00

This project develops a new approach to protecting information from interception
by adversaries in wireless communication networks, with a particular focus on
the scenario where an eavesdropper obtains a higher-quality version of the
transmitted signal than the desired recipient. The standard method of providing
protection in such a situation is to encrypt the information so that it is
beyond the eavesdropper's computational capabilities to decrypt the message;
this approach has met with longstanding critiques, including the lack of a
fundamental proof establishing the difficulty of the problem presented to the
adversary. An approach to everlasting security initiated in this project
exploits the non-commutativity of certain nonlinear operators: different
orderings of the same two nonlinear systems applied to the same input signal can
produce different outputs. This property is exploited for security in wireless
communication links by employing a short-term cryptographic key to force the
eavesdropper's signal to be subjected to nonlinear operations in the reverse
order of that of the signal at the desired recipient. The appropriate design of
the nonlinear systems yields differences in the signals at the desired recipient
and eavesdropper that can be exploited for everlasting secrecy - even when the
ephemeral cryptographic key is revealed to or broken by the eavesdropper
immediately after transmission. The development of this approach under
applicable system constraints and a comparison of the obtained security
performance to current approaches form the technical core of this project.

By establishing a new approach that expands the system conditions under which
everlasting security is obtained, a new avenue of research opens in this
critical area of wireless security. In particular, a security approach that
exploits characteristics of the eavesdropper's receiver rather than assumptions
of noise or loss on the propagation channel will provide an extra layer of
security that has not been exploited in current systems. Also, integral to the
project is the involvement of undergraduate and graduate students, and a
research experience for high school teachers will draw technical ideas from the
project. These activities provide workforce development in a critical area by
providing a compelling application and further broaden the impact of the
project.