* 1249200
* Understanding trafficking and membrane localization to re-engineer host and GPCR protein for improved expression
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Anne Robinson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2014
* USD 221,687.00

This NSF award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program
supports work to develop improved expression systems for integral membrane
proteins. Integral membrane proteins play critical roles in cell signaling, and
are implicated in a wide range of human diseases such as asthma, obesity,
cancer, heart disease, and chronic pain. Biophysical and biochemical studies of
membrane proteins require large quantities of purified protein; even more than
soluble proteins, because they need to be solubilized in detergent solutions.
Results for many classes of membrane proteins suggest that in traditional
expression systems, valuable targets of drug discovery and biochemical
importance will be understudied because researchers cannot make sufficient
protein. The goal of this research effort is to improve the expression of an
important class of membrane proteins, the G protein-coupled receptor family
(GPCRs). Specific aims are to identify cellular and molecular features of both
the proteins and expression host to achieve the highest level of active GPCRs
for structural and biophysical characterization. In addition, specific
educational examples will be developed for the undergraduate Heat and Mass
Transfer course. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the
laboratory, with particular efforts focused on representation from women and
under-represented groups.