* 1249235
* Archaeological Investigation of Mayan Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Lisa Lucero, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 119,184.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Lisa J. Lucero will bring
together a multidisciplinary team that include archaeologists, underwater
archaeologists, exploration divers, an ethnobotanist, a tropical tree
specialist, and a paleontologist from the U.S., Mexico, and Belize to examine
how ancient Maya settlement articulates with sacred landscape features in
addition to examining rainfall patterns and landscape
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Openings in the earth, such as caves and
pools, were sacred to the Maya as portals to the underworld or Xibalba. The Maya
left countless offerings in these portals to petition gods and ancestors to
bring forth rain and bountiful crops. At Cara Blanca in central Belize, there
are 25 openings in the earth in the form of pools (Pools 1-25). Its distance
from centers and relatively sparse but unique settlement (e.g., water temple and
sweatbaths) suggest it may have served as a pilgrimage center. Growing evidence
in the form of a Terminal Classic (c. 800-900 C.E.) water temple at Pool 1 with
a copious amount of water jars indicates that the Maya increased their visits to
Cara Blanca at the end of the Late Classic, perhaps in response to a series of
multiyear droughts that struck the Maya area between c. 800 and 900 C.E.
Further, previous dives at Pool 1 have yielded megafauna fossils, submerged
trees and freshwater shells that can be used to assess ancient climate and
landscape change through oxygen isotope analysis, radiocarbon dating, and
species identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goals in 2014 (April
30-June 30) are to conduct underwater excavations at two pools, continue
excavating the water temple at Pool 1, collect submerged fossils, fossil matrix
(gastropods, wood, soil) and tree limbs, map and explore a total of five
unexplored pools, and collect botanical specimens near pools to compare with
submerged trees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
will be to collect information about cultural landscapes, ceremonial life on the
surface and in the water, and ritual intensification. This project is unique in
both its multidisciplinary approach and focus on both the cultural and material
aspects of climate change and how the Maya responded to it. This project also
will address a topic that has been missing in southern lowland Maya studies -
the focus on water bodies as portals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the study is that results will be relevant today since the challenges the
Maya faced between 800 and 900 C.E. are similar to the ones at present with
accelerating global climate change. The international and multidisciplinary team
will include graduate students from the University of Illinois. The
investigations at Cara Blanca also set the stage for future fieldwork, including
additional diving expeditions to explore more of the 25 pools, continuing to
survey the transect along the pools, and excavating the sweatbaths, water
shrines, and other interesting settlement configurations. Results will be
disseminated through major peer review outlets (e.g., Latin American Antiquity,
Ancient Mesoamerica, Antiquity) and in Belize at the annual Belize Archaeology
Symposium.