* 1249556
* Travel Support for the 59th Session of the International Statistical Institute, Hong Kong
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Ronald Wasserstein, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 22,846.00

The American Statistical Association (ASA) will use this NSF award as a travel
grant for approximately 10 United States participants to attend the 59th Session
of the International Statistical Institute (ISI) in Hong Kong from August 25-30,
2013. The ISI meeting includes the meetings of the Bernoulli Society,
International Association for Official Statistics (IAOS), International
Association for Statistical Computing (IASC), International Association of
Survey Statisticians (IASS), and the International Association for Statistical
Education (IASE). Thus it is an umbrella meeting with sessions of interest for
thousands of statisticians. The travel grants will provide support to defray
transportation costs for individuals selected from institutions and non-profit
associations. An emphasis of the award is to encourage and provide the
opportunity for younger statisticians to participate in the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Participants will be notified of the availability of the travel grant
through Amstat News, a membership publication of the ASA, and on the ASA Home
Page on the Internet. Notices will be provided to university and college
statistics and mathematics departments to encourage younger statisticians to
apply for the travel grant. A review and selection committee will be established
to review the applications and select grantees. The committee will be comprised
of three or more ASA members and will convene at the ASA office in Alexandria,
Virginia. Special consideration will be given to statisticians who have recently
received their Ph.D.'s and to women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ISI
World Statistics Congresses web page:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.isi-web.org/about-
isi/isi-wscs