* 1249312
* RAPID: Enabling Collaborative Science Learning Experiences on Mobile Devices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Elliot Soloway, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 147,041.00

This RAPID project focuses on porting existing collaborative software in support
of project-based science -- WeMap and WeKWL -- to the iPad. Initial software
design and development has been done for Android machines as part of a
complementary research project, but iPads are available in so many schools that
it would be a shame to miss the opportunity to make available for the 2012-2013
academic year software that could be immediately used in science classes. The
work consists in moving the core collaboration support, concept mapping, and KWL
facilities to the IPad during summer, 2012, along with development of sample
lesson that model how the software can be integrated into classroom activities.
The apps will be available in Fall, 2012. Additional capabilities (file
management and message board) will be ported in fall and winter and made
available to schools as they are available. Together the apps will form what is
being called the WeLearn Collaboration Platform. The first apps to be made
available form a core of apps that teachers are used to using and ask for when
they have a new device available; more general-purpose apps (e.g., drawing and
animating, collaborative reading and writing) and science-specific apps (e.g.,
data collection and analysis tools) will be added to the suite as more is
learned from complementary research projects. The purpose of this RAPID is to
establish the platform into which those apps can be added and attract
significant teacher buy-in with those apps. That infrastructure and the
credibility gained through its use will form the basis for a more complete app
set and reason for teachers and school systems to see that tools developed
through a research endeavor can have value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is addressing a real, imminent need: Throughout the country, schools are buying
iPads this summer for use in the fall. Teachers need to be able to use the iPads
productively in science class immediately when school begins, yet there is
little in the way of educational software available in support of science
learning. Given that public=supported bonds are often used to support large-
scale technology purchases, it will be devastating (long term) to K-12 school
budgets if, like their desktop and laptop cousins before them, iPads are not
having the kind of positive impact on student achievement that is expected. Yet,
without available apps and models of how to use them effectively for science
education, there is little possibility of the technology being used well. This
project addresses real needs -- making easy-to-use software for promoting
science learning available to teachers and doing it in such a way that they have
that software in time to use it on their new devices and have available models
of its use to spur their imaginations.