* 1249354
* Workshop: Identifying the Research Challenges Underlying a National-Scale Learning Health System
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Charles Friedman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 99,808.00

It is widely acknowledged that improving health in the United States will
require the creation of a national-scale Learning Health System. A Learning
Health System (LHS) will allow the nation to take full advantage of advanced
computational methods and the increasing amounts of health-related data
available in digital form. An LHS would enable such data to be rapidly mobilized
and continuously analyzed--and the results subsequently shared in "actionable"
forms--to improve health care quality; empower public health and biomedical
research; and enable patients and their families, along with their care
providers, to make better-informed collaborative health decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of an LHS at national scale is a monumental
socio-technical challenge. These challenges invoke a broad scope of open
fundamental scientific questions that, to date, have not been clearly
identified. To address these issues we will undertake a road-mapping activity in
the form of a two-day invitational workshop in Washington, DC. The workshop,
engaging approximately 35 of the nation's leading scientists, will identify and
describe these open questions, and will identify interrelationships among them.
Participants will bring expertise spanning three broad challenge areas
underlying a national-scaled LHS: 1) system requirements, modeling and
performance; 2) data, knowledge, and analytics; and 3) organization, economics,
and policy. These challenge areas invoke the computational/informational
sciences and related fields of engineering, the behavioral and social sciences,
and the biomedical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this workshop
will provide clear direction for a next generation of research to address a
class of problems of vital interest to health and well-being of individuals and
populations. Also, because the challenges to be addressed in the workshop are
profoundly interdisciplinary, the results will create potential for
collaboration among groups of scientists who have not yet come together around
these most important problems.