* 1249272
* Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort VIII (2012-2014) Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Karan Watson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2016
* USD 987,000.00

The primary aim of the proposed Cohort VIII Texas A&amp;M University System
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the
Doctorate (BTD) program is to increase the pool of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) PhDs among underrepresented minorities groups
at TAMU and create a cohesive community of graduate students across different
disciplines within the university. The overall goal is to foster academic
success in a cohort of first-time URM STEM graduate students, by developing
their readiness and encouraging eagerness to complete STEM doctoral degrees and
by preparing them to take their places as leaders in interdisciplinary research
and in academia. As such, objectives to carry out the program's goals include
(1) retention of fellows into doctoral programs with funding after completion of
the NSF BTD program, (2) preparation to meet the challenges of completing
doctoral programs of study and for possible academic careers in higher
education, and (3) leadership skill development necessary to succeed as young
URM professionals upon completion of doctoral programs of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be achieved through collaborations among
the College of Science (COS), College of Engineering (COE) and the College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences (COALS) at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). Twelve
first-time graduate students from underrepresented minority (URM) groups, in
five departments in the COS, 12 in COE, and 14 in COALS, will be selected as BTD
fellows. The Fellows will be nurtured for two years as a cohorted community
benefiting from a program of academic and personal development activities and
social support, to sustain their commitment and success to their degree programs
and advancement toward doctoral programs by the end of their second year. The
BTD fellows, with differing disciplines and a common purpose, will share
coordinated resources and intellectually enriching group activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the intellectual impact of BTD, the program will
enhance the infrastructure of research and education by advancing pursuit of
graduate and doctoral STEM degrees.