* 1249489
* CAREER: Career Development in the Emerging Field of Geomycology:  Research and Education in Metal Biomineralization by Fungi
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Colleen Hansel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2015
* USD 258,585.00

While many metals are essential trace nutrients for life, at high concentrations
these same metals can be toxic and at times fatal. Within acidic mine waters
from abandoned coal mines, concentrations of the metal manganese (Mn) can be two
orders of magnitude higher than levels considered a health risk for neurological
disorders. We have recently found that oxidation and subsequent immobilization
of Mn in acid mine drainage (AMD) environments is mediated by an abundant fungal
community that completely and rapidly oxidizes Mn(II) to Mn(III/IV) oxides.
Although fungal mediated processes are universally observed and their impact on
geological processes indisputable, little is known about the fungal species
involved in the biogeochemical cycles of metals, the mechanisms that are
employed, and their impact on the mineralogical framework and reactivity of
soils and sediments. This CAREER proposal presents an integrated education and
research plan to explore and ultimately define the importance of fungi in the
oxidation of Mn(II) within surface environments, in particular those impacted by
acidic mine waters. The research will be conducted in the scope of an
undergraduate project on fungal diversity and a graduate student thesis on the
enzymatic, physiological, and geochemical controls on Mn(II) oxidation and
biomineralization by key Mn(II)-oxidizing fungal isolates. The specific
objectives are to define (1) the phylogenetic and ecological diversity of
Mn(II)-oxidizing fungi in AMD systems, (2) the fungal mediated (a)biotic Mn(II)
oxidative pathways, (3) the role of biological clocks on Mn(II) oxidation, and
(4) the Mn(II) oxidation rates and solid-phase. This research will involve a
multidisciplinary approach coupling molecular biology, enzymatic and chemical
assays, microscopy and sophisticated micro-spectroscopic techniques to probe
microbe-metal-mineral interactions at the molecular and bulk scale. The research
outlined in this CAREER proposal will fill major gaps in our knowledge of the
biological and geochemical controls of the Mn cycle ? information that is of
crucial importance for improving in situ bioremediation (e.g. AMD treatment),
stimulating primary productivity, and predicting the fate and transport of
contaminants in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In most
circumstances, placing abstract chemical and biological concepts into real-life
situations and applications can peak students interest and learning. The
visually striking and disturbing devastation caused by AMD is an ideal
environmental framework to educate students about the complexity of physical,
microbiological, and chemical processes that govern the health of the natural
world. The main educational outreach component of this proposal will be the
creation and instruction of an annual five-day professional development workshop
on AMD microbiology for informal and formal educators. The workshop, co-hosted
by the Microbial Sciences Initiative at Harvard and the Jennings Environmental
Education Center (JEEC), is entitled ?Living in the Acid: The Microbes that
Create and Remediate Acid Mine Drainage? and will focus on the biogeochemistry
and microbial ecology of AMD ecosystems, including lectures, lab and field
exercises, and curriculum development forums. This workshop will be a unique
experiential learning opportunity for educators seeking hands-on science
instruction with microbes, environmental quality, and the cutting-edge concept
of bioremediation. New findings from our proposed research will be directly
integrated into the workshop and provide information, including high-resolution
images, for permanent public displays for the JEEC. This workshop will serve as
a conduit to educate a wide socioeconomic diversity of students spanning from
rural to urban settings and to channel advances in our understanding of
environmental microbiology and bioremediation to the classroom and to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;