* 1249788
* Collaborative Research: Linking erosional and climatic processes in regions of active mountain building
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Christopher Poulsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2018
* USD 204,048.00

Topography in mountainous regions is a product of the erosion and export of
material across the landscape. The frequency and magnitude of erosion events
occurring in these regions is controlled by the local climate. The topography of
the mountain ranges, in turn, influences the climate. This suggests a coupling
between atmospheric and geomorphic processes in regions of active mountain
building. Observational studies of climate-topography-erosion relationships,
however, have been equivocal. One potential reason for this disparity in
observational results is that the modern climate, for which most studies depend
on, is a poor representation of the integrated climate history over landscape.
Over the timescale of mountain building, climate can vary due to orbital
variations, greenhouse gas concentrations, and the development of topography.
This work will develop a coupled climate-landscape evolution model framework to
quantitatively investigate interactions between climate, topography, and erosion
on geologic timescales. The co-evolution of climate and landscapes will be
modeled at different latitudes (e.g. tropical, sub-tropical, and mid-latitude)
and for different orbital configurations in order to increase our understanding
of the spatial and temporal variability inherent in the coupled climate and
landscape systems. This work will complement previous and ongoing empirical
studies exploring the interaction of climate and topography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the interaction between the climate and
topography is relevant to a number of societal issues including the rate of
sediment input to reservoirs, the terrestrial carbon cycle, and the intensity of
erosion processes in agricultural and uplands systems. The role of climate in
controlling erosion rates also has broader geological implications due its
potential influence on tectonic processes in regions of active mountain
building. Moreover, fully understanding the Earth as a system, including surface
and lithospheric components, requires a quantitative framework for linking
climate, erosion, and tectonics. This research will contribute towards this
goal. Additionally, the proposed project will develop a deployable middle-school
curriculum and interactive museum display in collaboration with the University
of Michigan Museum of Natural History.