* 1249211
* Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Abdul Mohamed, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 987,000.00

Jackson State University (JSU) and its LSMAMP partners seek to broaden the
participation and increase the number of underrepresented minorities (URM) in
PhD Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) programs through
the support of a tenth (10th) Cohort of students in the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Program. The major goal of the BD program is to provide a bridge
to the PhD at a 90% placement rate for minority students through the
implementation of a comprehensive two year master's degree program. To date,
from a total of 106 URM students (Cohort 1-9), 80 (Cohort 1-8) were admitted to
PhD programs, 16 have earned the PhDs (including one PhD-MD), and 53 are at
various stages of completing their PhD. Furthermore, 94% of JSU's BD students
earned their MS degrees in two (2) years. In order to build another successful
cohort of competitive URM STEM students who will earn their MS degree and bridge
into a STEM PhD program, JSU will continue to utilize a successful pathway
whereby URM students who pursue the MS degree have the potential to complete the
PhD degree in STEM areas if provided sufficient financial support, rigorous
curricula, committed mentoring, and extensive national and international
research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM disciplines targeted for the BD
include: chemistry, mathematics, biology, environmental science, computer
science, and engineering. The requested BD support will continue to accelerate
and increase the numbers of URM students entering the PhD pipeline. The BD is an
intensive, highly interactive program covering the first two years of the
students' graduate tenure leading to the MS degree. Students are expected to
continue their work through to the doctorate. The first year the student's
satisfy the required core courses and select their research advisor. During the
first summer, the students are exposed to scientific and technical workforce
environments internships at national or international laboratories, corporations
and universities. During this time, students and their faculty advisors
continually interact on the learning experience and initiation of research
projects. The second year is dedicated to research, writing the MS thesis,
specialized courses and applying to doctoral programs and fellowships.