* 1249384
* L-functions and Eisenstein series: p-adic aspects and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Ellen Eischen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 98,035.00

This grant concerns several projects motivated by p-adic aspects of L-functions,
a central object of study in number theory. The first part of the project
involves the development of certain p-adic differential operators and p-adic
measures (Eisenstein&lt;br/&gt;measures), technical tools that the PI will use
to construct p-adic L-functions. These p-adic differential operators and p-adic
measures build on the PI's prior results on these topics. These Eisenstein
measures are also conjectured to give a homotopy-theoretic invariant of certain
manifolds that generalizes the Witten genus. The second part of the project
concerns applications of the tools developed in the first part of the proposal.
The main application is the construction of p-adic L-functions that p-adically
interpolate the special values of L-functions attached to families of
automorphic forms. One portion of this application is joint with Michael Harris,
Jian-Shu Li, and Christopher Skinner. This part of the project also has
applications to Iwasawa theory, a p-adic theory for studying certain arithmetic
data, which in turn is expected to relate to the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
Conjecture.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;L-functions are certain complex-valued
functions that play an important role in number theory. Their values at certain
points satisfy striking congruence conditions and relate to many open problems.
One approach to studying L-functions uses p-adic numbers (depending on a prime
number p), an extension of the rational numbers analogous to but different from
the real numbers. This proposal involves further developing techniques for
studying p-adic aspects of L-functions. The proposed research has expected
consequences in algebraic number theory, analytic number theory, and algebraic
topology.