* 1249822
* EAGER: Compositional Data Fusion
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Judea Pearl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed activity will address two problems: (1) transportability, and (2)
data fusion. In the first topic, the project focuses on the problem of utilizing
conclusions obtained in one environment in another by permitting reasoning
agents to focus their reasoning on only the differences, while taking for
granted that which is common to both environments. In the second topic, this
project will formalize and reduce to algorithmic procedures the general problem
of fusing data coherently from multiple heterogeneous sources. The proposed
activities will develop effective procedures for determining whether unbiased
estimates of causal relationships in a target environment can be synthesized
from information obtained from a set of heterogeneous studies. These activities
will lead to a theoretical understanding of the conditions under which a
learning system can rely on previously learned information, transferred from a
different environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research project
have the potential to impact all data-related sciences where the
transportability and data-fusion problems are ubiquitous. These two problems
demand understanding of causal relationships in the domains being considered.
Such causal relationships need to be addressed by causal calculi so as to
extract the invariant features from each information source. The approach
pursued in this project builds on previous work of the PI, for instance,
reasoning with structural causal models and counterfactuals. The problems of
transportability and data fusion are critical in the health and social sciences,
where data is scarce and experiments are costly; they are of particular interest
in the "Big Data" enterprise, which is driven by the premise that data
availability will automatically result in data interpretability and where there
are nuances among the contexts of data collection.