* 1249315
* EAGER:  Single Cell Quantification of Splice Variants and Epigenetic Regulation of Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Ann Kirchmaier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Different cell lines and tissue types are often
characterized by the expression of distinct alternatively spliced transcripts,
implicating epigenetic processes in establishing stable splicing patterns during
mitotic cell divisions that accompany development and differentiation. This
project will develop a powerful and exquisitely sensitive technology to detect
and quantify low abundance mRNA transcripts in single cells invoking the
"Plasmon nanoruler" concept using gold nanoparticle sensors. The method will be
applied to test the hypothesis that pre-mRNA splicing patterns are mitotically
inherited. Aims include: optimizing sensor design and delivery modules for the
detection and quantification of multiple splice variants in single cells, and
defining splice variant profiles and heritability of splicing patterns in single
cells and their progeny. Expected deliverables are: development of a Plasmon
nanoruler hyperspectral imaging platform to detect and quantify up to three
splice variants in single cells without amplification steps; definition of
experimental conditions for utilizing nanoprobes for intracellular mRNA
quantification; and knowledge on the heritability of splicing. This high-risk
approach will set the precedent for understanding and quantifying the
heritability of splicing at single cell resolution. Moreover, once developed,
the technology can be adapted by multiple investigators for future studies,
including: detecting dynamic expression of transcripts from any desired gene in
single cells across multiple genetic, developmental and environmental
conditions; identifying rare phenotypes based on differential expression of
splice variants; and visualization mRNA localization and
trafficking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Educational impact includes
cross-disciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in the fields
of biophysics, biochemistry, and biology. Graduate students will develop their
professional and entrepeurship skills through one-on-one coaching from the PIs,
as well as through seminars offered by Purdue's Instructional and Professional
Development seminar series. Graduate students will hone their instructional and
mentoring skills by supervising undergraduate research interns recruited through
several ongoing programs at Purdue University.