* 1249319
* Workshop: Doctoral Consortium at the 14th International Conference on Multimodal Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Carlos Busso, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,587.00

This is funding to support participation by about 12 graduate students (10 from
U.S. institutions and 2 from non-U.S. institutions) and 5-6 senior members of
the ICMI community (faculty and industry researchers) in a Doctoral Consortium
(workshop) to be held in conjunction with and immediately preceding the 14th
International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI 2012), which will take
place October 23-26, 2012, in Santa Monica, California, and which is organized
by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). The ICMI conference series is
the premier international forum for multidisciplinary research on multimodal
human-human and human-computer interaction, interfaces, and system development.
The conference focuses on theoretical and empirical foundations, component
technologies, and combined multimodal processing techniques that define the
field of multimodal interaction analysis, interface design, and system
development. Topics of special interest to the conference this year include
multimodal interaction processing, interactive systems and applications,
modeling human communication patterns, and data, evaluation and standards for
multimodal interactive systems. ICMI 2012 will feature a single-track main
conference which includes: keynote speakers, technical full and short papers
(including oral and poster presentations), special sessions, demonstrations,
exhibits and doctoral spotlight papers. The ICMI 2012 proceedings will be
published by ACM as part of their series of International Conference
Proceedings. More information about the conference may be found at
http://www.acm.org/icmi/2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the ICMI
Doctoral Consortium is to provide PhD students with an opportunity to present
their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of academic and
industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral research plan and
progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers interested in designing
multimodal interfaces. Student participants will present their ongoing thesis
research as a short talk at the Consortium and also as a poster at the
conference Doctoral Spotlight Session. This year, the organizers seek to expand
the scope of the Doctoral Consortium to provide more opportunities for
interaction between the students and senior members of the field; to this end,
the program will also include a lunch on the day of the workshop for students
and mentors, a career panel that will provide the students and mentors the
opportunity to ask and answer questions and discuss challenges and opportunities
in the field, and a dinner that will provide the students with the opportunity
to hold informal conversations among themselves as well as with the organizers
and mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Doctoral Consortium will
give student participants exposure to their new research community, both by
presenting their own work and by observing and interacting with established
professionals in the field. It will encourage students at this critical time in
their careers to begin building a social support network of peers and mentors.
The organizers will take steps proactively to achieve a diversity of research
topics, disciplinary backgrounds, methodological approaches, and home
institutions among the students. Priority will be given first to minority
students, female students, students from geographically underrepresented states,
and finally to students whose advisors or departments have insufficient funds to
support their participation in the conference. To further increase diversity up
to two student participants may be invited from abroad, and no more than two
will be invited from any given U.S. institution of higher learning.