* 1249400
* IGERT: Adaptation to Change in Water Resources: Science to Inform Decision-making Across Disciplines, Cultures and Scales
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Jan Boll, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,099,997.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
prepares Ph.D. students at the University of Idaho with the tools to address the
effects of climate change and human population dynamics upon physical,
ecological, and social systems. The program provides trainees with an
interdisciplinary water resources education that promotes socially responsible
practice in research and the development of innovative approaches to problem
solving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this IGERT
program is to train future scientists who will develop adaptation strategies for
the short-term and long-term impacts of climate change and population dynamics
on water supply and demand. Trainees will integrate changes in infrastructure,
legal and institutional structure, and ecological responses into their adaption
strategies. While studying the Columbia River Basin in the U.S. and Canada, and
the Biobío River Basin in Chile, trainees will research landscape level water
quantity and quality, regulated and unregulated river systems, and social
networks of institutions and organizations that will use the science in decision
making. The program will provide trainees with courses, workshops, and informal
activities to foster collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Trainees will learn about how the various professions supporting sustainable
water resource management are interconnected within the larger social, cultural,
and legal context. Trainees will also collaborate with the Universities
Consortium on Columbia River Governance to bridge the discussions between
science and policy. Additionally, through this IGERT, the University of Idaho
will partner with the University of Concepción, Catholic University of Chile,
the University of British Columbia, and the University of Saskatchewan. Students
will be recruited from underrepresented groups, especially Native Americans, who
are directly affected by water resources problems in the
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.