* 1249213
* EAGER: Exploring plasma mechanism of synthesis of graphene in arc discharge
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Michael Keidar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This research concerns with exploring the fundamental role and advantages in
utilization of plasmas for synthesis of graphene. Graphene is a one-atom-thick
planar sheet of carbon atoms, which combines aspects of semiconductors and
metals and has potential applications in the areas ranging from high-speed
computer chips and biochemical sensors to ultracapacitors and fuel cells.
Standard CVD methods for synthesis of graphene utilize atomic (not ionized)
fluxes for synthesis. The utilization of plasma flux is being studied in this
project in order to enhance the mobility and reactivity of the carbon species
during the synthesis. It is anticipated that ultimate characteristics of the
synthesis can be significantly improved and limitations associated with partial
utilization of atomic deposition flux can be resolved when plasma-based
synthesis is utilized. This research will focus on the effect of ionization
degree of the graphene-creating carbon flux on properties of the synthesized
graphene. To this end, an array of diagnostic techniques for monitoring of
plasma parameter in a wide range of background gas pressures from high vacuum to
nearly atmospheric pressures will be applied. The ultimate goal of this project
will be to utilize the understanding of the fundamental role of plasmas in
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed interdisciplinary project has both
fundamental and technological significance. The fundamental significance is that
our understanding of the fundamental role of plasmas in graphene synthesis will
be greatly expanded. The technological significance lies in exploring the
ultimate benefits that plasma-based methods can offer including potential
creation of low-temperature graphene synthesis on a low-melt substrates such as
polymers, direct graphene synthesis on surfaces characterized by with lattice
mismatch with graphene such as Si wafer, significant enhancement of means to
control number of layers, production rate and purity. Many important sectors of
the national economy will be potentially affected. Successful development of the
superior plasma-based technology of graphene synthesis would have an enormous
impact on technological readiness and involvement of graphene-based transistors
and stretchable/foldable electronics and therefore, on numerous sectors
including aerospace, mechanical, civil, biomedical and opto-electronic
industries. The proposed research program will serve as an excellent vehicle for
undergraduate and graduate education in the field of nanotechnology and plasma
science. The PIs will make a concerted effort to involve women and under-
represented minority students in this project by working closely with
corresponded student organizations at George Washington University.