* 1249208
* EAGER: The Effect of Stress and the Role of Computer Mediation on Exam Performance
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Ioannis Pavlidis, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 193,231.00

In this project the PI will explore a novel experimental and methodological
framework for measuring and understanding the role of stress in student
performance on exams. Stress is defined here as sympathetic arousal, an ever-
present mechanism that helps humans cope with perceived threats or challenges.
The planned experiments, in which criticality and computer-mediation define the
two axes of the experimental space, will cover a rich set of combinations that
include bi-weekly exams each of which counts for a small percentage of the grade
vs. midterm and final exams that each count for a large percentage of the grade,
alternately offered in paper and iPad forms. Subjects will be randomly divided
into control and interventional groups; in the interventional group the time
will be relaxed, to determine the effect of stress reduction on the evolution of
competency. Unobtrusive measurements (to ensure non-interference with the
observed behaviors) will span the genetic, physiological and psychological
levels, while micro to macro measurements will afford a deep understanding of
the issues. While most HCI-related projects aim to change the design of the
interface, this research instead investigates the possibility of "changing" the
human (student) by revolutionizing relevant aspects of the educational system.
Improving the human-computer interface is a secondary aim where, depending upon
the success of the intervention, stress-reduction designs can be conceived to
counter-balance the time stressor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research tries to identify and suggest ways to correct problems in paper- vs.
computer-mediated exams, precipitated by strong sympathetic responses. To this
end the PI explores the role of the time stressor, and in so doing questions
certain aspects of the prevailing educational philosophy.