* 1249719
* EAGER: Implementing Nanolaminates in an Anodic Oxide Trench for Energy Storage Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Sylvia Thomas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 55,750.00

This grant provides funding for research enabling the development of densely
packed nano-scale structures to be used in the manufacturing of energy storage
devices, such as capacitors. The nanostructures will consist of metal-insulator-
metal layers and will optimize the novel utilization of alternating nano
laminates (thin atomic layers of material) in trench structures. Nano-sized
trenches will be fabricated and atomic layer deposition will be used to fill the
trenches with alternating high dielectric constant and wide band gap nanolayers.
Trench formation and nanolaminant development will be optimized through
structural and chemical characterization using transmission electron microscopy
(TEM), Fourier transform (FTIR) analysis, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Optimized structures will be integrated with
high performing electrodes as contacts for the electrical testing of capacitance
density, breakdown voltage, and leakage current.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon
successful completion of this research, the results will transform the lifespan
and cost efficiency of energy storage devices for global solutions. The outcomes
of this research will lead to improved nanostructure processing and equivalent
planar capacitance (EPC) performance for energy storage devices. The primary
goal of this research is to manufacture nano trench structures with optimized
pore size and conformal nanolaminant coverage to impact capacitor properties,
assembly, and scalability for energy storage. The developed nanostructures will
optimize material reliability, durability, and lower processing cost. These
resulting metal-insulator-metal trench nanostructures will address long term
life cycle, low efficiency, and high leakage current for storage devices used
for solar, wind, hydro, and other alternative energy sources.