* 1249769
* EAR-PF:  Linking lakes to the landscape: mechanisms that control terrestrial subsidies to pelagic food webs
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Steven Sadro, Sadro                   Steven
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2015
* USD 186,020.00

Dr. Steven Sadro has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to implement a research and education program at the University of California,
Riverside. He will use comparative and experimental approaches to investigate
the extent to which variability in the concentration and composition of
terrigenous inputs to lakes affects the transfer of terrestrial carbon into
pelagic food webs. Terrestrial ecosystems export a considerable amount of
organic matter into lakes, but the degree to which such material supports
pelagic food webs is debated, and the environmental controls of such subsidies
are poorly understood. In this study, the natural abundance of carbon (13C and
&amp;#8710;14C), nitrogen (15N), and hydrogen (2H) isotopes will be used to
determine terrestrial contributions to aquatic food webs. Seasonal and spatial
driven variation in the quantity and quality of terrestrial inputs will be used
along with experimental manipulations to illustrate mechanisms of control on
carbon transfers to pelagic organisms. These studies will be carried out in
high-elevation lakes, which have consistent spatiotemporal patterns in dissolved
organic matter composition driven by elevation and snowmelt dynamics, making
them ideal natural laboratories for ecosystem studies of carbon flow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lakes are natural repositories of terrestrial organic
matter. The extent to which this material is decomposed, stored, or biologically
cycled within lakes has important implications for energy flow, food web
structure, and ultimately, the amount of carbon that is exported or released
back into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. However, evidence that terrestrial
carbon is incorporated into aquatic food webs remains controversial. By
characterizing the mechanisms that control the flow of terrestrial carbon in
aquatic food webs, this research will illustrate linkages between organisms and
help refine food web models for aquatic systems. Furthermore, high-elevation
ecosystems are sensitive to the effects of climate warming; understanding carbon
cycling in these systems, in particular, is a critical first step in predicting
how ongoing changes in soil, vegetation, and hydrological dynamics will affect
aquatic ecosystems. Dr. Sadro will directly incorporate undergraduates in both
field and laboratory aspects of this research. He will assist in developing and
leading a university field aquatic ecosystem science course taught at the Sierra
Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory facilities, a UC Reserve located in the
eastern Sierra. Dr. Sadro will also contribute to the development of a watershed
education curriculum serving under-represented secondary school students within
the western Sierra Nevada Woodlake Union High School near Visalia, California.