* 1249633
* EAGER:   Genome construction in non-model organisms using recombinant populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Matthew Hahn, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2015
* USD 253,862.00

Whole genome sequence information has transformed research in traditional model
organisms, and now next-generation sequencing technology is at a turning point
in its application to non-model organisms. Researchers working in data-rich, but
sequence-poor, organismal systems are eager to apply these technologies to their
own species. However, the challenges involved in generating useful, high
quality, whole genome sequences in these naive systems are substantial. Non-
model systems can have many biological features that directly hamper genome
assembly, and therefore suffer from limited capacity to benefit from genomic
tools. This research aims to develop a new approach to genome assembly, one that
combines next-generation sequencing with recombinant populations made using
genetic crosses between individuals. If the full potential of the method can be
demonstrated, it will bring the power of genome-enabled science within reach of
a large range of non-model organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A tremendous amount
of biological knowledge lies hidden within the genetic make-up of every organism
on earth. The secrets of these organisms potentially hold the keys to
understanding the origins of biodiversity and the answers to many other
biological puzzles. This research will provide new tools that can be used to
unlock the genetic information contained within any species. The methods
developed will therefore be of great benefit to a large number of researchers.