* 1249247
* EAGER: Exploratory Research into Nationalism and Nation-Branding in Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Thomas Wilson, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2013
* USD 3,868.00

This is an exploratory EAGER research project that will provide the CoPI with a
two-week visit to two sites in Greenland, Nuuk and Kulusuk, in order to lay the
foundation for extended field research that will explore Greenland's
independence movement through its nation-building efforts, particularly its
nation-branding campaign, "Branding Greenland."

Exploratory work will consist of one-week in each location during which contact
with local officials and community members will be initiated. Efforts will focus
on explaining the proposed research and receiving local feedback which will be
incorporated into the long-term research design. In Nuuk, discussion of long-
term research will be initiated with governmental officials, members of the
Branding Greenland initiative, political parties, and local groups. In Kulusuk,
consultation will be initiated with community officials and leaders about the
proposed research and community approval for this work. This preliminary visit
will also introduce the CoPI to the issues surrounding independence,
nationalism, and nation-branding as they appear on the ground in Greenland.
Together these preliminary efforts will provide the foundation for a
comprehensive long-term research plan that will examine Branding Greenland as a
vehicle through which national culture and identity are constructed and
broadcast, particularly through policy initiatives, economic ventures, and media
venues, and their exhibition and experience in everyday life.

This EAGER research provides the basis for long-term work that examines the
increasing role of culture and identity as tools for economic development and
political recognition by indigenous and minority groups, through an examination
of Greenlands nation branding efforts. As was recognized by the ASSP panel and
the Program, the proposed DIG project is not possible without the prior insights
and approval of Greenlanders which will be achieved through this exploratory
EAGER research. A key goal of this EAGER research is to incorporate the
perspectives and interests of the people of Greenland into the long-term
research design. Connections with various governmental and non-governmental
groups will be established and avenues through which this research can be made
relevant to both academic audiences and indigenous communities will be explored.