* 1249166
* BREAD:  Basic Mechanisms Underlying Species-Specific Trypanosome Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2015
* Jayne Raper, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2015
* USD 1,125,433.00

PI: Jayne Raper (Hunter College of the City of New York
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Jose Cibelli (Michigan State
University); Alan Archibald (University of Edinburgh); Steve Kemp, International
Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) (Nairobi,
Kenya)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Aris Economides (Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals); Bruce Whitelaw (University of Edinburgh)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trypanosomiasis affects cattle and is prevalent in 36
countries of sub-Saharan Africa. It is caused by parasites of the Trypanosoma
species, which are transmitted by tsetse flies. Infection with these parasites
invariably leads to death. In addition cattle are reservoirs for trypanosomes
that infect humans and thereby cause an increase in disease transmission
resulting in human sleeping sickness, which is also fatal. Baboons are naturally
resistant to all these pathogens due to a factor in their blood known as
trypanosome lytic factor, which is a form of High-Density Lipoprotein (the
"good" cholesterol). A single baboon gene has been identified that when given
transiently to mice by gene therapy (as mice do not have this gene), completely
protects them from infection with trypanosomes. The goal of this research
project is to determine if the mechanism of species-specific trypanosome
resistance characterized in primates is shared by other vertebrates, such as
cattle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Trypanosomiasis is arguably one
of the most significant diseases to threaten livestock production in infected
areas of the world. The animal disease causes immense human suffering due to the
reduction of milk and meat production by approximately 50%, as well as the lack
of haulage for crop production, which are central to most African small scale
agriculture. Accordingly, trypanosomiasis is ranked among the top 10 global
cattle diseases impacting on the poor, and estimates of the cost of the disease
to livestock keepers and consumers vary between $1 to 5 billion US dollars
annually. This research project could lead to improved sustainability of
livestock production in a broad region of the developing world. Drugs that kill
trypanosomes have been extensively used in animals (35 million doses/year), but
drug resistance and disease resurgence has been reported in at least 13
countries. If this basic research project could demonstrate the proof of
principle that cattle with the baboon gene have complete protection from all
pathogenic African trypanosomes, including human infective trypanosomes, it
could have a strong long term impact in that it could lead to the elimination of
an important reservoir that drives human infection. Public access to data and
biological materials generated by this research project will be available
through a project wiki - http://www.genomics.liv.ac.uk/tryps/index.php.