* 1249191
* I-Corps:  A Compact Low-Cost Wire Antenna Array for Dedicated Short Range Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Vijaya Kumar Devabhaktuni, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed antenna system has the potential to allow simple implementation of
Vehicle-to-Vehicle and Vehicle-to-Roadside Infrastructure (V2V/V2I) systems with
low-cost, low profile, and enhanced electrical performance. The antenna system
includes specific feed network which meets the automotive mechanical and
manufacturing requirements. Such feed network allows relatively lower
installation complexity for new vehicles during the manufacturing stage and more
importantly, it enables aftermarket retrofit, where the antenna system with
ground plane independent characteristic allows flexible installation at
different positions of the vehicle (i.e. on the roof of the vehicle, in the
headliner, or on the dashboard). In essence, the proposed antenna will
facilitate the advancement of vehicle safety through communication technologies
and contributes to DSRC standards in supporting potentoal vehicle safety
implementations especially after the amendment of the IEEE 802.11 standard into
802.11p which regulates the frequency range of 5.85 - 5.925 GHz for DSRC
allowing high data rate communications and low power level requirements.

The proposed antenna system is significant to public safety as it will add to
the advancement of vehicle safety using Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS). ITS aim to streamline the operation of modern vehicles, manage vehicle
traffic, assist drivers with safety and other data by providing convenience
applications for passengers. From a commercialization prospective, considering
80 million vehicles enter the market every year, market penetration will
strongly influence the effectiveness of V2V/V2I safety and non-safety
applications. Studies have shown that it can take decades to reach 95% DSRC
transponder safety device penetration in the global automobile market, even if
all new vehicles are equipped during the manufacturing stage itself. This
antenna system will lead to enhanced "V2V and V2I communications" as it is
desirable for vehicle antennas to have the lowest possible profile in order to
avoid cosmetically altering the vehicle's exterior look and to allow easy and
quick installation.