* 1249210
* EAGER: Two Decades of Nanotechnology Development: Global Competitive Landscape and Knowledge Diffusion via ERGM and SIR Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 298,358.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award to the
University of Arizona provides funding to examine how collaboration among
researchers in the field of nanotechnology has influenced the advancement of
research in this field. To maintain the U.S.'s competitive edge, the U.S.
government has invested over $16.5 billion in nanotechnology research and
development (R&amp;D) including the 2012 budget of $2.1 billion through the
National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI). Likewise, significant investments in
nanotechnology have been made by other nations throughout the world. However,
the impacts of this funding on knowledge diffusion from research to innovation
occurs is unclear. Moreover, it is unclear if there are differences between the
collaboration networks of publicly funded researchers and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering these questions, the researchers will
examine collaboration networks of nanotechnology researchers the U.S. as well as
those of other countries with a view toward learning which factors contribute to
the effectiveness of researcher-inventors' collaboration networks, and if there
are factors which contribute the most or have the greatest impact. This will be
accomplished through the application of the Exponential Random Graph Model
(ERGM) and Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model for social network
analysis to model how nanotechnology knowledge and information moves through a
network over time; and to explore how public funding as well as the attributes
of basic researchers, researcher-inventors, and their networks may help or
hinder knowledge diffusion over time. It is expected that an outcome of this
research will be a better understanding of how public funding has improved
knowledge diffusion in collaboration networks of researcher-
inventors/researchers to advancing nanotechnology R&amp;D for the past two
decades.