* 1249123
* EAGER: Low-level detection of complex nanomaterials in biological media.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Eric Grulke, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 09/30/2013
* USD 49,894.00

Abstract

CBET- 1249123 Grulke, Eric A.

This project will focus on proof-of-concept research applying Accelerator Mass
Spectrometry (AMS) for low-level detection of complex nanomaterials in
biological media. A successful project will enable major improvements in
mechanistic studies of the fate and transport of complex engineered
nanomaterials (ENMs as nanoparticles) in environmental, health and safety
studies. AMS can separate rare isotopes with high selectivity and high
sensitivity. In this proposal, complex ENMs are defined as nanoparticles with
one material as their core and different surface-bound molecules (hereafter
referred to as coatings) to assist their performance in applications. Complex
ENM nanoparticles often agglomerate during environmental and biological testing,
both the core and coating may be transformed by such exposures, and material
balances need to be performed on both the core and coatings materials in order
to properly interpret their transport and transformations over the product life
cycles.

The research team has recently synthesized complex ENMs containing different
rare isotopes in the core and the coating. Two pathways are proposed: 1) the
synthesis and testing of a complex ENM system, an 26Al-labeled alumina core
(Al2O3) with 14C-labeled coatings (citric acid), which will be tested at low
dose levels in a rat model and 2) the synthesis and biodegradation evaluation of
both a core material, 32Si-labeled mesoporous silica, and a coating material,
14C-labeled PLGA. Pathway 1 work will attempt to demonstrate the lower limits of
detection of the AMS method, which is expected to be 103 to 109 times more
sensitive that radioactivity detection. Pathway 2 work will provide an
experimental system for explicit testing of degradable cores and coatings. As
these rare isotopes (RI) can be detected near attomole levels using AMS, it
should be possible to identify any changes in the molar ratios (coating RI/ENM
RI) during dosing, cell uptake, coating by environmental chemicals,
transformations in cell, or in the environment. Transformational testing will be
done in another, follow-on, project.

Intellectual Merit: A successful study will develop rare isotope AMS, a method
with high sensitivity and high selectivity, as a platform technology for
measurement of complex ENM transformations in relevant media. AMS should be
particularly valuable in determining the long-term fate of complex ENMs in
biological and environmental media, especially if the ENMs are aggregated or
agglomerated. These test systems will address ENM measurement infrastructure
needs specified in the NNI 2011 EHS Research Strategy Needs report.

Broader Impact: A successful proposal will stimulate and support the development
and dissemination of next-generation instrumentation and multiuser facilities,
specifically, the application of AMS methods to EHS studies of nanomaterial
toxicology. The investigators will continue their current activities in
education and training, and will include the new methodology in EGR 780,
Characterization of nanomaterials for medical applications, is a new course
supporting our Cancer Nanotechnology Training Center, an 26Al-labeled NIH-funded
program.