* 1249033
* SBIR Phase I:  Cloud-based platform to support experiential entrepreneurship education online at scale
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Bhavik Joshi, LaunchPad Central Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project aims to provide a cloud
based software platform to deliver entrepreneurship education at scale.
Innovation is the first step along the journey towards commercialization, job
creation and profitability. On a good day this path is dark, winding, uphill and
unpaved. At LaunchPad Central, they are rapidly creating the ability to help
pave this road to increase the odds of successfully navigating this journey. The
data from early stage startups will add to the "intellectual exhaust" allowing
for pattern recognition of early warning signs of failure. The LaunchPad Central
team has the domain expertise required to architect this platform. Collectively
they possess an in-depth understanding of the requirements. A world-class board
of advisors including Steve Blank, author of The Four Steps to Epiphany and the
Startup Owners Manual (standard entrepreneurship texts across top universities
worldwide) gives the company an unparalleled intellectual advantage on best
practices to deliver this content at scale. The company has the experience of
teaching this process in classroom and synchronous online formats to graduate
engineering, MBA students and scientists/researchers from research universities.
This has given the team considerable collective intellectual and operational
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project can be significant. The NSF Innovation Corps program has adopted Steve
Blank's Lean LaunchPad process in 2011. One hundred NSF I-Corps funded teams
have graduated and are on their way to successfully commercializing their lab
research. The program is set to scale over the next 18-24 months. LaunchPad
Central enables the successful scale of this program for early stage
technologies from the top universities to learn how to navigate the financial
valley of death as they seek to commercialize their science in scalable and
sustainable ways. LaunchPad Central will have a much broader impact for
entrepreneurs on Main Street. The Small Business Administration could offer the
tools that have been tried and tested by Silicon Valley entrepreneurs.
Decreasing the odds of failure for small businesses (the backbone of the US
economy) can have a profound impact on job creation. Scalable startups have
historically grown from innovation and entrepreneurship hubs like Silicon
Valley, Boston etc. Their software provides the metrics to identify promising
entrepreneur across the country and potentially connecting them to mentors and
investors in Silicon Valley.