* 1249652
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:  Novel micromechanical and computational approaches to discover the mechanisms of symmetry breaking and polarized growth in dicot pavement cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Daniel Szymanski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 08/31/2014
* USD 169,993.00

In plants, the leaf epidermis is an important architectural control element that
defines the growth properties of underlying tissues and the overall form of the
organ. The size and shape of leaves are important traits in agricultural
production, as is the architecture of the leaf. Therefore, a deep understanding
of the genetic and cellular control of leaf development is an important research
goal. The tissue-level behavior of the epidermis is driven by the polarized
growth of jig-saw-puzzle shaped pavement cells with interdigitating lobes.
However, the molecular, cellular, and mechanical control mechanisms for this
important cell shape control pathway are not known. This knowledge gap cannot be
filled until new experimental and computational approaches are developed. The
objective of this project is to create a new set of image analysis techniques,
mechanical devices, and mathematical models that will enable a mechanistic
understanding of how tissue-level mechanical forces interact with intracellular
signaling pathways to control the geometry of morphogenesis. Our approach will
include the development of new image analysis and nano-scale mechanical devices
that will enable quantitative tests for the mechanisms of pavement cell growth.
We will create computational models that will allow us to analyze the
plausibility of existing growth control models, and make new predictions about
how mechanical forces and intracellular reorganization interact to control cell
shape. The research will include interdisciplinary cross-training of the
research team, and is expected to generate technical advances in image
processing and analysis that will be made publicly available through a
collaboration with the iPlant data sharing resource. The project will generate
broadly useful computational models that simulate plant cell growth control
mechanisms and generate predictions that can be experimentally tested. This
project is jointly supported by the Programs in Plant, Fungal and Microbial
Development in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and by the
Networks and Regulation and Cellular Processes Programs in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.