* 1249603
* CSR: EAGER: A Scalable and Efficient Resource Discovery  System for Large-Scale Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 216,000.00

The objective of this EAGER project is to explore a preliminary design of a
Scalable and Efficient Resource Discovery system (SERD) that can be utilized in
large scale distributed systems. In particular, the PI is investigating the
incorporation of the following three key innovations into SERD.

(1) A scalable middleware for resource discovery: Current resource discovery
systems use flat peer-to-peer (P2P) structures that lead to either high overhead
in structure maintenance or low efficiency in resource discovery. They also lack
proximity-awareness and multi-resource range querying capabilities. By contrast,
SERD clusters proximity-close nodes that have the same resource and connects the
clusters using a backbone hierarchical P2P structure, permitting efficient range
querying of proximity-close resources.

(2) Scalable and efficient resource discovery: Using the SERD middleware in (1),
the PI will develop efficient resource information marshaling and searching
algorithms. These algorithms can achieve proximity awareness and can provide
range querying capabilities that enables the nodes to find physically close
resources within specified ranges.

(3) Balanced resource discovery: Current resource discovery systems lack a load
balance algorithm to balance the resource discovery load among the different
nodes. By contrast, SERD incorporates a load balancing algorithm in order to
balance the resource discovery load among the different nodes.