* 1249311
* EAGER: New Biophotonics and Computational Molecular Dynamics for Understanding Epigenetic Regulation of Gene Transcription
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vadim Backman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,958.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1249311&lt;br/&gt;Backman,
Vadim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to understand biological processes
at the nanoscale that has been stymied by a lack of practical means of analysis
of cellular nanoscale architecture. Conventional visible-light microscopy allows
detection of morphological changes only at the micro-scale. To address this
limitation, the PI?s have developed PWS microscopy, which quantifies the
statistical properties of cellular nanoarchitecture. Using PWS, they
demonstrated an increase in the disorder of nuclear nanoarchitecture in the
earliest stages of carcinogenesis manifested as an alteration of the higher-
order chromatin structure. This phenomenon was observed in multiple cancer types
(lung, colon, pancreatic, esophageal, ovarian and thyroid cancers). This project
will lead to the development of a new light-scattering interference-based
microscopy technique, molecular PWS (mPWS) microscopy, which would allow
molecular-specific sensing of cell chromatin structure at the nanoscale, which
is not otherwise possible. The technique will be used to study epigenetic
mechanisms of how changes in higher order chromatin structure modulate gene
transcription. The proposed work is aimed at describing all these different
processes related to the changes in the chromatin nanoenvironment.