* 1249014
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Bandwidth Photonic Arbitrary Waveform Generation using Low-Bandwidth Spectral Shaping
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Peter Sellin, S2 Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,968.00

NSF SBIR Phase I Proposal 1249014 - Request for Abstract&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I
project advances arbitrary waveform generation (AWG) capabilities for high
bandwidth operation essential in technologies such as telecommunications, test
and measurement, remote sensing, and others where higher bandwidths are demanded
but cannot be achieved with current electronic devices. This new innovation
employs an optical fiber storage ring to interferometrically combine many low-
bandwidth input waveforms to synthesize high-bandwidth output waveforms. This
technology exploits advances in stable fiber lasers and telecommunications
components with hardware comprised of commercial off-the-shelf photonics and
low-bandwidth electronics. Prior efforts have successfully demonstrated the
device concept and led to one patent pending. This SBIR project addresses
fundamental coherence issues through device-engineering that enables bandwidth
extension above 25 GHz, and noise reduction in the photonic components, moving
this innovative solution towards a viable commercial product. Metrics for
success are combined bandwidth, time aperture, and signal fidelity. This
photonic method for wideband AWG offers the potential for high bandwidth
(&gt;100 GHz), long waveform durations (&gt;10 microseconds), with high fidelity
(40 dB SFDR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project offers the potential for transformative advances in
full utilization of the electromagnetic spectrum spanning microwave to terahertz
frequencies. In particular, this approach is ideally suited to bridge the
technological gap that exists between waveform generation by well-developed
continuous AM or PM modulation of individual coherent sources and by proposed
methods of controlled synthesis of frequency arrays. This technology provides a
unique combination of high spectral resolution, long time aperture, and high
bandwidth that has broad application in test and measurement devices,
telecommunications, signal processing, and next-generation information
technologies that exploit the full information capacity of optical fiber beyond
the current capabilities. Generation of agile, complex, wideband optical
waveforms can enable new paradigms for free space optical communications, while
also applicable to spread spectrum and low probability of intercept
applications. This project also aims to investigate fundamental noise issues
inherent to repeated re-amplification of coherent optical signals, providing
insights directly relevant to meeting the rapidly increasing needs of our modern
information age. Furthermore, the coherent optical storage ring technology
developed in this project will benefit a number of other potential applications
such as wideband spectrum analysis and ultra-high precision characterization of
optical oscillators.