* 1249916
* Controls on the carbon isotopic composition of coalbed biogenic methane and implications for biogas stimulation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Vinson, Vinson                  David
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 160,333.00

Dr. David Vinson has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to implement a research and education program based at Northwestern University.
He will investigate stable carbon isotope signatures imparted during
methanogenic biodegradation of coal. Natural abundance carbon stable isotope
(13C/12C) ratios are valuable signatures of specific pathways and processes
associated with methanogenesis. Yet, interpretive uncertainties and
discrepancies with microbiological techniques complicate the use of carbon
isotopes to diagnose methanogenic pathways of interest (e.g. acetoclastic
methanogenesis and CO2 reduction). Other competing biogeochemical processes - in
particular sulfate reduction - and mass balance effects may also influence
observed carbon isotope signatures. Additional pathway-specific tools and
techniques may improve understanding of the utilization of methane precursors,
especially acetate. The primary tasks of the research are to adapt methods of
analyzing compound-specific and intramolecular carbon isotope ratios of acetate
to the low concentrations encountered in microbial gas systems, to analyze these
isotope ratios in waters from natural and laboratory-constructed methanogenic
systems in order to trace acetate utilization during methanogenesis, and to
apply modeling techniques including reactive transport modeling to the mass
balance of methanogenic coal biodegradation.

Natural gas is an increasingly important energy resource, of which a significant
portion is of biogenic origin. The research focuses on microbial methane derived
from unmined coal (coalbed methane), and has implications for naturally-
occurring and human-stimulated biogas resources derived from other carbon
sources. In order to stimulate the native microbial community to yield
additional methane, a detailed understanding of natural processes and pathways
is required. In this research, the use of a compound-specific isotope tracer
technique will promote understanding of the utilization of acetate in
methanogenesis or in competing processes that do not yield methane. In other
words, the efficiency of natural or modified methane-producing systems may be
recorded by the isotope signature of acetate, combined with information on
source organic carbon and end products (methane and CO2). Education and outreach
activities associated with the postdoctoral fellowship include developing and
conducting a biofuels-related summer workshop for K 12 teachers and involving
undergraduate students in the research.