* 1249022
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless Accelerometer Network and Integration with Point Clouds for 3D Stability Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2013
* Donald Kraemer, SPLIT ENGINEERING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,854.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create a
rock and soil monitoring technology based on the integration of wireless
accelerometers and topographic point clouds. The wireless accelerometers could
be deployed in open-pit mines, highways, and other critical areas including dam
and bridge foundations. In some uses of the system, such as mines and quarries
and along highways, routine vibrations from blasting and highway traffic would
be used to sound the accelerometers, determine resonance frequencies, and
predict when unstable ground conditions are occurring. In other uses of the
system, the accelerometers could be sounded manually to predict the stability of
critical structures near dam and bridge foundations. Point cloud processing
software will be developed to serve as the key visualization and analysis tool
for the accelerometer data, and by integrating sensor point clouds with
traditional topographic point clouds, new instability prediction methods will be
developed. Specific research activities include field accelerometer monitoring
and LIDAR scanning in an open-pit mine and an interstate highway, processing
vibration data to determine source properties and ground frequencies, modifying
point cloud software to accept sensor point clouds, and developing procedures
for predicting unstable ground movement from resonance
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project are related to increased safety, both the safety of workers
(mining, highway, rail, dam, etc.), and the safety of the general public that
are impacted by unstable rock and soil structures along highway and rail slopes
and bridge and dam foundations. By closely monitoring the vibrations due to
blasting, the damage to rock and soil structures as well as buildings and other
structures can be reduced. This increases safety and also reduces the cost of
stabilizing slopes and buildings. By utilizing inexpensive accelerometers, this
technology would allow long stretches of potentially unstable highway and rail
slopes to be monitored. Even though this proposal is focused on the stability of
rock and soil structures, it could have future applications in much broader
fields including the stability of civil structures such as buildings and
bridges, and the monitoring of construction and manufacturing sites. The
proposed monitoring system would collect valuable information on rock and soil
resonance frequencies and associated instability that would be of interest to
companies and universities. By continually monitoring potentially unstable rock
and soil exposures, a large database of useful information would be collected.