* 1249135
* Increasing and Enhancing Research Experiences for Native American and Pacific Islanders Undergraduates
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,772,737.00

This proposal, "Increasing and Enhancing Research experiences for Native
American and Pacific Islanders Undergraduates," from the Organization of
Tropical Studies (OTS) requesting renewed support through August of 2015, seeks
to increase students accepted in the OTS program from 17 to 20 participants per
year. Participants are selected from the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) institutions, such as tribal colleges, community colleges
and non-research (R1) institutions that serve Native Americans and Pacific
Islanders. Secondly, OTS will organize a follow-up workshop in the fall to
complement the successful orientation workshop it holds in the spring for
research- and on-campus mentors and LSAMP Coordinators to continue improving the
summer program. Also, OTS intends to integrate more comprehensively the
students' research experiences with course work and research activities in their
home institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts:
The strength of the program lies in engaging Native American and Pacific
Islander students in pure and applied biological research, while introducing
them to the biodiversity, cultural diversity and community-based conservation
issues of the tropics. Under the guidance of the program staff and faculty
research mentors, the students complete high-quality research projects designed
to sharpen their technical skills and enrich their professional development. In
2011, OTS's Impact Study revealed that most Native American and Pacific Islander
students who participated in the program continued their undergraduate careers
(moving from two-year schools and community colleges to four-year institutions).
Notably, most of these alumni majored in STEM fields and many went on to
graduate degree programs.