* 1249925
* IOS BP: Integrating and Leveraging IOS Networks to Facilitate the Development of URM in IOS Career Paths
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Medeva Ghee, Council on Undergraduate Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2018
* USD 533,918.00

National efforts to boost minority participation in the STEM disciplines have
resulted in modest increases in doctoral recipients in science and engineering
and national reports continue to highlight the urgency to increase the numbers
of underrepresented minorities in scientific fields. This project will link the
resources of three professional societies to develop innovative initiatives that
will address the recruitment of undergraduate students from under-represented
groups into graduate programs in integrative biological organismal fields and
focus on the retention of graduate students and post-doctoral researchers from
under-represented groups in integrative biological organismal fields. The
initiatives concentrate on key transitions of the educational pathway, advanced
undergraduates, early graduate students (within the first two years of graduate
school), and the progression of post-doctoral researchers into faculty careers.
This approach is innovative in that it addresses the URM individuals in biology
across the entire educational pathway rather than treating each stage and
transition in isolation. The three societies involved in this project are the
Council on Undergraduate Research (CUR), the Leadership Alliance Program (TLA),
and the American Physiological Society (APS). Over 1,000 individuals from under-
represented groups will be directly impacted by the activities of this grant.
More than 300 individuals from non-minority groups will also benefit from the
activities in this project. Most importantly, a supportive community of faculty,
administrators and staff committed to broadening participation in integrative
biological will be developed.