* 1249780
* Integrating Fault Slip Observations of Earthquake Swarms, Tectonic Tremor, and Slow Slip in Alaska and the Aleutians and Their Potential Relation to Large Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Stephen Holtkamp, Holtkamp                Stephen        G
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2017
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Stephen Holtkamp has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to implement a research and education program at the University of
Alaska, Fairbanks. This project aims to improve our understanding of the seismic
cycle along the Alaskan megathrust subduction zone. While the main hazard from
subduction zones comes from large earthquakes (generating extreme ground shaking
and tsunamis) and volcanoes, there are a variety of other geophysical phenomena
that have a currently unresolved impact on these major geologic hazards. Dr.
Holtkamp will be using a newly developed seismic method, multiple station
waveform cross correlation, to study Low Frequency Earthquakes (LFE's) and
earthquake swarms, both of which are hypothesized to be related to aseismic
("slow") slip. This technique has been shown to detect earthquakes up to one
order of magnitude smaller than would be possible using traditional seismic
techniques, allowing us to build a more complete catalog of these seismic
signals. This technique is insensitive to various forms of seismic background
noise, making it the ideal technique to build complete time histories of
triggered phenomena. The higher resolution characterization of these seismic
signals will provide us the ability to determine their role in the seismic cycle
and their relation to large earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.

This technique is well suited for addressing a variety of problems in the earth
science community, from volcano seismology to induced seismicity from energy
technologies (e.g., wastewater injection induced seismicity). One goal of this
project is to create a complete tutorial for students and scientists from a
broad range of backgrounds and interests to quickly and efficiently begin
utilizing this powerful tool. This will ultimately be accomplished through
mentoring of undergraduate researchers and implementation in coursework to
provide a structured way to improve the tutorial while also fostering cross-
disciplinary collaboration and insight.