* 1249324
* Enhancing the REU Experience - BIO REU Travel Scholarship and Just-in-Time Review Program
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Amanda Simcox, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,999.00

An award has been made to the University of Massachusetts Boston to manage, in
collaboration with the BIO REU Leadership Committee, the BIO REU Travel
Scholarship and Just-in-Time review programs. Biology REU programs are dynamic
and multi-disciplinary. To ensure that students appreciate the full scope of
"doing science" it is crucial that students are able to present their work to
their scientific peers. To enable students to present their work in poster,
oral, or written form this program will offer electronic submission and rapid
review of research products. BIO REU student research materials will be reviewed
by graduate research students from across the US providing not only content
review but also an expanded network of near-peer mentors, further strengthening
the impact of the BIO REU experience. In addition the program provides travel
scholarships for students to attend and present their research at scientific
meetings. These meetings are the ideal venue to ensure that students fulfill the
research experience which culminates in peer-review of their work. The goal of
both programs is to support undergraduate researchers to publish and/or present
their research to the scientific community ensuring that research results are
disseminated broadly. Students will apply for funds and/or submit their research
materials for review on-line at http://www.bioreu.org. Just-in-Time review will
utilize cutting-edge real-time editing and response tools ensuring that students
receive feedback quickly. Applications for travel will be reviewed by a
selection sub-committee of the BIO REU Leadership Council and will include the
abstract submitted for presentation, letters of recommendation from REU mentors
and site directors as well as an essay from the student regarding the
anticipated professional development outcomes of attendance and presentation.
Travel awards will be based on student application materials with priority given
for one student award per REU site. Students will, in addition to presenting
their research, have the opportunity to share their presentation/poster with the
broader REU community through the BIO REU website. For additional information
visit http://www.bioreu.org or contact Dr. Robyn Hannigan
(Robyn.Hannigan@umb.edu).