* 1249053
* SBIR Phase I:  Fault-tolerant Drive for High-Power-Density Motors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Michael Ricci, LaunchPoint Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 149,602.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will prove the
feasibility of a high reliability motor drive optimized for lightweight
propulsion systems for electric aircraft. The NASA green flight challenge proved
the viability of electric flight with a 400 passenger mile per gallon pure
electric flight last year, but products specific to this market are not yet
available. Presently available motor drives limit the reliability of electric
propulsion system to unacceptably low levels. These drives are designed for
ground vehicles and have reliability significantly less than general aviation
planes. These drives also require heavy load inductors to interface with the
highest power density electric motors. The novel drive architecture proposed
will provide high reliability and operate directly with low inductance motors in
the 10 kW to &gt;250 kW range. Rigorous reliability analysis techniques from the
commercial aviation industry will be applied to system models to optimize the
architecture for reliability and power density. The design will be validated in
hardware by fabricating and testing a single phase of the drive. This drive
coupled with an advanced motor will form an electric aircraft propulsion system
with the highest power density available and a reliability level consistent with
aviation usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to address a developing market for propulsion
systems that will enable non-polluting and reliable electric aviation in the
small aircraft and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) sectors. UAV use is expanding
rapidly. Many domestic applications of UAVs such as law enforcement or surveying
could be served by electric UAVs. Congress has mandated that the FAA integrate
UAVs into the airspace, but present UAVs do not have reliability levels
consistent with use in the civilian airspace. General aviation is looking to
electric flight as a way to reduce operating costs and greenhouse emissions in
an age of ever increasing fuel prices and concern for the environment. The FAA
is updating regulations to create a class of "Electric Light Sport Aircraft"
(eLSA), but no commercially available motor drives meet general aviation
reliability levels. This project will combine rigorous commercial aviation high
reliability electronics design techniques with power electronics designs from
heavy industry motor drives to create an electric aviation motor drive that is
lightweight, fault tolerant, and highly reliable. The proposed drive will have
reliability levels consistent with operation of electric aircraft in the
civilian airspace while still retaining exceptional power density.