* 1250659
* EAGER: Analysis of Thermoelectric On-Site Cooling Devices for Therapeutic Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Kenneth Diller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 198,725.00

CBET - 1250659&lt;br/&gt;PI: Diller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
motivated by the need to substantially improve the quality and safety of our
ability to administer cooling therapy, with the potential to save thousands of
lives and eliminate thousands of device-induced injuries annually. The
opportunity to conduct this research has been created by two major technical
breakthroughs. On the one hand, the PI?s laboratory has discovered how to apply
physiological principles to on demand create large heat flows between the body
core and the skin surface for therapeutic purposes, and also how to break the
chain of deep ischemia associated with tissue cooling therapy that can lead to
ischemic-induced injury. On the other hand, there have recently been significant
advances in developing new thermoelectric materials that enable devices to
operate with much higher efficiencies than in the past. As a consequence, for
the first time it is possible to apply thermoelectric modules directly to the
surface of a treatment site, doing away with the traditional connections to an
external refrigerator and circulating water lines to provide cooling therapy. At
the temperatures requisite for medical cooling, thermoelectric materials can
produce a figure of merit ZT of about 1.0 that is sufficient to generate
adequate heat flow rates. Coverage of complex three-dimensional anatomic sites
will be achieved with a matrix of small thermoelectric modules affixed to a
flexible, thermally conductive substrate. Each module will have a thermal sensor
to provide feedback signals that can be used to modulate the cooling effect in
both time and space for specifically designed therapeutic protocols. An
engineering challenge will be to provide the connectivity and control to operate
all elements of the module matrix in concert. Subjects will be instrumented to
monitor surface and core temperatures along with important physiological
properties including skin blood flow at the heat transfer site. Performance of
the thermoelectric device will be assessed in terms of compatibility with
adaptation to medical applications and the ability to control physiological
temperatures and blood flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply
thermoelectric modules to fabricate and test refrigeration systems that can be
used directly on an area of the body surface for therapeutic cooling. The
capability can be used to treat medical conditions such as a stroke, heart
attack, or concussion that can cause a life threatening lack of oxygen to the
brain and to treat soft tissue injuries. This type of device will be safer and
easier to use than any currently available alternatives, and it is designed for
small size, light weight, and low power consumption to allow it to be used by
first responders in ambulances so that treatments can be started early when time
is of the essence. Successful completion of this project would enable more
effective cooling therapies to be designed and executed than have ever before
been possible and could save thousands of lives annually.