* 1250219
* Collaborative Research:   From Gabbros to Granites - An Investigation of Arc-Scale Differentiation at the Guadalupe Igneous Complex, Sierra Nevada, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Scott Paterson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2016
* USD 127,922.00

Just a few key features allow Earth to be easily recognized from its planetary
neighbors: water, continental crust (made of granitic rocks) and plate
tectonics. These features are likely interlinked, and appear to be essential for
the evolution of a planet that can support human life. This study focuses on the
origin and emplacement of granitic rocks, which form the stable continental
crust, without which terrestrial life could not have evolved. The origin of
granite has been the source of much debate for more than a century, as
successive hypotheses survive, are modified, or abandoned in the face of new
observations. They weigh in on the debate by examining two currently popular
models for the evolution of the Sierra Nevada Batholith in California, which is
home not only to the crown jewels of the National Park System (Yosemite, Sequoia
and Kings Canyon), but which has long served geologists as a type example of how
granitic crust is formed in the plate tectonic setting known as a 'subduction
zone'. Subduction zones are regions of Earth's surface where one tectonic plate
sinks beneath another, in the process generating both earthquakes and volcanoes.
These tectonic regions are also referred to as 'arcs', for the arcuate patterns
of volcanoes that such a setting develops, such as the Japanese, Aleutian or
Marianas Islands. It is in these regions that granites are thought to form. When
such arcs develop granitic rocks, which are buoyant and difficult to subduct
beneath another tectonic plate, these eventually amalgamate to form the
continents as seen today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team will
investigate the two key means by which granitic rocks of the Sierra Nevada
Batholith, California are thought to be created: crystallization
differentiation, and partial melting of pre-existing lower and upper crust.
Recent work has suggested that earlier-formed crust, which consists mostly of
basalt and overlying sediments, is heated by the intrusion of more newly-formed
basaltic melts, and partially melted to form granitic melts directly. These
granitic melts then rise through existing crustal materials to accumulate at
shallow depths. An alternative hypothesis is that newly formed basalts are
transported to the upper crust directly, and there differentiate to form the
granitic materials that now dominate the landscape of the Sierra Nevada. The
contrasts between these two hypotheses are significant. In the first case,
little new crust is being created during Late Mesozoic time?older crust is
simply being recycled and remobilized. The age of the crust then is then older
than the age of the youngest granites in this model. In contrast, when newly
formed basaltic melts differentiate directly to form granite, then this
represents a new addition of granite to the crust. There is no better place to
test these models than at the Guadalupe Igneous Complex (GIC) of the western
Sierra Nevada. This Jurassic-age pluton (~151 Ma) contains very rare exposures
of the newly-formed basaltic melts that intruded the crust at the time that the
GIC granites formed: our goal is to test whether such melts primarily caused
heating and partial melting of pre-existing crustal materials, or whether they
differentiated directly to form granite. Another advantage to our study of the
GIC is that the rocks in this region provide an unusual glimpse into the crust
into which the newly formed basalts were intruded. Unlike other granitic plutons
of the Sierra Nevada, they can test whether pre-existing crustal materials
provide an appropriate source material for the formation of granitic rocks
within the GIC.