* 1250569
* Contribution of Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds to Organic Aerosol Formation in the Presence and Absence of Anthropogenic Pollution
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Allen Goldstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 467,198.00

This project will develop a better understanding of the formation and
transformation of Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) and will examine how Biogenic
Volatile Organic Compounds (BVOC) interact with anthropogenic pollution to alter
the atmosphere's oxidative capacity and enhance SOA formation. Hourly
measurements will be made, using a Semi-Volatile Thermal desorption Aerosol Gas
chromatograph (SVTAG) system, of speciated vapor and particle phase intermediate
and semi-volatile organic compounds during the Southern Oxidant and Aerosol
Study (SOAS) to be conducted in Alabama in the summer of 2013. The time-
evolution of secondary organic compounds and their precursors will be studied a
smog chamber and compared with data from the SOAS campaign to ascertain whether
mechanisms observed in the smog chamber are supported by the field data. This
study will make a significant contribution to understanding the formation of
secondary organic aerosol in a heavily forested region with natural emissions of
volatile organic compounds. Emissions of air pollutants from urban areas may
enhance secondary aerosol formation. The data collected in this project will be
critical to advancing the knowledge and prediction of regional atmospheric
chemistry, ozone and secondary aerosol production, and their role in climate
processes.