* 1250063
* Paleoclimate Analysis of a Miocene Arctic Forest from the Kolyma River Basin, Northeastern Russia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Hope Jahren, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Paleoclimate Analysis of a Miocene Arctic Forest from the Kolyma River Basin,
Northeastern Russia

A. Hope Jahren University of Hawaii

Throughout most of the Tertiary (~65 Ma to ~3 Ma), forests have thrived north of
the Arctic Circle. These unique ecosystems were subject to prolonged periods of
continuous darkness and light each year, yet managed to persist through the
major climate transitions of the Eocene, Oligocene, and Miocene. Much is known
about the fossil forests of Arctic North America from studies of Paleocene
(e.g., Chickaloon, Alaska), early Eocene(e.g., Ellesmere Island), middle Eocene
(e.g., Axel Heiberg Island), and Miocene (e.g., Banks Island) terrestrial
sediments. Previous NSF-funded work has supported our reconstructions of
seasonal precipitation (Schubert et al., 2012), relative humidity (Jahren and
Sternberg, 2003, 2008), the isotopic composition of environmental water (Jahren
et al., 2009), soil-methane production (Jahren et al., 2004), and possible water
transport mechanisms (Jahren and Sternberg, 2002) using stable isotope analyses
of plant fossil materials from the Eocene sediments of Arctic Canada. Russian
literature from the 1970s and 80s described the Miocene sediments of Siberia as
temporally extensive and spectacularly rich in fossil forests, however, they
have not yet been examined using stable isotope techniques. In this proposal, we
describe our plan to collect, archive, and analyze Pinaceae and Taxodiaceae
fossils from the Baekovo and Nekkeiveem floras, located in the Kolyma River
Basin of northeastern Siberia. The sediments we will sample are part of the
Khapchan Formation which is late Miocene in age (11.6 to 5.3 Ma; Nikitin, 2007);
we will perform one season of fieldwork as part of the Polaris Project II, a
recently funded NSF research and education initiative under the direction of Dr.
R.M. Holmes (WHRC; see letter of support within Supplementary Documents) to
study transport and transformation of carbon in rivers flowing into the Arctic
Ocean. As part of Polaris II, we will receive assistance with visas, export
permission, and housing at the Northeast Science Station near Cherskiy, as well
as the use of an existing boat charter scheduled to navigate the Kolyma River
Basin (contact: Dr. Sergei Zimov). We will employ our recent innovations in
microanalysis of intra-ring Ã¤13C profiles (Schubert and Jahren, 2011) for
determination of the seasonal timing of precipitation (Schubert et al., 2012)
for the Miocene Arctic forests of northeastern Siberia. This proposal represents
a significant revision of the proposal approved for funding, as necessitated by
the >50% reduction in the level of funding, and the restriction of time to two
years of total funding. The main alteration of the scientific goals within the
original proposal is the exclusion of oxygen isotope analyses of recovered
fossil material that were proposed in the original version. In the event that
further funding becomes available, collected fossil may be analyzed for oxygen
isotope composition, and our hypotheses about paleorelative humidity can be
tested under separate support at a later date. The budget has also been altered
in that PI Brian Schubert is now an Assistant Professor at University of
Louisiana at Lafayette; what would have been postdoc salary to him has been
redirected into two months of his summer salary within a subcontract to ULL.

The Intellectual Merit of this study is its potential to open up new
intellectual territory on Tertiary Arctic forests via the Miocene sediments of
Northeastern Siberia. Fundamentally, we are interested to learn whether the
climate scenarios we have constructed for the Canadian Arctic Eocene were global
and long-standing, or limited to the Western Hemisphere and/or to the Paleogene.
We hypothesize that a general attribute of Tertiary Arctic forests is a summer-
dominated hydrologic regime where maximum light levels and maximum water
availability coincide, similar to what we observed for the Eocene forests of
Arctic North America. We propose a first test of this hypothesis as the
determination of the seasonal precipitation regime within Miocene Arctic forests
using stable isotope analyses of fossils from the Kolyma River Basin. The
Broader Impacts As part of the Polaris II field seasons, we will provide two
educational modules introducing students to the Tertiary Arctic forests
including hands-on exercises to define simple stratigraphy and
collection/identification of plant fossils. Our module will form a separate blog
on the website documenting the evolution of the Polaris Project since its
inception in 2008 (http://www.thepolarisproject.org/journals/blog/). Finally, we
note that our research at the University of Hawaii serves the State of Hawaii,
an EPSCoR state. The EPSCoR program is designed to broadly impact science
capabilities in EPSCoR jurisdictions, and coinvests with NSF Directorates and
Offices in support of proposals submitted to the Foundation's research and
education programs, and crosscutting initiatives.