* 1250702
* EAGER: Automatic Classification of Programming Difficulties by Mining Programming Events
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Prasun Dewan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2015
* USD 124,960.00

Today, when a student or industrial programmer faces difficulty in some task
assigned to him/her, this event often goes unrecorded and unobserved by others.
As a result, it is not possible to use mechanisms to ameliorate the effect of
the difficulty. In this project, the researchers will address this problem by
automatically detecting and classifying programming difficulties by mining
programmers' interaction with the computer. Specifically, they will investigate
(a) whether it is possible to automatically identify the barrier causing a
difficulty and (b) whether it is possible to determine the severity of the
difficulty. The project will start a new area of research exploring how
difficulty-detection mechanisms should be designed, implemented, evaluated, and
applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: If successful this research will
lead to future work on a variety of difficulty amelioration mechanisms,
including (a) allowing industrial workers and teachers to synchronously push
help to developers facing difficulties; (b) informing developers facing
difficulties about actions taken by others who overcame similar difficulties, so
that they can take similar actions; (c) allowing assignment doers to anticipate
the kind of difficulties they will encounter and thus be better prepared for the
assignment; and (d) giving assignment definers an understanding of the inherent
difficulty level of the assignment, which can lead to redefinition or better
explanation of the assignment. These amelioration mechanisms can substantially
reduce the high costs associated with software development and quality teaching,
and transform collaborative software engineering and education. Such mechanisms
can lead to significant productivity gains in industry, especially in
distributed software development. An educational setting provides an even more
compelling motivation because shyness of students and/or lack of instructor time
prevents student difficulties from being addressed in a timely manner. In
computer science this is particularly a problem as a small mistake can prove to
be very costly. The difficulty amelioration mechanisms will reduce this problem
and thus attract a larger variety of students to computer science and empower
those who are already committed to it.