* 1250641
* The internal structure of deposits emplaced under upper plane bed / sheet flow transport conditions: Laboratory experiments and numerical modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Enrica Viparelli, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2017
* USD 201,725.00

The internal structure of deposits emplaced under upper plane bed/sheet flow
transport conditions: Laboratory experiments and numerical modeling Enrica
Viparelli, EAR-1250641, University of South Carolina ABSTRACT Rock deposits
emplaced by storms and turbidity currents can be characterized by a lower
erosional boundary underlying a massive unit followed in ascending order by a
parallel laminated unit and a cross laminated unit. Such deposits are
interpreted to be emplaced by waning energy flows. Massive units are
macroscopically structureless, i.e. there is not a visible organization of
sediment particles within the deposit. In the laminated units, sediment
particles of different size are deposited with visible patterns. The main
objective of this research is to investigate and model flow and sediment
transport conditions that are responsible for the emplacement of massive and
parallel laminated units. Laboratory and field studies demonstrate that parallel
laminated units are emplaced under sediment transport conditions known as upper
plane bed regime. These conditions are characterized by i) a moving bedload
layer one or two grain diameters thick, and ii) downstream migrating low
amplitude bedforms. As the parallel laminated unit is deposited under upper
plane bed regime, the basal unit has to be emplaced under more intense transport
conditions. The central hypotheses of the proposed research are that i) those
intense transport conditions correspond to sheet flow, which is a mode of
bedload transport characterized by a bedload layer 10-100s grain diameters
thick, ii) the sheet flow layer can suppress the formation of parallel
laminations, and iii) this suppression results in a tendency to homogenize the
grain fabric of the emplaced deposit under conditions of continued deposition.
It must be acknowledged that sheet flow is not the only mechanism that produces
massive deposits, but the conditions for it to operate can be commonly met at
field scale. Based on the results of preliminary laboratory experiments, an
experimental and numerical program is proposed to characterize the deposition of
massive versus parallel laminated deposits. Open channel, i.e. river-like,
laboratory experiments will be performed to build a deposit under upper regime
plane bed and sheet flow transport conditions. The choice of this experimental
setting is dictated by the need to induce sediment deposition in the sheet flow
regime at laboratory scale. However, the experiments will be specifically
designed to model intense and net-depositional subaqueous flows. The numerical
program is centered on the development of a model that is able to reproduce the
grain fabric of the deposits emplaced under upper plane bed and sheet flow
transport conditions. The model will be validated against the experimental
results. The results of the laboratory and numerical work will provide the
necessary information to i) characterize the mechanics of upper plane bed and
sheet flow transport regimes in general, and ii) relate the grain fabric of the
deposit to the characteristics of the flow and the sediment transport. They are
thus expected to have a transformative impact on the communities studying
subaqueous sedimentary processes, coastal and deep-water engineering. One
graduate student will take the lead in the performance of the experimental and
numerical work to pursue his PhD research. He will also be responsible for the
organization of the laboratory and numerical data and for their timely
dissemination through the CDSMS and the NCED repositories. Four undergraduate
students will be hired in three years to prepare them for graduate studies via
undergraduate research projects that will be directly supervised by the PI.