* 1250475
* Thrust Belt Exhumation and Duplex Development in the Sikkim Himalaya
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Jason Barnes, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 21,779.00

Colliding tectonic plates create high uplifting landscapes that exhibit diverse
spatial patterns of active deformation, affect global climate, and ultimately
regulate the flux of sediment and water to the oceans. Past research shows these
mountain belts grow both outward and upward in complex ways across space and
time. However, major questions remain about how and why different parts of
mountain belts evolve differently and what role various internal and external
forcings may play in the process. Duplexes are stacks of thrust-bounded rock
bodies that represent regions of intense shortening that result in focused
crustal thickening and uplift rather than expansion outward. An emerging view is
that a large duplex has become an important, widespread component in the frontal
portion of the Himalayan chain that may be a response to concentrated monsoon
precipitation and erosion. In the Sikkim Himalaya in India, the Lesser Himalayan
Duplex is well exposed by river incision, the geologic structure is well
documented, and hence various structural models are proposed for how it may have
developed. This research project will determine the exhumation patterns of the
region using bedrock cooling ages and computer models informed by the geologic
structure, to quantify the integrated history of duplex deformation and
exhumation. The results will determine the chronology and magnitude of Lesser
Himalayan Duplex growth and erosion, address the hypothesized structural models
for Lesser Himalayan Duplex development, and test the fidelity of this approach
to tackling complex deformation processes throughout the world's active mountain
belts and ultimately the mechanisms that drive them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research confronts the reality that increasingly complicated deformation
processes are being recognized in mountain ranges and tackles that challenge by
advancing the ways we integrate geologic data and computer models to comprehend
active mountain system behavior. Improved knowledge of the processes that
localize mountain deformation, climate, and erosion has important implications
for seismic hazards and the generation, transport, and delivery of fluid and
debris to adjacent lowlands where a large portion of the Earth?s population
resides. This project also represents a synergy of integrated research and
education between North American and Indian geoscientists, educators, and
students. Combined approaches and results from this project and a complimentary
one in India will be discussed at the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay and
University of North Carolina. A future US science teacher will participate in
the research and translate the results into educational material for K-12 Earth
Science courses and the public. This award is designated as a Global Venture
Fund Award and is being co-funded by NSF?s Office of International Science and
Engineering.