* 1250123
* EAR-PF:   Are the slow growth and metabolic rates of crocodylians secondarily derived?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Sarah Werning, Werning                 Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Sarah Werning has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a research and education plan at Stony Brook University in New
York. She will study the bone tissue of living and fossil species of
crocodylians (alligators, crocodiles, and caimans) and their extinct ancestors
to test the hypothesis that the slow growth and low metabolic rates observed in
living crocodylians are secondarily derived.

Like most reptiles, all 24 living species of crocodylians are characterized by
slow growth rates and low metabolic rates. These are reflected in the
microscopic structure of their bone tissues. Compared to living species,
crocodylian ancestors were much more diverse in terms of their body size,
anatomy, diet, degree of terrestriality, and habitat. Their bone tissue
indicates that they grew much faster and had higher metabolic rates; a very
different physiology compared to their living descendants. This strongly
suggests that crocodylians re-evolved slow growth and lower metabolic rates
after going through some evolutionary experimentation with higher rates. By
performing bone tissue analyses on museum specimens of modern crocodylians and
especially their extinct ancestors, Dr. Werning seeks to determine when the
transitions to and from higher rates occurred, and whether these changes in
physiology were concurrent with changes in body size, anatomy, and ecology. To
do this, she will sample bone from modern and fossil crocodylian skeletons, and
prepare histological slides for microscopic study. She will quantitatively
analyze the bone microstructure for characteristics known to vary with growth
rate and/or metabolic rate in living species (e.g., the density, arrangement,
and organization of blood vessels, bone cells, and collagen fibers, the number
of annual growth lines, and rates of annual bone deposition). Dr. Werning will
reconstruct growth trajectories for individual animals' lifespans and pool data
from multiple individuals to describe species-level variation in growth and bone
tissue structure. She will compare related taxa to elucidate the evolutionary
transitions in bone tissue structure, growth, and metabolism within the
crocodylian lineage, and determine whether they co-occurred with transitions in
body size, morphology, and ecology/habitat.

Dr. Werning's project will generate a large bone tissue dataset that will
integrate the modern and fossil records and establish the sequence of evolution
of growth and metabolic rates across the entire ~250-million-year history of the
crocodylian lineage. The results will offer insights into the biology and life
history of modern species for which data are difficult to obtain directly from
living animals. Similarly, they will reveal information on the biology and life
history of extinct animals that are not apparent from their skeletal anatomy.
For both groups, these include information on growth rates, metabolism, and
longevity. This project will provide education and training in paleontological
methods to high school and undergraduate students, and collaborative interaction
with graduate students. The study uses existing specimens in US and
international museum collections, and promotes future research by providing a
large collection of digital images that will be made publicly-available through
the NSF-funded image repository, MorphoBank. Paleontology plays a crucial
outreach role in teaching scientific methods and promoting evolutionary theory
to the public. Dr. Werning will work with Stony Brook University's renowned
Center for Communicating Science to improve her existing outreach skills, and
will design an exhibit for public display at the Stony Brook University Medical
Center.