* 1250385
* Shopping for Mortgage Contracts:  Price Discrimination, Bank Mergers, and Negotiation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jean-Francois Houde, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 91,173.00

This award funds work that develops a new data analysis technique for an
important class of markets. The new technique will be used to analyze very
detailed data about consumer mortgages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many markets
prices are determined through a negotiation process between buyers and sellers.
Sellers post or announce a price, but consumers may be able to negotiate a
discount. The extent to which sellers negotiate may depend on customer
characteristics. Despite the prevalence of discounting, existing empirical
techniques for analyzing market data ignore discounting in differentiated
products markets. This research project develops and applies a new empirical
technique that allows for discounting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique is
used to analyze very detailed data on a large set of approved mortgages issued
in Canada between 1992 and 2004. These data provide extremely valuable
information on features of the mortgage as well as household and market
characteristics. Mortgages are a good case study for the new method because many
consumers negotiate a discount from the price/interest rate 'posted' by a
neighborhood financial institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project gives new
insight into how the interplay of market concentration, differentiation, and
information frictions determine the market power of banks. The first goal is a
descriptive analysis of discounting and price discrimination in this market. The
second goal is to understand how mergers in the Canadian banking industry
affected mortgage interest rates. The third goal is to develop and estimate a
full supply and demand model for this industry and use it to answer several
different questions about the likely effect of credit regulations on demand for
mortgages and housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how consumers shop and
negotiate for mortgages will give us new insight into how this market functions
to support housing markets.