* 1250265
* EAGER:  Multi-Domain, Workflow Driven Computation System for Microbial Ecology Research and Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Mark Ellisman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 07/31/2014
* USD 299,999.00

This EAGER award to the University of California - San Diego, explores
innovations to The Community Cyberinfrastructure for Advanced Microbial Ecology
Research and Analysis, (CAMERA, http://camera.calit2.net/). CAMERA is a widely
used infrastructure that provides a single software system for depositing,
locating, analyzing, visualization and sharing data about microbial biology. A
heavily utilized and core component of CAMERA is the workflow driven
computational system for data analysis. The award anticipates analysis needed
for next generation sequence (NGS) data. BLASTx Work flows using CAMERA's Refseq
Protein database) will require nearly 2.5 Million core hours to complete
analysis of a typical NGS data set, making it impractical and costly to rely on
a single computational resource for an entire workflow. The PI will prototype
novel heuristic-based dynamic resource scheduling approaches to allowing
distribution of workflow tasks among heterogeneous computing domains such as
local systems, a variety of commercial clouds, and multiple national
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores development of a multi-
domain scheduling system where the individual component tasks of a workflow are
not bound to a single computational resource or domain, but rather can be
scheduled across multiple resources as well as across institutional domains. It
benefits a rapidly growing segment of the scientific community in both large and
modest laboratories whose instruments now generate massive amounts of genomic
data at modest expense but who have insufficient access to resources needed for
processing or analyzing these data. The cyberinfrastructure to be established
will potentially be usable by other science communities facing similar
computational challenges.