* 1250440
* Building the Deccan Traps:  What Can We Learn from Lava Flow Morphology in Large Igneous Provinces?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Amanda Clarke, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2015
* USD 250,290.00

Large igneous provinces (LIPs) represent the most intense manifestation of
volcanism on Earth. They occur both on land and in the oceans and cover areas of
hundreds of thousands of square kilometers under thick stacks of basaltic lava
flows hundreds of kilometers in length. Similar phenomena constitute the bulk of
volcanism on other terrestrial planets in the solar system, and on Earth they
are known to disrupt climate as well as the chemical balance of the oceans.
Though these events are rare in our planet's history, many are linked with mass
extinctions of animal and plant species. Despite their importance in our
planet's evolution, the physical eruption processes of LIPs are poorly
understood. This project aims to understand the changes in eruptive style during
the course of LIP emplacement, focusing on the transition from complex lava
flows fed from large central volcanoes to extensive sheet flows sourced from
elongate volcanic cracks. The project will use a combination of fieldwork in the
Deccan Traps of India (a LIP emplaced during the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass
extinction, 65 Myr ago) and laboratory experiments using analog materials that
effectively mimic the behavior of lava flows. This transition in eruptive style
appears to be a fundamental feature of continental LIPs and partly controls the
release of gases from these eruptions, and therefore also controls their
potential climatic and environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Deccan
Traps, formed 64-67 Myr ago, are a continental LIP presently covering ~500,000
km2 of the central and western Indian subcontinent, and likely were two to three
times larger at the time of emplacement. Recent work has shown the prevalence of
compound lava flows in the lower part of the Deccan stratigraphy, whereas simple
flows dominate the upper lava formations. Similar transitions have been
documented in other LIPs (e.g., Etendeka, North Atlantic Igneous Province,
Ethiopian Traps), suggesting a common evolution of architecture for many LIPs.
Historically, compound flows have been interpreted to be sourced from large
central shield-like volcanoes at relatively low effusion rates, whereas simple
sheet flows are thought to originate from individual, scattered fissure and
point vents sustaining high effusion rates for prolonged periods of time. These
historical interpretations inform our starting hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;(1) A shift
in edifice architecture occurs at the compound-to-simple flow
transition&lt;br/&gt;(2) Lava flow morphology is dependent on effusion rate
episodicity&lt;br/&gt;Establishing the manner in which magma is delivered from
the volcanic feeder system to the distal parts of the longest lava flows
documented on Earth is essential to understanding the thermal budget of lava
flows, the architecture of LIPs, and the release of volatile species into the
atmosphere during such eruptions. Fieldwork will aim to quantify the prevalence
of compound and simple flows in different formations, determine the timescale of
the transition in flow style, and document lateral changes in flow morphology.
This work will be complemented by analog laboratory experiments that simulate
lava flows and have been designed to isolate the factors that control the
compound-simple flow transition and flow morphology, such as effusion rate,
spatial distribution of vents, and episodic flow patterns. Two novel approaches
will be used to measure thermal conditions and cooling during the experiments:
temperature-dependent planar laser-induced fluorescence will measure the
temperature distribution within the flows, and an infrared camera will measure
changes in surface temperatures.