* 1250636
* CAREER: Gravitational Waves from Compact Binaries as Probes of the Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Nicolas Yunes, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Gravitational wave astrophysics is entering a new era of discovery and
exploration, with first detections expected within the next few years with
Advanced LIGO, the ground-based interferometer in the United States. One of the
key missions of LIGO is to test Einstein's theory of General Relativity where it
has never been tested before: where the gravitational force is enormous relative
to Earth's or the Sun's pull. Such a task is achievable because gravitational
waves encode information about this force when black holes and neutron stars
collide in the Milky Way and nearby galaxies. This project has 2 main goals: (i)
to calculate accurate waveforms that aid in the detection of gravitational waves
from compact binary inspirals and (ii) to develop the best, generic and model-
independent framework to test Einstein's theory and search for anomalous
deviations in gravitational wave data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
described above is creative and potentially transformative, constituting one of
the first dedicated efforts to test Einstein's theory with gravitational waves,
an essential step to exploit the full potential of gravitational wave detection.
This type of research is also timely and relevant, in view of upcoming, advanced
detectors and the dawn of gravitational wave astrophysics. The impact of
gravitational waves signaling a systematic departure from Einstein's predictions
is clearly breathtaking. But the lack of a departure from Einstein's theory
would also constitute a huge step for Science, proving for once and for all that
Einstein's theory is also valid in the most extreme gravitational scenarios. We
also have an ambitious outreach plan that includes the organization of
"Celebrating Einstein": an immersive art exhibit that incorporates gravitational
waves sounds and simulations, orchestra and dance performances, and a scientific
workshop. There will be accompanying talks for the public and lectures for local
middle school students. Another outreach initiative is the creation of a "Cosmic
Caf√©" in Bozeman, Montana, that will reagularly organize activities such as
Jeopardy-type contests about Physics.