* 1250492
* CAREER: Towards  universal understanding of caloric and other complex effects in ferroics from multiscale modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Inna Ponomareva, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational
research and education through a computational first-principles-based
exploration of magnetocaloric, electrocaloric, elastocaloric, and multicaloric
effects in a wide range of ferroic materials. Caloric effects are associated
with a reversible adiabatic change in the temperature under either an
application or removal of external fields and may provide the basis for solid-
state refrigeration technology - an energy-efficient and environmentally
friendly alternative to conventional refrigeration. In recent years interest in
caloric effects in solids has dramatically increased, thanks to the discoveries
of giant caloric effects in some materials as well as the elevated interest in
energy-converting and energy-renewable materials. However, fundamental
understanding of the mechanisms and interactions underlying giant caloric
responses is limited. The ultimate goal of this project is to reach a
fundamental understanding of caloric effects in ferroic materials through a
multiscale modeling approach. To reach this goal, the PI will&lt;br/&gt;1.
develop a multiscale computational tool that allows accurate simulations of
caloric responses in a variety of ferroics and across a span of length-
scales;&lt;br/&gt;2. carry out comprehensive research on electrocaloric,
magnetocaloric and elastocaloric effects in various ferroics;&lt;br/&gt;3.
utilize the materials-specific multiscale computational tools to work towards
designing and predicting materials with enhanced caloric responses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be integrated with the education of
graduate and undergraduate students as well as an outreach activity with middle
school and high school students. The PI will enrich both graduate and
undergraduate curriculum through the integration of computational projects in
two courses: Computational Physics and Mathematical Methods in Physics. The PI
will provide both education and training in computational physics to the
graduate students involved in the research. The PI has recently established an
outreach program for middle school students. This award supports further growth
of the outreach program as well as involvement of graduate students in the
program. As part of the program the middle school students will visit the
physics department annually as well as host the PI's group in their school. A
special feature of the outreach program is the early exposure of students to the
exciting world of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER award supports the computational
exploration of how the application of a changing electric field, magnetic field,
stress field, or a combination of fields to some materials can lead to a change
in temperature. These caloric effects, the electrocaloric, magnetocaloric,
elastocaloric, and multicaloric effects respectively are interesting from a
fundamental science point of view, and may have applications in solid-state
refrigeration technology - an energy-efficient and environmentally friendly
alternative to conventional refrigeration. Caloric effects have been known for
decades; however, they seemed to be impractical because the observed changes in
temperature were small. Recent experiments have demonstrated multiple giant
caloric effects requiring a reassessment of the potential of these caloric
effects for practical application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports
research aimed to establish the fundamental mechanisms of caloric effects across
the scales from the human scale to the scale of atoms. The PI plans to develop a
theoretical foundation and the tools for a reliable, fast and inexpensive
computer exploration and design of caloric materials. These outcomes may lead to
a considerable advance at the frontiers of solid-state refrigeration. The
potential applications include but are not limited to compact and portable
cooling for sensors and on-chip refrigeration; refrigeration/air conditioning
for dwellings and vehicles; and multifunctional magneto-electronic devices.
Furthermore, the research on nanoscale ferroic materials may have impact on
refrigeration technology through miniaturization of refrigerators, where
increased efficiencies, reduced weight and volume, and environmentally friendly
refrigerants would greatly benefit society. In conjunction with the research
plan, education and outreach activities will be undertaken to achieve timely
penetration of research into education, and to inspire a new generation of
scientists and engineers: (1) computational research will be integrated into at
least two courses; (2) graduate students will be a part of the research; (3) an
outreach activity will be performed to educate middle school students about
careers in science.