* 1250502
* Ancient Environments And The Isotope Geochemistry Of Low Temperature Fe(III) Oxides
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Crayton Yapp, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2019
* USD 207,270.00

On the continents, increasing modern demands on limited and climatically
sensitive "critical zone" resources such as potable water and arable land
motivate improved knowledge of past changes in global climate and their
manifestation in the critical zone. An overall decline in ocean temperatures
over the past 65 million years (Ma) was interrupted at irregular intervals by
times of relative warmth. One interruption of special note on the continents was
the "middle Miocene climatic optimum" (MMCO) about 15 million years ago. In
particular, at a paleo-latitude of ~30°S, western Australia experienced
widespread, intense, chemical weathering, which produced ancient soils
characterized by pellets of the minerals goethite (alpha-FeOOH) and hematite
(alpha-Fe2O3) that are concentrated in vast ore-grade channel iron deposits
(CID). Proposed measurements of the H and O isotopes in CID goethite and
hematite, as well as radiometric (U-Th)/He crystallization ages of the goethite
should produce a well-dated record of ancient subtropical continental
temperatures and waters. In addition, measured concentrations and carbon isotope
ratios of the Fe(CO3)OH component in goethite would yield soil CO2
concentrations and isotopic characteristics of oxidizing organic matter with
their implications for ancient critical zone carbon cycling (e.g., biological
activity). These data are also expected to yield the concentration of MMCO
atmospheric CO2 and would provide "ground truth" for community use in model
simulations of ancient climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A published model predicts
that the O isotope fractionation factor between crystallizing goethite and
ambient water will transition from a low-pH (acidic) value to a high-pH (basic)
value. A series of goethite synthesis experiments over a range of pH from 3 to
13 at different temperatures are proposed to test this model. Experimental
knowledge of the pH at which the transition occurs would minimize the chance of
misinterpretation of O isotope data from natural goethites and also yield the
relative magnitudes of two rate constants important in the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of a robust radiometric age of
crystallization with stable isotope data from a single mineral (i.e., goethite)
is rare and enhances its value as a rich source of paleoenvironmental
information. The results from the studies of natural and synthetic goethites
would be relevant to climatology, hydrology, and paleoecology, in addition to
geochemistry. The proposed research would contribute to the development of human
resources through the training and participation of a graduate student in
dissertation research. In addition, participation of undergraduate students
would provide hands-on experience in the performance of geochemical research and
encourage pursuit of scientific careers. Results from this research would be
published and integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught at SMU
by the investigator.