* 1250199
* Collaborative Research:  A Data-Driven Statistical Approach to Aging and Elasticity in Colloidal Glasses
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Larry Wasserman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 359,674.00

The research objective of this grant is to understand the fundamental process of
aging of glassy materials from a statistical and microscopic point of view.
Aging of glassy materials is a long standing problem: a glass is an out-of-
equilibrium material, so its mechanical and electrical properties change over
time, but the microscopic reasons for this are still unknown. Understanding
aging has implications for extending the lifetime of products made from glassy
materials (both "regular" glass and plastics). This project involves simulations
of glassy systems and will employ novel statistical techniques to reconstruct
local elastic properties of the material. We will learn how these properties
change during the aging process. Complementary experiments will be conducted on
colloidal glasses, a well-characterized model system which exhibits aging. Due
to the limited amount of data the experiments can obtain - and more
fundamentally, the limited data one can obtain before a system ages into a new
state - we will need to extend statistical techniques from bioinformatics and
econometrics to be able to the relevant information from our
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed statistical techniques will be useful
in a variety of applications beyond aging or materials science. Of equal
importance is understanding the fundamental mechanisms of aging in glassy
systems, which may have a long-term impact on how glassy materials are produced.
The students involved in this project will gain interdisciplinary experience, as
the project merges physics and engineering, statistics and soft materials,
statistical mechanics theory and microscopy experiments. Outreach efforts will
target Pittsburgh area high schools with under-represented populations and will
target Atlanta area K-12 students via "Squishy Physics" field trips.