* 1250774
* EAGER: A Legal and Structural Investigation of Online User-Generated Content Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Francis Lastowka, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 75,367.00

This project examines user-generated content (UGC) in interactive media, in
order to improve the functioning of copyright law with respect to important
areas of computer software and online communications. UGC is currently
generating interest among businesses, researchers, scholars, and game software
designers. In recent years, increasingly powerful, simple, and cheap digital
authoring tools have extended the power of amateur creativity. This project will
provide: (1) a new structural theoretical framework for the analysis of UGC in
games, (2) new empirical data on UGC in computer games, and (3) a legal analysis
of the applicability of copyright's "fair use" doctrine to UGC in games.
Videogames are a new form of interactive media often combine traditional media
forms with software interfaces that enable forms of player authorship. Content
authored by players has the potential to infringe copyright law. While copyright
infringement lawsuits have been filed based on UGC technologies, there have been
few empirical studies of interactive media technologies that depend on UGC.
Additionally, very few legal or media theorists have provided analytical
structures that can be used to explore the complex relationship between player
authorship and traditional authorship in the video game industry.

This project endeavors to map the intersection between copyright law and UGC
authorship in video games. The payoff of this research will be to provide
additional insight to the market, to help ensure the development of important
emerging technologies, and to contribute to the contemporary debate over
appropriate legal rules for the interactive media industry. The data collected
and the theoretical framework developed will aid those researching interactive
media in speaking about evaluating tools for user-generated content in games and
other interactive media, and clarify the legal constraints on game software
design. This research will provide data on how interactive media technologies
facilitate creativity, thereby helping policy makers and technologists
understand how user-generated content intersects with new media forms.
Additionally, by analyzing the legality of user-generated content, this research
will aid policy makers and technologists in efforts to reform copyright law to
take into account new forms of authorship.