* 1250104
* IGERT: Neuroengineering from Cells to Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,796,140.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
provides Ph.D. students at Rice University with innovative training in
neuroengineering, spanning the disciplines of neuroscience, electrical
engineering, mechanical engineering, and bioengineering. In collaboration with
Baylor College of Medicine and seven other universities and participating
organizations, Rice University trainees are developing the tools to understand,
interface with, model, and manipulate the nervous
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Due to improved technologies
that enable neuroscientists to interact with brain cells, and due to the
increasing types of neuroscientific data collected through electrical and
optical methods, the neuroengineers who create and work with these complex data
sets require highly specialized training. This program trains students in three
specific areas: (1) cellular systems neuroengineering, which studies the nervous
system?s signaling processes at the molecular and cellular levels; (2)
engineering multi-neuron circuits, which involves collecting and analyzing data
from groups of brain cells and devising methods to induce them to produce new
functional responses; and (3) translational neuroengineering, which develops
systematic approaches to improve clinical devices such as prosthetics and deep
brain stimulators. Trainees in this program are learning to be technologically
innovative; to be aware of social, cultural, and ethical aspects of
neuroengineering; to communicate their work effectively to a wide variety of
audiences; and to understand the pathways to commercialize their
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As this program trains
neuroengineers to develop advanced solutions to functional and structural
problems in the brain, a new problem-based learning curriculum will result and
will be shared with the public through open education resources. By cultivating
relationships with biomedical device companies, international researchers, and
collaborators within two minority-serving institutions in Texas, students in
this program are expanding the applications of their training and increasing
participation in their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and leadership skills needed for
the career demands of the future. The program is intended to establish new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and
to engage students in understanding the processes by which research is
translated into innovations that benefit society.