* 1250232
* CDS&amp;E: STRONG Cities - Simulation Technologies for the Realization of Next Generation Cities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Dev Niyogi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 552,410.00

1250232&lt;br/&gt;Aliaga&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
proposal is to create a computational framework for producing next-generation
new city designs or modifications to existing cities-Simulation Technologies for
the Realization of Next Generation Cities or STRONG Cities. The project will
enable designing 3D models of cities that are resilient (and "stronger") to its
surrounding environment and more livable for its inhabitants. While multiple
types of simulations can be performed, it is hard to encapsulate the subtle
interdependencies between different parameters of the diverse urban modeling and
simulation processes (e.g., weather, socio-economic, energy, and environmental
simulations). This framework couples the traditional forward modeling process
with an inverse urban modeling process that optimizes the input parameters to
satisfy user-specified indicators. Effectively, the approach closes the loop
between forward and inverse modeling and enabling the user to be much more
efficient in generating a 3D model that satisfies their many requirements. Both
forward and inverse modeling strategies can be applied during an exploration
session for either local or global model modifications. The expected
deliverables include software infrastructure, simulation algorithms, a re-
parameterization method, and exemplary datasets and results for multiple cities.
Furthermore, the project will provide several innovative tools for social and
public engagement, for urban planning, and for indicator visualization. In
particular, the project addresses designing, simulating, and visualizing future
cities in order to evaluate building smart codes, sustainability plans, future
architectural designs, alternative transportation investments, land use
regulations, and environmental protection policies. It will build upon ongoing
funded education projects, mainly through NSF and NOAA, to provide educational
material to middle and high school students as well as university level
students. Moreover, the project is also very well suited to promote diversity
since both PIs are diversity award winners and already have a diverse research
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is very timely. Mankind is
now in the first century of the urban civilization. Since 2008, and for the
first time in history, more than half of the world population lives in cities.
Over the next 30 years the growth of the population and amount of urbanization
will only increase. Hence, properly managing the growth of existing cities and
the design of future cities is a vital issue that will only continue to increase
in importance during the twenty-first century. The STRONG Cities project will
provide the first computational system to dynamically integrate urban land use
planning and several high impact simulations thus enabling a next generation of
weather-aware, socio-economically planned, drought-ready, and greening conscious
cities. The project addresses what has been called the "ultimate design
challenge": urbanization. This objective is of significant interest to a wide
variety of stakeholders worldwide and spanning several engineering and science
fields (e.g., civil engineering, agricultural engineering, hydrology, and earth
and atmospheric sciences) as well as urban planners, metropolitan planning
organizations, and the hazard mitigation community.