* 1250549
* Boron Isotope Geochemistry of  Metasomatic Minerals in Subcontinental Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* David Bell, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2019
* USD 249,961.00

It is at present not known if the Earth's interior is getting wetter, drier, or
remaining essentially unchanged in its water content. This work will use the
isotopic composition of boron to trace the past movement of water-rich fluids
through Earth's mantle in an attempt to shed light on this question. The issue
is important because such fluids play a key role in the evolution of Earth's
surface environment, the geochemical and geophysical evolution of its interior,
and the formation of economically significant ore deposits. This project will
lead to an improved understanding of volatile element cycling and mantle
evolution and will fulfill broader impacts related to graduate student and high-
school teacher training in science, as well as international scientific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron (B) is a fluid-transported element
whose isotopic composition can be used to trace the movement of fluids between
reservoirs at Earth's surface and those in its deep interior. Using the isotopic
compositions of B, Sr, Pb and Ar (measured by SIMS, LA- MC-ICPMS and LA-noble
gas mass spectrometry, respectively) in minerals formed from successive
generations of fluids passing through the upper mantle beneath continents, this
research will trace the origin and timing of these fluids, determine their
relationship to surface and deep interior geochemical reservoirs, and examine
evidence for possible secular changes in the cycling of B over Earth's history.
A key question to be addressed is the degree to which recycled materials giving
rise to distinct mantle isotopic reservoirs are depleted in their surface-
derived volatile components during subduction. By sampling and analyzing
minerals formed within the mantle using in-situ microbeam methods the
contaminating effects of high concentrations of B in the crust and oceans that
have generated some uncertainty in previous studies may be
avoided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on samples from the Archean
mantle of South Africa and younger mantle from the western US, contributing
broadly to understanding the tectonic evolution of those key regions. In
addition to training of a US female graduate student and field instruction of
local K-12 science teachers, broader impacts of the project include
collaboration with South African and European scientists that will promote
international scientific exchange, catalyze development of scientific capacity,
and enhance opportunities for future transdisciplinary science.