* 1250128
* Collaborative Research:   Geological Constraints on the Physical State of the Subduction Zone Interface at the Depth of Slow Slip and Tremor
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* John Platt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 289,025.00

Subduction complexes such as the Franciscan Complex of California contain large
volumes of rock that have been exhumed from up to 40 km depth, and which
preserve a record of the ambient physical conditions and deformational
processes. In particular, the South Fork Mountain Schist (SFMS) in the Northern
Coast Ranges is a 240 km long and up to 5 km thick body of intensely deformed
sedimentary and volcanic rock that occupied the subduction zone interface at
around 123 Ma, at a depth and temperature corresponding to the source area of
present-day episodic slow-slip and seismic tremor (ETS) events. The SFMS
preserves an extraordinary high-strain deformational microstructure that
indicates the activity of a combination of microcracking, pressure-solution and
dislocation creep at relatively high stress, burial depths of around 40 km, and
temperatures of around 350 degrees C. The SFMS offers an easily accessible
window into the physical conditions and deformational mechanics during ETS
events. This project quantifies (a) deviatoric stress using recrystallized
grain-size piezometry on rocks affected by dislocation creep, (b) strain and
strain-rate using the estimated subduction rate for this period, the thickness
of the deformation zone, and microstructural features including microfold
geometry and deformed clastic quartz and radiolarians, (c) temperature using
laser Raman spectroscopy on carbon and the Ti content of quartz, (d) pressure
(and hence depth) using phase assemblages in the blueschist-facies rocks, and
multi-equilibrium thermobarometry on coexisting chlorite and white mica, and (e)
water activity using cathodo-luminescence and FTIR analyses on quartz. These
measurements will allow thermomechanical modeling of the effect of dissipative
heating, and calculation of the rate of moment release, which can be compared
with the seismic record during ETS events. Elastic modeling of the rate of crack
propagation will allow calculation of the rate of fluid transport and the rate
of propagation of slip events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most powerful and
damaging earthquakes known occur between 15 and 40 km depth in regions known as
subduction zones where oceanic plates are being carried down into the Earth's
mantle. Below that, there is a transition downwards from the abrupt movements
that cause earthquakes to steady sliding without earthquakes. This transition
produces several types of ground motion, including "slow earthquakes", in which
slip continues for up to two weeks, but without ground shaking. The transition
may play a role in building up the stress that produces normal earthquakes at
shallower depths. This project investigates rocks in northern California that
were formed in a subduction zone at about 40 km depth, and which preserve a
record of the physical conditions (pressure, temperature, stress, and water
content) and processes that lead to slow earthquakes and related phenomena in
present-day subduction zones.