* 1250261
* An Adaptive and Robust Discrete Geometry Based Helmholtz Solver and Applications to Device Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Shanker Balasubramaniam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 630,999.00

The research objective of this award is the development of mathematics and
algorithms that facilitate design and optimization of physical systems that are
governed by the Helmholtz equation. While the research results are broadly
applicable, the focus of this effort will be restricted to acoustic and
electromagnetic systems. The crux of the proposed effort will rely on developing
solution techniques that are capable of multiscale analysis, and are highly
flexible and adaptive in both surface and function representation. The research
progresses in sequence through three stages; the development of (i) local
parametric surface descriptors that can be adaptively refined, (ii) a functional
framework to represent fields and corresponding integral equation solvers, and
(iii) hierarchical algorithms for morphing surfaces in response to external
constraints. The methods developed will be used in three application areas;
nanophotonics, steering of microbubbles and shape reconstruction in inverse
problems. Deliverables include a highly flexible and adaptive modeling and
analysis tool, demonstration and validation via applications, documentation and
dissemination of research results, and cross-disciplinary student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tthe results of this research will provide a
cogent modeling tool that is sufficiently flexible and adaptive so as to be
usable within a design and optimization framework for Helmholtz systems. To
highlight their broad applicability, the tools developed will be tested in
different types of applications ranging from biomimetic displays to solar cells
to microbubbles to inverse problems in imaging. To ensure dissemination of the
research, the PIs will create a dedicated website, as well as work with the
Michigan Center of Industrial and Applied Mathematics and Institute of Cyber-
Enabled Research. Existing channels in women and minority recruitment at MSU
will be utilized. Undergraduate students will be involved through senior design
projects and through existing REU programs at MSU. Graduate and Undergraduate
Engineering, Computer Science and Physics students will benefit through
classroom instruction and involvement in research.&lt;br/&gt;