* 1250890
* Gordon Research Conference on Plant-Herbivore Interaction, Ventura, CA, February 24 - March 1, 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,08/31/2013
* Colin Orians, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This award will provide support for a Gordon Research Conference on Plant-
Herbivore Interaction to be held in Ventura, CA, February 24 - March 1, 2013.
This conference focuses on emerging topics and features a mix of empirical and
theoretical emphases. Sessions featuring talks and posters are discussion-
oriented, allowing for lively interdisciplinary conversations to be initiated
and continued throughout the meeting. The goal of the conference is to stimulate
the production of critical insights into how plants defend themselves, ways in
which herbivores overcome plant defenses, how other organisms, from microbes to
predators, alter plant defenses and herbivore performance, and whether these
species-specific interactions scale up to communities and landscapes. Research
perspectives to be addressed include defense evolution in plants, the interplay
between secondary metabolites and plant nutrients, the consequences of prior
attack (induction) to plant defense expression and to the distribution and
abundance of herbivores, microbial mediation of plant-herbivore-enemy
interactions, and how shifts at the community or landscape level alter these
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The relaxed atmosphere of
this conference is designed to generate stimulating interactions, lasting
networks, and interdisciplinary collaborations. This award will be used to
support the attendance of young scientists, including graduate students, post
docs and assistant professors with efforts in place to recruit underrepresented
minorities.