* 1250822
* Collaborative Research: Featuring EarthScope in Coastal Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami Hazards Education by Linking Teachers, Interpreters, and Emergency Managers
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Beth Pratt-Sitaula, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 03/31/2018
* USD 193,986.00

The same geological forces that form the spectacular beaches and headlands of
the Pacific Northwest also threaten our lives and infrastructure with
earthquakes and tsunamis. This project, known as the Cascadia EarthScope,
Earthquake, and Tsunami Education Program (CEETEP), helps to mitigate the
effects of these potential disasters through collaboration building and
professional development for K-12 teachers, park and museum interpreters, and
emergency management outreach professionals in communities along the Oregon and
Washington coast.

The March 11, 2011 great earthquake and tsunami that devastated Japan has
heightened public concern about similar geologic hazards in our own country. As
part of a nationwide effort, the NSF EarthScope Program has been deploying
hundreds of seismic, GPS, and other geophysical instruments to measure movement
of the Earth's crust and detect earthquakes along the Cascadia Subduction Zone.
These instruments provide detail for ongoing research showing that coastal
regions are storing energy that will be released in the next great Cascadia
earthquake, with the resulting tsunami arriving onshore in 30 minutes or less.
NSF and other organizations have compiled a list of Earth Science Literacy
Principles that the educated public should know and appreciate
(http://www.earthscienceliteracy.org). CEETEP, by drawing on EarthScope
observations and results, especially helps to convey three of these concepts to
students and the public: "Earth scientists use repeatable observations and
testable ideas to understand and explain our planet;" "Earth is continuously
changing;" and "Natural hazards pose risks to humans."

Tens of thousands of Oregon and Washington residents live within severe
earthquake-shaking and tsunami-inundation zones, and millions of tourists visit
state and federal parks in these same areas each year. Teachers in the K-12
school systems convey some basics about geological hazards to their students,
and park rangers and museum educators likewise engage visitors at their sites.
Both of these groups also at times work with emergency managers. CEETEP is
strengthening these efforts by providing community-based workshops that bring
together all of these professionals to review the basic science of earthquakes
and tsunamis, learn about EarthScope and other research efforts that monitor the
dynamic Earth in the region, and develop ways to collectively engage students
and the general public on the mitigation of coastal geologic hazards.

The CEETEP effort involves geoscience educators from Oregon State University,
Central Washington University, and the University of Portland. From 2013 to
2015, approximately eight workshops are being conducted in coastal communities
of Oregon and Washington. Participating K-12 teachers and park interpreters are
learning about ongoing research on Cascadia plate tectonics, earthquakes and
tsunamis, and about how EarthScope is advancing frontiers of knowledge about
geologic hazards in the region. Emergency management outreach leaders are also
training the participants on emergency preparedness actions. Master teachers
offer pedagogical guidance and ideas about assessment and interaction, while
experienced interpreters discuss how to reach a variety of audiences in settings
outside the classroom. This exchange of pedagogies among educators facilitates
their collaboration and helps them communicate common messages about the science
and mitigation of Cascadia geohazards. In follow-up share-a-thons, the teachers
and interpreters showcase how they have crafted their new knowledge into Earth
science and emergency preparedness learning experiences for K-12 students and
visitors to parks and museums. This EarthScope educational program is critical
to promoting a culture of geohazard awareness so America can prepare for and
mitigate the effects of the next great Cascadia earthquake and tsunami, as well
as smaller earthquakes and tsunami from distant sources.