* 1250470
* Collaborative Research: Field-Based Quantification of Dehyration Flux from Subducting Lithologies, Syros and Sifnos, Greece
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Mark Caddick, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2018
* USD 236,964.00

The release of water (and other volatiles) from subducted rocks represents an
important part of the global geological water (and CO2) cycle. More
specifically, it is a crucial triggering process for arc volcanism, seismicity,
and the generation of ore forming fluids. Knowledge of the primary dehydration
flux from subducted rocks as well as the timing and location (e.g. depth and
temperature range) of this release is fundamental to understanding such broad
tectonic processes, but rates of fluid production are currently generally poorly
understood. The proposed research will employ novel methods to reconstruct
dehydration fluxes from a 45 million year old subduction complex now exposed at
the surface as well-preserved blueschist and eclogite rocks on the islands of
Syros and Sifnos, Greece. With this unique information, geodynamic model
predictions of subduction zone dehydration processes will be tested and
refined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key question is whether the primary dehydration
flux from subducted rocks is continuous or pulsed. While many past predictions
suggest relatively continuous release of water from descending rocks, recent
work (including preliminary work on Sifnos) has suggested that metamorphic
reactions during subduction can occur in brief bursts that rapidly liberate
water. Concentrically zoned garnet crystals, which grow during subduction zone
dehydration, will be dated like tree rings with the Samarium-Neodymium decay
system. Crucially, the dating resolution will be sufficient to resolve changes
in the rate of garnet growth (i.e. pulses) as short as a few hundred thousand
years. Thermodynamic analysis will provide constraints on the specific depth and
temperature interval of garnet growth, which will be linked directly to
concomitant water release for each rock. Constraints from thermodynamic analysis
will be integrated with direct rate &amp; age information from zoned garnet
geochronology to provide a unique dehydration chronology. These novel methods
and resulting datasets will provide scientists a new window into subduction zone
processes occurring deep within the Earth.