* 1250956
* BIGDATA: Small: Big Data for Everyone
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,05/31/2017
* William Cohen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 548,417.00

Although big data has had a huge impact in several areas, this impact is limited
by the high cost and poor quality of analyzing unstructured data, and the costs
of integrating data of multiple types. Lowering these costs will bring the
benefits of big data based research to many new areas. Against this background,
this project aims to develop machine-learning methods that read, analyze, and
integrate web-scale collections of text and other data. The project can be
expected to yield fundamental advances in data integration, machine learning,
natural language understanding, and automated inference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes research thrusts in (1) robust semi-
supervised bootstrap learning algorithms that can cope with ambiguity in text,
(2) algorithms for detecting and aligning the schemas implicit in semi-
structured sources relative to a shared common ontology, (3) NLP algorithms that
perform deeper analysis on text to extract infrequently mentioned yet important
facts, and (4) targeted reading agents capable of pursuing specific queries or
conjectures based on the scientist's current focus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated results of the project include fundamental
advances in each of the research thrusts and their synergistic integration into
software system (NESSIE) designed to help scientists in exploring scientific
hypotheses in their respective domains of interest, by supporting targeted
extraction of knowledge from large amounts of textual sources in relevant areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the research include advanced
techniques for extracting and organizing structured knowledge from text, and
integrate the learned information with existing structured knowledge in multiple
domains. The Additional broader impacts of the research include enhanced
opportunities fore advanced research-based training of graduate students. The
softare and data resulting from the research will be made freely available to
the larger scientific community.