* 1250333
* 2012 MRS Fall Meeting Symposium on Bioinspired Directional Surfaces: From Nature to Engineered Textured Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2013
* USD 7,200.00

This grant provides partial support for participants at the Symposium on
Bioinspired Directional Surfaces: From Nature to Engineered Textured Surfaces,
to be held during 2012 Materials Research Society (MRS) Fall Meeting on November
25-30, 2012 in Boston, Massachusetts, USA. This symposium will bring together
experts and researchers from industry, government labs, and academia to
establish and extend state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical approaches to
the synthesis and characterization of natural and synthetic surfaces that
demonstrate unidirectional surface properties. Examples of such natural
directional surfaces include textured surfaces on gecko, spider and lizard feet
that allow the animals to climb smooth vertical walls. Advancement in our
understanding of natural directional surfaces could lead to the development of
new synthetic materials and coatings with precisely tuned physicochemical
properties to transport water droplets, control imbibition, provide directional
adhesion, and exhibit directional friction. Such synthetic directional surfaces
are expected to be of great value to the energy and biomedical fields for
applications such as directional syringes, microprocessor cooling, high-
efficiency hydropower turbines, and nanoscale digital fluidics.

The symposium will include invited and contributed talks and a poster session
providing ground for intensive and fruitful interactions and discussions among
experts and young researchers. Interdisciplinary topics in chemistry, physics,
materials science and engineering related to the synthesis and characterization
of directional and anisotropic surfaces will be presented to inspire
experimental and theoretical research on new generations of coatings and
surfaces. The symposium will help to identify the key challenges and
technological needs for the rational design of smart surfaces, will spark
fruitful discussions in the community, and will attract a new generation of
scientists to this critically important field of materials research. Support
from this NSF grant will be used to defray conference expenses for graduate and
postgraduate students who otherwise would be unable to attend due to a lack of
funds. The symposium organizers will specifically promote the participation of
students who are members of groups underrepresented in science and engineering.