* 1250143
* EAR-PF:   Dynamic Rupture Modeling on Major San Andreas Fault Intersections
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Julian Lozos, Lozos, Julian C
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 02/29/2016
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Julian C. Lozos has been granted a NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and outreach plan at Stanford University and
the USGS Menlo Park campus. This project aims to improve our understanding of
the physical processes that determine how seismic rupture negotiates a junction
between major faults, and by extension, our understanding of fault segmentation.
Dr. Lozos will conduct dynamic rupture models to produce a suite of scenario
earthquakes for the junctions between the San Andreas Fault and three other
faults: the San Jacinto Fault, the Garlock Fault, and the Calaveras Fault
respectively. Each of these junctions represents different types of geometrical,
geological, and stress complexity, and each poses a significant seismic hazard
to its surrounding area. Thus, the focus on the San Andreas system will improve
understanding of general fault physics, as well as of seismic hazard in
California. Previous studies have focused on these faults individually, or on
generalizations and simplifications of the types of geometries represented by
these junctions. This study will consist of more realistic and detailed modeling
of the study areas, by incorporating many types of complexity into the model
inputs. Complex fault geometry, velocity structure, and initial stresses will be
informed by fault geology and seismicity literature, as well as by static stress
modeling. Once the scenario modeling is completed, Dr. Lozos will compare the
results to paleoseismic and historical data, both to constrain the modeling
results against known past fault behavior, and to provide insight into the sizes
and extents of earthquakes at these fault junctions in the past.

Many people live in the vicinity of the study areas, and thus, this project
includes an education and outreach program focused on informing the public of
the basic science of earthquakes, the related hazard, and on how to prepare for
them. Dr. Lozos will give a series of public talks in communities near his study
areas. Through Stanford, he will help lead field trips for K-12 students to
local fault zones, and through the USGS, he will participate in additional
public outreach events. In addition to public outreach, Dr. Lozos will also
assist in developing a graduate-level course on fault physics at Stanford, which
will help prepare him for a future career in academia.