* 1250368
* Extension of the Plagioclase-liquid Hygrometer to Rhyolites and Sr and Ba Partitioning Studies: New Phase Equilibrium Experiments on Hydrous Rhyolite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Rebecca Lange, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2016
* USD 355,191.00

Rhyolite is the most differentiated silicate magma type on Earth and makes up
some of the largest explosive eruptions (100-1000's km3), including those that
have occurred at Yellowstone National Park. Understanding the origin and
evolution of large-volume rhyolitic magmatic systems is of considerable interest
because their formation must fundamentally reconstitute and differentiate
continental crust, and they are candidates for future "supervolcano" eruptions.
The mineral phases in rhyolites often provide a rich opportunity to examine pre-
eruptive temperatures, oxidation states, and melt water concentrations, as well
as time scales for melt accumulation in the upper crust. However, there is a
surprising paucity of phase-equilibrium experiments on natural rhyolite melt
compositions, which limits the potential to use these mineral phases to extract
the maximum amount of information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to perform hydrous phase-equilibrium experiments in a cold-seal and
piston-cylinder apparatus under controlled oxygen and water fugacity (fO2 and
fH2O) conditions on a variety of natural rhyolite liquids over a range of
temperature and pressure, which will enable calibration of the plagioclase-
liquid hygrometer to rhyolite compositions. The experiments will also be used to
determine trace element partition coefficients between mineral and melt,
particularly for Sr and Ba. The partitioning behavior is critical to
understanding how extremely low-Sr rhyolites form, some of which constitute some
of the largest (most voluminous) explosive eruptions on Earth. Finally, these
experiments will greatly enhance the calibration of broad thermodynamic models
of crystal-melt equilibrium, which when combined with geophysical models can
provide a deeper understanding of how large-volume rhyolite magma bodies form
and why they sometimes erupt explosively, which is a significant geohazard.