* 1250700
* Development of Experience-Dependent Responses to Voice Pitch in Newborns and Infants
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Fuh-Cherng Jeng, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 06/30/2016
* USD 166,624.00

Intonation as a change in voice pitch can carry important information in
communication. In non-tonal languages such as American English, differences in
intonation can change a statement into a question while in tonal languages such
as Mandarin Chinese, intonations can change the meaning of every single spoken
word. Despite its apparent importance, it remains unclear whether and how the
ability to perceive tonal difference is acquired through learning during early
development. To address this important question, Dr. Fuh-Cherng Jeng of
University of Ohio proposes a project to be conducted at two infant centers, one
in the United State and one in Taiwan, to first investigate whether newborn
babies born to a tonal (Taiwan) and atonal (US) language environments differ in
their ability to perceive intonation and to then follow up 3 months later to
assess whether the exposure to different language environment lead to changes in
this ability. Dr. Jeng will employ non-invasive electrophysiological techniques
to measure how brain activity in subcortical and cortical structures changes in
response to voice pitch at each point of the development. Through this
technically challenging study, Dr. Jeng expects to answer the question whether
the ability to detect intonation is learned or innate and how plastic are the
infant brains in response to exposure to early life language environment.

The proposed study could lead to new approaches for diagnosis and possible
remediation of developmental disorders of language. In particular, this research
may have implications for the early detection and identification of
social/communicative disorders such as autism. Furthermore, through the US-
Taiwan collaboration, the PI creates exceptional opportunities for US graduate
students with extensive international experience. These experiences are expected
to broaden their understanding of research in a different cultural context, help
students develop personal relations with Chinese researchers, and lay the
foundation for initiating their own future international collaboration activity.
Such experiences will also provide teaching and training opportunities for the
students to deal with challenges and benefits of conducting research on a global
stage. Finally, Dr. Jeng will participate in the big data effort by making the
data available to support other coordinated NSF efforts that aim to make use of
real data in the teaching of STEM related courses and to enable participation in
discovery science by those who would otherwise have no access to such data.

This project is co-funded by the International Science and Engineering Section
of the NSF Office of International and Integrative Activities