* 1250903
* WORKSHOP ON NEXUS OF ENERGY/WATER/CLIMATE/AIR POLLUTION (NEWCAP) -- A Sino (Mainland-Taiwan)/U.S. Partnership Initiative, August 2013, Arlington, VA
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* David Shaw, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 70,000.00

ABSTRACT 1250903 (Shaw). This workshop on the nexus of energy/water/climate/air
pollution (NEWCAP) will bring together Sino (Mainland-Taiwan) and U.S.
researchers to focus on NEWCAP issues with special emphasis on the effects of
controlling fossil fuel combustion emissions on cloud droplet nucleation
processes, the subsequent suppression of rain formation in the lower
troposphere, and the overall shifting of patterns of precipitation extremes. The
current science and technology outlook for Asia-Pacific related to NEWCAP will
be explored at the workshop. Discussions will identify needs for sustained
investigations in the future to fill knowledge gaps and improve capability for
applications to environmental management. The conference will explore long-term
theoretical, field, and laboratory research opportunities in relevant topical
areas. Questions addressed will include: How can international leadership and
partnerships in the science and technology of NEWCAP be developed? How important
are changes in microclimate that are affecting clouds and precipitation in the
Asia-Pacific region (relevant to the hydrologic cycle and water supply)? What
growth characteristics of the megacities will influence energy production and
use, including industry and transportation? What characteristics will be factors
in NEWCAP interactions? How will multipollutant air quality strategies change in
the next 25 years in response to the potential influence of climate change,
including changes in precipitation extremes? The workshop will be held in the
U.S. during August 2013. This award is co-funded by GEO's Atmospheric Chemistry
program and Hydrologic Sciences program, ENG's Environmental Sustainability
program, and OISE's Global Venture Fund.