* 1250388
* 3D Visualization and Advanced Mapping Techniques for Metamorphic Terranes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Terry Pavlis, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2018
* USD 223,527.00

Field geology is the foundation of the solid earth sciences but suffers from an
image problem that stems in part from field geologists clinging to techniques
and technology that have seen little change since the 19th century. Field
geology is at the beginnings of a revolution, however, with the advent of new
technologies that not only increase field efficiency but allow earth scientists
to analyze problems that were impossibly complex in the past. Key to this
developing revolution are three-dimensional (3D) visualization capabilities, and
true 3D renderings that can be obtained from combinations of high resolution
topography and high resolution photography draped on the terrain model. This
study is exploring new techniques and workflows that are best suited to
analyzing complex metamorphic structures using modern field computer
capabilities and software. The study site is the west-central Panamint Mountains
where a metamorphic complex is exposed over elevations ranging from near sea
level to ~10,000 feet and surface conditions ranging from hyper-arid desert to
moderately weathered rocks in open, sub-alpine forest. The study is evaluating
different field workflows, beginning with a variant on conventional mapping
techniques using Geographic Information System (GIS) field software supplemented
with improved positional accuracy using laser ranging devices, limiting 3D
visualization to an evening exercise tied to data backup and cleanup. This will
be followed by experimentation with real-time, 3D field visualizations based on
initial development of a high resolution digital elevation model (DEM) using a
terrestrial laser scanner and completed with a real-time, in the field, 3D
visualizations. Synergistic activities include using U-Pb geochronology to
constrain the absolute age of deformation events, testing rock unit correlations
through detrital zircon signature, and finite strain studies to aid kinematic
interpretations.

This project has potential broader applications and implications for all field
sciences with the potential to transform the way in which field studies are
conducted. Although the project focus is on complex geologic structure, the
techniques developed in the study will be exportable to a wider range of field
projects in academia and industry. Digital mapping techniques are already seeing
widespread application in a variety of fields but the present generations of
methods are flat-map centric in a three-dimensional world. Moving to a true
three-dimensional workflow should allow resolution of problems there were
impossibly complex based on a flat-map workflow. Moreover, development of these
techniques carries educational applications with the potential to allow
accelerated learning of spatial concepts. To insure wide dissemination of
project results the PI is conducting annual short courses in modern field
techniques. The results of this study have the potential to profoundly impact
that manner in which field sciences, including geologic mapping, are conducted
and will thus be of significant value to the scientific community. In addition
to the research goals, the project is supporting the training of students in
STEM science at the graduate to undergraduate level at the University of Texas
at El Paso. Given the university's demographics, the project will include
students from underrepresented groups. The field studies in this project are
entirely within Death Valley National Park, and the research products that will
derive from this study will provide a resource for the National Park Service and
will include outreach activities that will benefit the general public.