* 1250305
* Collaborative Research: Recharge, Mixing and Eruption Triggering Mechanisms at Chaos Crags and 1915 Eruptions, Lassen Volcanic Center, California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Kari Cooper, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2014
* USD 59,428.00

This project will produce advances in pure science with broader impacts in
public safety and education. The Lassen volcanic center had its last major
eruption in 1915 at Lassen Peak, and it is located beneath many of the flight
paths of airlines that connect cities in the western U.S. An understanding of
how and why volcanic eruptions are triggered at Lassen Peak thus will play a key
role in future hazards assessments. Our study brings together researchers with a
wide variety of expertise to examine several processes operating prior to
eruption, including eruption triggers and magma storage. For example, prior work
shows several mechanisms by which an eruption even may be triggered. One line of
thought is that eruptions are triggered soon after new magma is introduced into
a magma reservoir beneath a volcano, as new magmas mix with magmas already
present in a shallow chamber. Alternatively, new magma inputs may need to cool,
and partially crystallize before an eruption occurs. This cooling drives water
into the remaining uncrystallized magma, which increases pressure within the
magmatic system if enough water is concentrated into the magma to form a vapor
phase. Expansion of the vapor phase may crack the overlying rock and allow an
eruption to occur. Lassen provides an important testing ground for these ideas
because the two most recent eruptive episodes (1915 at Lassen Peak, and the
earlier eruption at approximately 1144 AD at Chaos Crags) both show evidence for
pre-eruption magma inputs, but those fresh inputs acted very differently in the
two cases. Thus a comparison of the two eruptions will provide insight into the
importance of different triggering mechanisms in the Lassen magma system. This
study will bring together researchers and students across the spectrum of
universities, with representatives from major research institutions, state
service universities and a liberal arts college. This will enhance the education
of many students, as it provides valuable opportunities to support under-
represented groups (Hispanics and women) at both the undergraduate and graduate
level, to work in laboratories and with researchers across the globe. In
addition, many undergraduates at CSU Fresno will participate in the research as
research projects are routinely integrated into the laboratory requirements for
core courses.

To attack the research problems outlined above, we will perform a collaborative
study of the relationships between magma recharge (fresh inputs of magma), magma
mixing and eruption, in the Chaos Crags and 1915 eruptions of the Lassen
Volcanic Center, California. The study will use a combination of textural
studies to assess crystallization processes, U-series (radiometric) and
diffusion profile methods for age dating, and mineral-melt and fluid inclusion
studies to delimit pressures and temperatures of magma storage. The specific
targets of investigation are the 6 domes of Chaos Crags (denoted as A to F), and
the more well-mixed 1915 eruptive products at Lassen Peak. At Lassen Peak,
magmas mixed intimately prior to eruption, while at Chaos Crags, mixing was for
some reason inhibited. Does this contrast reflect (a) the timing between fresh
magma inputs and eruption; (b) contrasts in temperatures and depths of magma
storage/interaction or; (c) the relative amounts of hot fresh magma inputs
compared to the cooler magmas that already inhabit the chamber (left-over from
some prior magmatic episode)? The Chaos Crags units are of special interest
because Dome A shows little evidence of mixing?and so yields the most extreme
felsic and mafic compositions; all other domes, and the 1915 lavas, fall between
these extremes. Dome A thus provides access to end-member magmas. The Chaos
Crags and Lassen Peak suites also expose interesting textural contrasts as the
Chaos Crags rocks are more crystalline, and their enclaves show a greater
variety of quenching textures, which suggests a relationship between mixing and
recharge. Key questions include: (1) Does recharge of a chamber with mafic magma
trigger mixing (and eventually, eruption), or is there a time lag between
recharge and mixing? (2) What effect does a time lag between the initial
intrusion of felsic magma and the later intrusion of mafic recharge magma have
on the efficacy of mixing and the time scale of eruption? (3) Does the ratio of
mafic recharge/resident felsic magma affect mixing and/or the timing of
eruption? (4) Do the depths and temperatures of magma storage affect the
mixing/eruption process?