* 1250153
* EAGER: The Feasibility of Simulating of Weak Volcanic Shockwaves with Analog Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Allen, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,482.00

Information about conditions at a volcano vent can be extracted from
observations of atmospheric shock waves. An improved understanding of the burst
phenomena that generate shock waves and the dependence upon volcano shape and
eruption properties may lead to new methods to access information on the
eruption intensity as well as generate the initial conditions required in a
buoyancy predictive models of the gas/ash plume dispersion. This EaGER project
is a one-year feasibility study that will investigate experimental simulation of
a volcanic explosion using a unique shock tube
apparatus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use of atmospheric shock propagation to gauge
explosive power and eruption temperature is new and untested. If successful,
atmospheric shock propagation has the potential to radically improve the
accuracy of measuring explosive power. At the conclusion of the project we
anticipate being able to definitively address concerns regarding the feasibility
of a shock tube experiment to scale volcanic explosions. The theory developed
will enable more precise prediction of explosive power derived from atmospheric
shock wave propagation. The proposed research is interdisciplinary and
represents a new collaboration between geophysics and mechanical engineering at
Michigan Tech. It includes an important opportunity for the postdoctoral
investigator to establish his career. The project will address an area of high
risk: the feasibility of scaling volcanic eruption with a shock tube experiment.