* 1250394
* Application of quantum cascade laser-infrared absorption spectroscopy for methane clumped isotope thermometry using doubly isotope substituted methane (13CH3D)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Shuhei Ono, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* diane mcknight
* 04/30/2016
* USD 139,999.00

Technical description. In this project, we apply quantum cascade laser infrared
absorption spectroscopy (QCLAS) to precisely measure abundance of doubly
isotope-substituted methane (13CH3D) as a new and robust proxy for the source of
methane in geologic environments. On the first order, 13CH3D abundance would
indicate the temperature at which the methane was produced or internally
equilibrated for its 13C-D bond abundance. On the second order, kinetic process
may produce different clumped isotope effect that may be used to fingerprint
unique processes, as has been seen for the 13C16O18O system. The QCLAS
instrument has already been installed in the PI's laboratory and the precision
of 0.1 to 0.5 permil have been achieved for four major isotopologues of methane
(12CH4, 13CH4, 12CH3D, and 13CH3D). The goal of the project is to further
optimize the QCLAS and sample inlet system, and calibrate the 13CH3D clumped
isotope thermometry scale by using thermally scrambled methane (>200 °C) as well
as microbially produced methane (<100°C). Some geologic methane will be analyzed
as a pilot study.

Tunable laser spectroscopy is an emerging new technology only recently applied
in the field of stable isotope geochemistry. This research explores its
application to precise measurements of isotopologue species that are technically
challenging by conventional magnetic sector-isotope ratio mass spectrometry
instruments. Applications of this new technology are not limited to 13CH3D, and
it could be applied to other clumped isotopologue systems (e.g., CO2, N2O and
SO2). The proposed project will facilitate the close collaboration between
Aerodyne Inc. (US small business) and MIT, as well as other US and international
collaborators, for the development of new generation isotope monitoring
equipment. One graduate student will actively participate in development and be
trained as a future isotope geochemist with a strong instrumental background in
this emerging new optical technology. This project will be included in
undergraduate class materials. This project also helps to add to scientific
infrastructure via development of an instrument that will be available to
researchers at MIT and beyond.

Non-technical description.

Methane is both an alternative energy source as well as being a potent
greenhouse gas. It is likely to play a significant role in future
diversification of our energy resources through new harvesting technologies such
as fracking. Further harvesting of methane has the potential for increase
release of methane to the atmosphere, which may impact climate. The project
outlined in this proposal is for the development of a new, lower-cost method to
measure carbon and hydrogen isotope abundances in methane from natural sources
(e.g. wetlands, permafrost) and anthropogenic sources (e.g. agriculture). These
measurements can provide us with a far better understanding of methane cycling,
which may have implications for environmental management of methane.