* 1250367
* EAGER: Human-Centered Mitigation of the Insider Threat
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Linda Camp, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 99,989.00

The research provides a method to detect and mitigate the insider threat.
Currently insider threat detection is focused only on the malicious person
attempting to harm the organization. Most employees seek to assist their
employers. Very few people want to hurt the business providing their livelihood.
However, many employees take risks (sometimes very serious risks) on the
network. We simultaneous help the benevolent employee and detect the malicious
one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our system helps employees by showing them network
risks, and helping them decrease the risk. Sometimes risk-taking is worth it;
for example, emailing a document to a superior in dire straights using gmail.
Sending documents over gmail is risky. Our system helps the employee mitigate
the risks they are taking. In the gmail example, our system automatically
changes the settings to encrypt the email. Rather than walking through changing
setting (which can be intimidating) or just popping up a confusing and technical
dialogue box, we just encrypt the email for the employee. Also, in this case our
system shows the employee that choosing not to encrypt the email will be very
risky. The document (if it is not encrypted) can be seen by anyone on the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important part of our system is that it treats
employees as partners to the organization. At the same time our system detects
insiders by watching across the organization for the person taking both large
one-time risks and small cumulative risks. This proposal is innovative, and a
very different approach than industry uses today.