* 1250449
* Deuterium\Hydrogen Partitioning Between C-O-H species in Silicate Melts and Fluids: An In-Situ Experimental Study at High Pressure and Temperature
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* George Cody, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2016
* USD 255,474.00

Water is essential to a wide range of geological processes occurring on Earth.
The cycling of water, for example, governs the flux of heat and mass between the
lithosphere and hydrosphere. To better understand the water cycle in the Earth?s
interior, however, it is important to constrain the distribution of chemical
components such as hydrogen and deuterium (hydrogen with an added neutron ?
?heavy hydrogen?) that constitute the water dissolved in volcanic glasses and
minerals. The concentration of deuterium- and hydrogen-rich molecules in these
phases likely constrain the observed differences on the hydrogen-deuterium
composition between mantle and oceanic H2O reservoir, as well as the subduction
zone contributions to the mantle-water cycle. These differences in the abundance
of hydrogen/deuterium between water reservoirs implies that cycling of water in
the mantle is not extensive or that hydrogen and deuterium react differently at
high temperatures when dissolved in minerals, melts and fluids. Experimental
results will, thus, shed light on the fate of water that resides deep in the
Earth?s interior and promote our current understanding of planetary evolution
and formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, we will investigate the
relationship between deuterium/hydrogen partitioning and speciation of C-O-H
volatiles in silicate melts and fluids at pressures and temperatures reflecting
lower crust and upper mantle conditions. We will study the relative distribution
of H-D isotopologues of methane, hydrogen, and water dissolved in melts and
coexisting fluids in-situ by Raman and infrared spectroscopy in a series of
hydrothermal diamond-anvil cell experiments at high temperature and pressure.
These experiments will be complemented by the use of 1H/2H Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance and TC/EA-Isotope Mass Ratio Spectrometry on quenched melts.
Experimental results will help us constrain isotope exchange reactions as
function of elemental speciation and partitioning between melts, crystalline
phases and aqueous solutions. The novel use of vibrational spectroscopy for in-
situ and real-time measurement of isotope molecules can be expanded to other
applications including mineral physics, geochemistry and energy-related
research. An undergraduate student will participate during a 10-week internship
program established in the second and third year of the project. This research
will also support the M.Sc. thesis of a graduate student from the George Mason
University.