* 1250574
* A Proposal to Provide Technical Assistance in the National Science Foundation's Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Undergraduate Program
* EHR,HRD
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2015
* USD 813,835.00

This award enables the Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network to offer 7
workshops for faculty at HBCUs. The series includes proposal development
workshops for science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) faculty at
these minority-serving institutions that have never received HBCU-UP support.
Workshops in the series focuses on enhancing the ability of STEM and/or
Education faculty at current HBCU-UP grantee institutions to prepare competitive
Broadening Participation Research (BPR) and Research Initiation Awards (RIA)
proposals to NSF's HBCU-UP program.

The proposed project convenes STEM junior faculty from grantee institutions to
discuss effective mentoring and training of STEM undergraduates as research
assistants. These workshops are designed to help ensure that students who
graduate from HBCU institutions with degrees in STEM disciplines are well-
prepared to successfully pursue STEM graduate study or to transition into the
STEM workforce.

The workshops will involve a minimum of 250 different STEM faculty from HBCUs
and provide a strong foundation for institutions to pursue and successfully
receive increased support for STEM and STEM education activities on their
respective campuses. Strengthening STEM disciplinary offerings at minority-
serving institutions represented in the workshop series increases the number and
quality of preparation of STEM graduates from these institutions. This, in turn,
positions HBCUs to enhance and expand their contribution to the quality and
productivity of the Nation?s STEM workforce.