* 1250885
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   The Legality of Intellectual Property in Vietnam
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Sally Merry, New York University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 01/31/2014
* USD 22,244.00

How and what are the Vietnamese people learning about intellectual property
("IP") law? In the last generation, Vietnam has received over $80 billion of
foreign investment, most of it since joining the World Trade Organization and
revising its legal codes to put IP law on the books. In action, law is not the
source of most social regulation in Vietnam, and a concept of ideas as property
seems foreign among the pirated DVDs and unlicensed software everywhere in
H&#7891; Chí Minh City. Nevertheless, domestic and global brands proliferate in
Vietnam, and global corporate employers introduce their habitual ways of talking
and acting: ways that reflect certain proprietary relationships around ideas,
and a place for law to organize those relationships. What is this cultural
contact doing to the place of IP in Vietnamese society? And what might it be
doing to the common place of law?

This project analyzes the legality of IP law within engineering in Vietnam,
which is currently being negotiated through the coming together of the disparate
patterns of talk and practice of international employers or educators and of
local engineers. The methodology includes semi-structured interviews and
ethnographic observation in a European-owned factory and in an English-language
university in H&#7891; Chí Minh City. The research examines how engineers
beginning their practice adopt or modify the patterns of talk or practice that
give some ideas a proprietary sense, and that give law a place in those
proprietary relationships. The interaction between different cultural practices
amidst changing legality is fertile empirical ground for theoretical development
in this area of simultaneous legal and social change. More broadly, this
research engages debates on the policy of global IP protection by reframing the
issue around the dynamics of the growing middle-class and professional groups
outside the legal community in Vietnam.