* 1250395
* EAGER: Toward a User-centered, Inclusive, and Personalized Approach to Mobile Web Adaptation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Lina Zhou, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2015
* USD 287,870.00

The PI's goal in this exploratory research is to seek ways to fundamentally
improve the user experience when browsing the Web on mobile handheld devices.
Existing approaches to mobile Web adaptation have a number of major problems or
limitations. Although no single interface design can address the different needs
of individual users, existing adaptation methods typically offer one-size-fits-
all solutions. While many contextual factors affect Web navigation on handheld
devices, relatively little context data is systematically captured today in
real-time and exploited in adaptation. Current techniques do not provide users
with cues to help them find information of interest. And almost all existing
adaptation solutions do not consider the problem of mobile Web accessibility for
disabled users; in particular, there is a paucity of knowledge on how to design
and deploy the ability to invoke on a mobile device in a personalized, device-
aware manner assistive technologies or special features that may be needed by an
individual user. In this project the PI will take the first steps toward
development and evaluation of a transformative user-centered, inclusive, and
personalized approach to mobile Web adaptation that dynamically adapts the
content and display of Web pages based on users' information needs, device
characteristics, and accessibility requirements. To these ends, he will focus on
users with visual impairments. Specific research questions to be addressed
include the following: Can a user-centered approach to mobile Web adaptation
better meet the preferences and needs of both typical users and those with
visual impairments? Can device-aware mobile Web adaptation better support
accessibility? Can we design and build a cloud-based integrative, personalized
mobile Web adaptation system that provides ubiquitous access to not only typical
users but to users with visual impairments as well? Project outcomes will
include design, implementation and evaluation of a prototype cloud-based service
that integrates a novel user-centered approach to mobile Web adaptation that
enables users to specify and adjust adaptation preferences and strategies, a
novel device-aware adaptation that dynamically adapts Web pages based on
characteristics of individual mobile devices, and novel personalized adaptation
techniques for restructuring Web content so as to provide useful information
cues and accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will
benefit not only researchers in the related fields of computer science and
information systems, but also manufacturers and designers of handheld devices as
well as individual users. The project will provide unique insights to
manufacturers of mobile devices and to mobile application designers on how to
achieve user-centered, context-aware adaptive interfaces for handheld devices
that improve the user's navigation performance and overall Web browsing
experience. It will lay the foundations for a novel personalized adaptation
solution that improves mobile Web accessibility, for different user communities.
And it will provide technical guidance and empirical evidence on how to reduce
the digital divide as it relates to the mobile Web. Project findings will be
disseminated through interdisciplinary conferences, workshops and journals, and
they will be incorporated into existing graduate and undergraduate courses at
UMBC as well as a variety of K-12 outreach programs.