* 1250350
* EAGER: Nonparametric Machine Learning on Sets, Functions, and Distributions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Artur Dubrawski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Most machine learning algorithms operate on fixed dimensional feature vector
representations. In many applications, however, the natural representation of
the data consists of more complex objects, for example functions, distributions,
and sets, rather than finite-dimensional vectors. This project aims to develop a
new family of machine learning algorithms that can operate directly on these
complex objects. The key innovation is efficient estimation of certain
information theoretic quantities for learning predictive models from complex
data. The research is organized around three specific aims: (a) Development and
analysis of nonparametric estimators for certain important functionals of
densities, such as entropy, mutual information, conditional mutual information,
and divergence; and study of the theoretical properties of these estimators
including consistency, convergence rates of the bias and variance, and
asymptotic normality. (b) Use of the preceding estimators to design new learning
algorithms for clustering, classification, regression, and anomaly detection
that work directly on sets, functions, and distributions without any additional,
hand-made feature extraction, histogram creation, or density estimation steps
that could lead to loss of information. (c) Study of the theoretical properties
of these new machine learning algorithms (computation time, sample complexity,
generalization error) and empirical evaluation of the algirithms them to a
variety of important real-world problems, including nuclear detection
astronomical data analysis, and computer vision in collaboration with
researchers at Lawrence Livermore, University of Washington and Johns Hopkins
University, and Carnegie Mellon University
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project, if successful,
could substantially advance the current state-of-the-art in building predictive
models from complex data. The results of research, including publications and
open source software, will be freely disseminated to the larger scientific
community. The project provides enhanced research-based training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students at Carnegie Mellon University as well as
the collaborating institutions.