* 1250886
* BIGDATA: Small: DCM: Data Management for Analytics Applications on Modern Architecture
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Jignesh Patel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 680,916.00

We are now in the midst of the big data revolution where enterprise services are
increasingly being driven by operational and business models that are powered by
data analysis. A key part in making big data successful is ensuring that basic
data processing primitives can execute efficiently on large and every increasing
volumes of data. However, data processing kernels today largely employ
techniques that have been designed about three decades ago, and are now out of
touch with modern hardware that has made a fundamental technological shift.
First, driven by power consumption characteristics, modern processors now have
multiple processing units (called cores) fabricated in a single chip. In
contrast, processors just a few years ago were single core. Second,
traditionally the storage media for data has been the magnetic hard disk. Now,
data has started to move nearly permanently to higher levels of the memory
hierarchy, and more specifically to main memory. The goal of this project is to
rethink key aspects of data processing techniques for the modern many-core and
main memory hardware environment. The research approach is to design, implement
and evaluate various methods for data kernels that can be used to store and
process data efficiently. In other words, the key focus is on producing data
kernels that "run at the speed of modern hardware." Thus, this project aims to
have a broad impact on the big data ecosystem by developing faster, cheaper and
more energy-efficient data kernels.