* 1250580
* CAP: Mobile Pathways for 21st Century Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Sousan Arafeh, OpenAirBoston.net
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 48,500.00

Open Air Boston (OAB) is a nonprofit organization whose mission is to bridge the
digital divide so that low-income, under-served populations in the City of
Boston have access to digital communications technology and the Internet. The
OAB Technology Goes Home (TGH) Program is an 11-year-old, award-winning City
initiative that gives under-served residents the opportunity to access the tools
and education required for 21st century skills development. The next step in
this initiative has been conceptualized as a collaboration with local informal
education organizations to design game-like community learning experiences that
use mobile technologies to engage students and their parents in scientific
reasoning and exploration that will help them learn STEM content and practices
and perhaps become interested in STEM careers. This Cyberlearning Capacity-
Building Project (CAP) is for the purpose of building the research capacity of
this already-strong team so that they have the capacity to develop an approach
that is based on the best that the literature has to tell us about how people
learn and how people learn with technology and so that they can use their
efforts as an infrastructure for carrying out research that will advance what is
known about engaging low-income, under-served populations of teens in STEM
endeavors in beneficial ways. The team is undertaking three capacity-building
sub-goals to help them incorporate state-of-the-art knowledge and findings into
their approach: (1) further developing the project team, partnerships, and
collaboration activities of the team so that they can successfully achieve those
goals; (2) synthesizing the research literature on the use of a social-mobile
learning applications to engage students in informal STEM learning; and (3)
synthesizing the research literature on engaging under-represented, under-served
middle school students and their parents in technology-based collaborative
educational activities. Experts on how people learn and how people learn with
technology are collaborating with the already-existing team to conceptualize an
approach to using mobile devices to engage middle schoolers and their families
in STEM exploration and investigation in their community that has foundations in
what is known about how people learn and engaging adolescents in science and
that has good potential to lead to STEM learning and interest in STEM-related
careers.