* 1250786
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Mining large graphs through subgraph sampling
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Harish Sethu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 560,367.00

The size and complexity of these "Big Data" graphs have always posed significant
challenges, limiting the scope of their analysis and thus also limiting the
implications that one can draw from them. Mining data from large real-world
graphs typically poses two challenges: one of computational resources and
another of incomplete information. A comprehensive analysis of these graphs has
usually required access to large distributed computing platforms and
sophisticated software. This project aims to address a portion of these
challenges by investigating a new method, based in statistics and spectral graph
theory, to infer essential properties of the full graph through extracting a
representative sample of small subgraphs from the full graph. The goal is to
reduce the computational burden on researchers interested in large graphs and
thus broaden participation in "Big Data" activities. As is now well-understood,
the analysis of large graphs has many applications in a variety of fields
including business, economics, public policy development, law enforcement,
public health, sociology and, of course, computer science. This breadth of
applicability and the proposed curriculum development activities have the
potential to draw and retain a greater diversity of students into computer
science and engineering and increasing the participation by under-represented
groups.

Many of the principal properties of a graph can be inferred from the graph
spectrum (eigenvalues of its adjacency or the normalized Laplacian matrix). In
particular, a rich set of interlacing results in spectral graph theory allows
one to bound the eigenvalues of the full graph using the eigenvalues of its
subgraphs. This project will develop new algorithms for generating subgraph
samples, and then use basic estimation theory from statistics and the
interlacing results from spectral graph theory to discern properties of a large
graph. The new method based on subgraph sampling (as opposed to node or edge
sampling) uses results from spectral graph theory and statistics to estimate the
spectrum (eigenvalues) of the graph based on the spectrum of the sampled
subgraphs. The goal is to allow a meaningful analysis of extremely large graphs
without the use of anything beyond a typical desktop computer. The data
collected and the algorithms developed as part of this project will be made
available to the larger research community through a data repository hosted by
Drexel University. The project will also make contributions to open-source
software.