* 1250296
* Development of a Micro-baddeleyite (ZrO2) U-series Chronometer for Recent Mafic Lavas
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Axel Schmitt, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2015
* USD 199,983.00

Reconstructing the pre- and post-eruptive chronology of past volcanic eruptions
is essential for understanding the patterns of human response to natural
disasters, and to devise mitigation strategies for extant volcanic hazards.
Despite the maturity of many geochronological techniques applied to date
Quaternary volcanic eruptions, considerable uncertainties remain with regard to
the timing of magmatic processes culminating in violent eruptions, as well as
their environmental impact even for fairly recent events. This research will
develop a dating tool for common types of volcanoes characterized by
comparatively low silica abundances, which can be difficult to date using
existing chronometers. Ultimately, improved age constraints on the eruptive
history of such volcanoes will lead to better assessments of their volcanic
hazards.

The new chronometer is based on the radioactive decay of uranium intrinsic to
the crystal lattice of baddeleyite, a zirconium oxide mineral. Crystal sizes for
baddeleyite are typically small, and therefore this research will improve
electron-beam techniques for locating micro-baddeleyite crystals in rocks, and
develop analytical procedures to analyze baddeleyite via secondary ionization
mass spectrometry to detect trace abundances of uranium and its radioactive
decay products. Representative volcanoes will be investigated to calibrate the
baddeleyite chronometer against other dating techniques. For this, University of
California Los Angeles researchers are collaborating with domestic and
international volcanologists. Case studies include volcanoes in the Cascades
(USA) and the Campanian volcanic province (Italy). These volcanoes represent
long-lived volcanic systems with a protracted history of recurrent eruptions
over tens to hundred thousands of years. Establishing precise and accurate
volcanic chronostratigraphies through baddeleyite uranium disequilibrium dating
will ultimately contribute to an improved understanding of magma output rates
and eruptive recurrence intervals in a broad range of magmatic environments.