* 1250451
* Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Bubble Dynamics in Volcanic Conduits
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Helge Gonnermann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2014
* USD 129,773.00

Volcanic eruptions can have significant impact on life, infrastructure, commerce
and climate. Erupting magma is a mixture of hot rock fragments (formerly magma),
such as volcanic ash, and volcanic gases that are transported to surface as
bubbles within the erupting magma. Bubbles may both, confine magmatic gases
potentially resulting in large excess gas pressures, or they may facilitate
syneruptive gas loss by forming permeable networks during bubble coalescence.
Consequently, bubbles play a crucial role in a feedback with magma ascent rate
and affect the style and explosive intensity of eruptions.

This project will further our quantitative understanding of the various
processes that affect bubbles and magmatic gases during volcanic eruptions. We
will develop a new bubble-scale numerical model for bubble growth, deformation
and coalescence. The model will be calibrated to laboratory experiments that are
specifically designed to facilitate the integration of empirical data. The
bubble-scale model will then be coupled with a multiphase conduit flow model to
address problems such as (1) the spatiotemporal evolution of gas pressure in an
erupting magma with a polydisperse bubble size distribution; (2) the
implications for magma fragmentation; (3) bubble coalescence during shear
deformation of the erupting magma; (4) open-system gas loss by permeable flow
through coalesced bubbles; and (5) shear localization within the ascending
magma.