* 1250052
* IGERT: Functional Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Solutions
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Jochen Lauterbach, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
provides Ph.D. students at the University of South Carolina at Columbia with the
unique training and skill sets to advance the science and engineering of
nanomaterials for sustainable energy generation. Trainees are collaborating in
interdisciplinary research teams to receive a technical education in alternative
energy production and to gain experience in technology commercialization,
entrepreneurship and science communication.

Intellectual Merit: Three main research areas direct trainees to design
materials that can be applied to energy conversion involving: (1) transformation
of carbon dioxide into liquid fuels; (2) conversion of biomass feedstock to
liquid fuels; and (3) modifying solar energy into electricity. Trainees engage
in problem--?]based learning and use case studies to address each research
question through research and coursework. While exploring the basic underlying
physical laws and engineering constraints for their research areas, students are
participating and competing in a new campus innovation program.

Broader Impacts: This project?fs emphasis on entrepreneurship and strong
technical training is preparing trainees to take leadership roles within the
fast growing renewable energy industries and existing fossil fuel
infrastructure. The University of South Carolina at Columbia?fs campus programs
and partnership with North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University,
encourage the participation of underrepresented groups in this project.
Additionally, trainees are engaging in outreach activities with the South
Carolina Governor?fs School for Science and Mathematics, to provide research
opportunities and mentoring to STEM high school students.

IGERT is an NSF--?]wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating
U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
establish new models for graduate education and training in a fertile
environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries, and to engage students in understanding the processes by which
research is translated to innovations for societal benefit.