* 1250280
* CDS&amp;E-ENG:   A Novel Approach for Oceanographic Explorations: Multi-Scale Modeling and Simulation using CFD Enabled by AUVs Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Ranganathan Kumar, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 03/31/2018
* USD 462,577.00

The research objective of this grant is to understand the fundamental mechanisms
responsible for marine transport through computations that are enabled by data
collected through a mobile sensor network. The movement of water provides the
energy for geochemical and biological fluxes and occurs over large spatial
scales at all ocean depths. Turbulence is a natural characteristic of ocean
flows and plays an important role in how materials such as sediment, pollutants
and nutrients are dispersed and deposited in the surrounding environment. In
spite of the extensive studies, ocean turbulence and the extent to which it
influences mass transport processes, such as sediment entrainment and transport,
remain poorly understood because of the lack of direct measurements. In this
research, a multi-scale modeling and simulation approach using computational
models that are data-enabled by specially designed autonomous underwater
vehicles will be pursued. If successful, this research will significantly
enhance the ocean observations and will enable previously unobtainable
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will incorporate recent
developments in computational and data-enabled sciences and will combine them
with classical work into an innovative educational program at the undergraduate
and graduate levels; this interdisciplinary project will emphasize fundamental
understanding of the underlying computational and dynamical system processes.
UCF's College of Engineering and Computer Science alone has an undergraduate
student population of 24 percent minority (African-American, Hispanic, and
American Indian) and 14 percent female. This diverse student population enables
the recruitment of minority and female students into this project. In addition,
through outreach activities supported by this grant, this project will foster an
interest in computational and dynamical systems sciences in the broader
population and more generally promote an interdisciplinary scientific and
engineering culture that will have a long-term impact on all students throughout
their careers.