* 1250124
* Multidomain and Integrative Capabilities for Large-Scale Systems Simulations with High-Order Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Yulia Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 264,720.00

The research objective of this grant is to develop new algorithms for scientific
computations that involve integration of multiple computational modules and are
accurate, efficient, robust, and scalable on thousands of processors.
Integration of multiple computational modules within a single framework becomes
increasingly important with the rise in complexity of modern computations that
tend to involve large-scale and/or multi-scale systems. This project will
concentrate on developing multi-domain capabilities within the high-order
spectral-element fluid dynamics and heat transfer solver and ensuring high-order
global accuracy and stability of the coupled algorithm. The multi-domain
capabilities will include overlapping and moving grid systems and can be applied
to many important problems of multi-scale and multi-physics nature. The
algorithmic and computational developments will be systematically validated
versus known analytical solutions and existing experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this effort will produce an accurate
and scalable computational tool equipped with integrative capabilities to enable
scientific computing in the 21st century, available as open source software
under a public license. The new tool will allow for efficient computational
analysis of important problems of multidisciplinary nature. One such problem is
the performance of rotating wind turbines subject to complex atmospheric inflow,
which can be more accurately predicted and optimized with the availability of
the developed methods. Modern computing advances and capabilities as well as
their importance in solving realistic engineering problems will be a central
theme for multiple outreach and educational activities, including participation
of women in science trough Girls in Engineering Program at ASU, working with
K-12 students and teachers in the Kyrene School District in Tempe, and
organizing on-campus visits of national lab collaborators to expose students to
the most recent advances in the field.