* 1250505
* Effect of Temperature Cycling on Crystal Size, Crystal Alignment, and Approach to Equilibrium in Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Allen Glazner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2016
* USD 292,301.00

The Earth's crust is composed largely of volcanic rocks that were erupted onto
the Earth's surface and plutonic rocks that formed when unerupted magma
crystallized within the earth. One method by which these rocks are interpreted
is to examine the size distribution of minerals that make up the rocks. For
example, many volcanic rocks have contain small amounts of tiny crystals,
indicating rapid cooling at the Earth's surface, whereas most granites contain
large crystals that indicate slow cooling at depth. These basic relationships
have been known for over a century and guide much of what we know about the
Earth's crust, but recent work has pointed out many puzzling inconsistencies
with these interpretations. In particular, many granites contain huge crystals
(10 cm or more in length) that must have grown very late in the cooling history
of the rock. The source of these anomalies in crystal size distribution may lie
in temperature fluctuations. Preliminary experiments show that oscillating
temperature can play a profound role in cannibalizing small crystals and
promoting growth of large ones. This process plays an important role in many
related fields of materials science, including food technology, semiconductors,
metallurgy, and studies of snow and ice on the earth and other
planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine the effects of temperature
cycling on crystal size and alignment in magmas. Crystal size relationships
suggest that these large crystals grow by cannibalism of smaller crystals. It is
planned to use a four-fold approach to studying the effects of temperature
cycling on crystal size relationships: (1) experiments in the ammonium
thiocyanate-cobalt chloride magma analog system; (2) temperature cycling
experiments in natural basaltic and andesitic magmas in a one-atmosphere gas-
mixing furnace; (3) temperature cycling experiments in the granite-water system
using cold-seal pressure vessels; and (4) pilot studies of temperature cycling
in a piston-cylinder device. The goal of these experiments is to determine what
role temperature cycling plays in the textural evolution of igneous rocks.
Experiments in the magma analog system will be continued in order to develop a
quantitative dataset on crystal size development, and experiments at 1-atm and
in high-pressure furnaces will examine the role of varying temperature of
crystal growth. An important facet of these experiments is the possibility that
oscillating temperature will dramatically increase crystal growth rates, as is
seen in other materials; if so, then the kinetic problems that plague
experiments in high-silica systems may be partially avoided.