* 1250752
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Data Summarization, Analysis, and Triage for Very Large Scale Flow Fields
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Han-Wei Shen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 727,258.00

Two major challenges are faced by computational scientists who routinely
generate big data sets. The first is deciding what data are the most essential
for analysis, given that only a small fraction of them can be retained. The
second is transforming these data into information that conveys the most
insight. As the size of simulation output continues to grow, the "save the data
first, analyze them later" approach needs to be completely replaced with more
aggressive data prioritization and reduction before any analysis can be done. In
this project, core data analytics technologies are developed to facilitate
effective data summarization, indexing, and triage for large-scale flow data.
Fluid flow plays an important role in explaining many phenomena across a wide
range of disciplines. To provide the scientists with a succinct view of the data
content, and also organize the data and features based on their similarity and
complexity, a graph-based model is developed to simultaneously reveal the major
structure of the flow field, and to facilitate high performance and out-of-core
flow line computation. We develop statistical and geometrical complexity
measures for the flow lines to efficiently group and prioritize sub-regions in
the vector field to allow efficient data access. To characterize the temporal
complexity of flow fields, we develop time-varying analysis algorithms that
allow for more detailed analysis of the data, and provide the user with flexible
interface to quickly identify salient features.

The development of the proposed integrated flow analysis and visualization
framework initially targeted two applications, simulations of turbo machinery in
aerodynamics, and study of Madden Julian Oscillation in climate modeling. As
typical flow in turbo machinery is full of evolving shocks and vortical
structures, visualization allows the designers to identify loss regions and
complex flow features in a relatively short amount of time if these features can
be identified automatically. To understand the phenomenon of Madden Julian
Oscillation, as this phenomenon is strongly related to the convection of air,
the flow analysis techniques developed under this project can be used to
identify and track its locations and durations. Because the size of data
generated by time-varying simulations can be prohibitively large, the proposed
time-varying data reduction techniques allow scientists to focus on the most
salient portion of the data. The key impact of this project is to make available
a working and attractive solution to assist scientists to comprehend the vast
amount of data generated by large-scale simulations. Through close collaboration
with application scientists, the research ideas developed in this project into
will be transformed into an open source software framework.