* 1250724
* GOALI: Rapid Prototyping of Microscale Structures for Active Medical Devices and Characterization at FDA
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 75,000.00

1250724 Narayan

Diabetes mellitus is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the United
States. In addition, this medical condition disproportionately affects
individuals from minority ethnic groups as well as older individuals. Although
previous microneedle-based insulin delivery and glucose sensing efforts have
envisioned microneedle-tissue contact for extended periods of time, no study to
date has sought to optimize microneedle design in terms of biological, chemical,
and mechanical properties for extended use within a wristwatch form factor
device that is capable of 200 skin penetration events.

The PI will partner with a leading US-based manufacturer of glucose meters,
Prodigy Diabetic Care, to develop a comprehensive research, education, and
outreach program that involves rapid prototyping of microneedles for use in
insulin delivery as well as glucose sensing. The main benefit of the proposed
collaborative research program is intensive access for the PI and the graduate
researcher to the state-of-the-art equipment at Prodigy Diabetic Care, including
equipment for preparing glucose oxidase, determining the consistency of glucose
oxidase, determining blood glucose levels, preparing insulin patches, testing
electronics, and designing meter containers. Five hundred square feet of space
at Prodigy Diabetic Care will be devoted to the proposed GOALI effort. The
research objective of this GOALI proposal is to apply a rapid prototyping method
known as two photon polymerization and a recently-developed class of materials
known as zirconium oxide hybrid materials to create hollow microneedles with
appropriate chemical, biological, mechanical, and functional properties for
extended use in a wristwatch form factor device.