* 1250827
* In It for Good: Individual and Institutional Determinants of Public Interest Law Careers
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Catherine Albiston, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 119,602.00

This project will examine the professional trajectories of public interest
lawyers, who play crucial roles in allowing access to legal remedies and problem
solving. Previous research has found that many students come to law school
seeking public interest careers but do not ultimately pursue them; even those
who do frequently change paths. This study will be the first to investigate what
influences those who persevere through law school and beyond in their quest to
become public interest lawyers. Since equal access to justice is a significant
aspect of how the legal profession understands itself, explaining choice and
persistence in public interest careers is significant to explaining the
practices of the profession. Therefore, the project's intellectual merit rests
in its contribution to understanding an empirical puzzle in the sociology of the
professions.

This project will study graduates of law schools that vary according to student
population and whether the institutions are public or private. It will survey
students who graduated in 2001-05 to investigate how career choices are
influenced by background prior to law school (family, schooling, work, and
volunteer activity), law school experience (academic performance, externships
and clinics, extracurricular activities, summer jobs, volunteer activities,
leadership roles), and experience in each position after graduation, as well as
changes in personal circumstances (marriage, divorce, children, responsibility
for other family members, educational debt and other financial circumstances).
By comparing the career paths of all graduates, the goal is to identify the
factors associated with sustained public interest commitment and relate them to
different types of careers in the public and private sectors.

The project's findings will have significant broader impact; it will provide
useful information concerning career choice within the legal profession, of
particular importance at a time of extensive reconsideration of education to the
profession. It will also enable law schools to make effective use of scarce
resources to support innovative curricula and financial aid programs, such as
scholarships and loan assistance.