* 1250663
* EAGER: Lignin as a Sustainable Resource for Hydrocarbon-Like Transportation Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Erdogan Kiran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 56,517.00

PI: Kiran, Erdogan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1250663&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER:
Lignin as a Sustainable Resource for Hydrocarbon-Like Transportation
Fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important future goal in alternative energy
research is the development of biofuel technologies that are based on non-edible
feedstocks. In this context, the development of resources with reduced feedstock
variations that are sustainable and are not based on food crops is a continuing
challenge. Equally important is the transformation of biomass to hydrocarbon-
like liquid fuels with low oxygen-to- carbon (O/C) and high hydrogen-to-carbon
ratios (H/C) as this is required for compatibility with petroleum- based
transportation fuels for which future demands are projected to be particularly
high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the biomass components (namely cellulose,
hemicelluloses, and lignin), lignin has the lowest O/C and the highest H/C
ratio. As such, if it were to exist as a uniform feedstock, it would be an
extremely attractive starting material for conversion to hydrocarbon-like liquid
transportation fuels. Currently, such a resource does not exist. Lignins that
are available are the byproducts of pulping processes, which are complex
mixtures with high content of carbohydrate fractions. They have high O/C ratios,
and their compositions depend on the pulping process
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER research project will explore the
feasibility of an integrated approach to generate a uniform carbohydrates-free
lignin feedstock as a resource for generation of hydrocarbon-like transportation
fuels. The process that is envisioned will employ the tunable properties of
supercritical fluids combined with the dissolving power of ionic liquids. An
integrated process is being considered that will also be generating value-added
by products which can themselves be a resource for alternative fuels or chemical
feedstocks. Among the byproducts are oils and fats which can be a resource for
biodiesel; or extractives-free cellulose and hemicelluloses which can be a
resource for bioethanol or can directly be used as a pulp source in paper
production. The primary focus of the initial exploration is however on the
feasibility of generation of a carbohydrates-free uniform lignin source which
can be converted to liquid biofuels with low O/C and high H/C ratio, similar to
petroleum-based hydrocarbon fuels using mixtures of ionic liquids with
supercritical fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will generate the key
preliminary data pertaining to supercritical fluids and ionic liquid mixtures
with respect to their penetration, extraction and modification power of the
complex cell walls of plant and woody biomass. New information will be generated
on the miscibility of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin in mixtures of
supercritical fluids and ionic liquids as well as new information on
depolymerization and hydrodeoxygenation of extractives-free lignin. These
findings are expected to be also of value in several other application areas
such as materials science and polymer modifications. This research project will
train one graduate and one underdraduate student in the involved
multidisciplinary disciplines.