* 1250192
* Multiscale Computational Design of Active Thermal Interfaces Leveraging Quantum Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Elif Ertekin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2015
* USD 485,000.00

#1250192 Sinha

Research Summary: The project proposes (1) a new concept for interfacial thermal
energy transport based on quantum mechanical resonant energy exchange mechanisms
active at the nano and atomic scale, and (2) the development of a multiscale
computational framework to assess the potential and optimize the design of such
an interface. Traditionally, interfacial conductivity is engineered by passive
mechanisms, relying on phonon matching to assist conductional across two
surfaces. Instead, the project proposes to investigate an additional energy
exchange mechanism between the surfaces mediated by resonant dipole-dipole
interactions between molecular layers bonded to the two surfaces. The interface
concepts explored are electronic and vibrational energy exchange mechanism
between a solid and molecular adsorbates, and electronic energy exchange
mechanisms between two surfaces in close proximity. Assessing and optimizing the
design requires linking multiple scales in thermal transport from angstrom
quantum scales to sub-micrometer phonon mean free path scales.

Intellectual Merit: It is commonly believed that conventional solid-solid heat
conduction offers the best option for thermal transfer across an interface. This
work will critically investigate whether active interface design has the
potential for enhanced thermal conduction beyond the solid-solid limit. The
interface design proposed links a numbers of active phenomena operative at
variety of length scales, and inherently requires a multiscale approach. These
techniques to be implemented include first-principles methods (density
functional theory, quantum Monte Carlo), molecular dynamics simulations, and
continuum level modeling based on Maxwell's equations. The team consists of two
active researchers in nanoscale transport phenomena and in first-principles
modeling of materials.

Broader Impact: Across a variety of arenas including microelectronics and large
scale applications, interfaces are the limited factor for heat transport. This
proposal considers a fundamentally new and potentially transformative approach
to interfacial thermal conductional based on resonant energy transfer processes.
The research proposed here will also be complemented by a number of synergistic
teaching activities: (1) Creating a series of six java applets entitled
Nanoscale Thermal Transport at Interfaces meant for use as a university-level
teaching tool, that will be made available to educators via PI websites and
through publication in an education journal. (2) The proposed research will
provide the opportunity for the training and development of two graduate
students in the multidisciplinary fields of nanosciences, transport phenomena,
and multiscale modeling. (3) Undergraduate researchers will be involved and
exposed to this new field of study. (4) For the duration of the program, the PIs
will coordinate a full-day workshop, including modeling demonstrations,
laboratory tours, and hands-on activities, to take place during the GIRRLS
Exploring Science and Engineering Camp, held every summer at the University of
Illinois Campus Middle School for Girls. (5) The research findings will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed, archival journals and presented at conferences.