* 1250419
* Tracing Volatile Accretion, Mantle Mixing and Early Degassing from Plume Derived Noble Gases
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2014
* USD 284,561.00

The composition of Earth's early atmosphere strongly influenced chemical
reactions that occurred on our planet's surface. While outgassing of the early
Earth's interior, such as through a magma ocean, leads to an oxidized H2O-CO2
atmosphere, if the early atmosphere was largely derived from late accreting
planetesimals, then the oxidation state of the impactor controls the composition
of the atmospheric gases. The proposed noble gas measurements will be ideally
suited to address whether the early atmosphere was produced through outgassing
of the mantle or impact outgassing of late accreting planetesimals. In addition
to the origin of the early atmosphere, the noble gas measurements will provided
new constraints on what sources contributed volatiles to Earth and at what stage
of Earth's accretion the volatiles currently in the solid Earth were delivered.

Specifically, Helium (He), Neon (Ne), Argon (Ar), Krypton (Kr) and Xenon (Xe)
isotopic measurements will be made on mid-ocean ridge and ocean island basalts.
These noble gas measurements will help to answer the following key questions: i)
are the stable isotopic compositions of Xenon and Krypton in Mid-Ocean Ridge
Basalts (MORB) and plume source(s) solar, chondritic, or air-like? ii) are the
elemental abundance ratios observed in Iceland basalts representative of other
mantle plumes? iii) are the observations of higher Pu- to U-derived fission Xe
and lower I/Pu ratio for the Iceland plume representative of other mantle
plumes? iv) is the magnitude of 129Xe/130Xe isotopic anomalies in MORBs and
plume source(s) constant or is there variability in the ratio associated with
subduction of air/seawater? and v) what is the degree of mixing between the MORB
and plume source over 4.45 Ga such that differences in Xenon isotopic
compositions can be preserved in the present day mantle? Answers to these
questions will address the broader goal of understanding the origin of the early
atmosphere and the timing and processes controlling the acquisition of
terrestrial volatiles.