* 1250985
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Statistical Machine Learning Methods for Scalable Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Cun-Hui Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 738,971.00

Big Data has become ubiquitous in modern industrial and scientific applications
where the size and dimensionality of data are becoming so large as to require
new statistical tools for efficient data analysis. This collaborative project
involving researchers at Rutgers University and Microsoft Research focuses on
the theoretical and algorithmic development of advanced computational methods
for big data analytics. While the problems to be investigated are motivated by
various Internet applications, the resulting solutions are expected to be
broadly applicable to other domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project considers
three interrelated main themes in big data analytics: (a) effective sampling of
big datasets to filter out unreliable data source and improve statistical
analysis; (b) dimensionality reduction techniques that can best preserve
information via hashing and sparse random projection techniques; and (c) large
scale optimization techniques for machine learning that can directly handle
large datasize. Anticipated results of this work include new theoretical
results, new data analytics algorithms, and their open source software
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the research include
broadly disseminated open source implementations of scalable data analytics
algorithms, research-based training and education of graduate and undergraduate
students, and academic-industrial collaborations resulting in an interplay
between fundamental research in machine learning and industrial applications.