* 1250358
* A workshop to assess and advance the prediction of land-surface response to climate and land-use changes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Jon Pelletier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2014
* USD 29,939.00

This work centers on a three-day workshop to assess the state of knowledge in
understanding and predicting land-surface responses to climate and land-use
changes. The activity responds directly to major themes in a 2010 NRC report
(Landscapes on the Edge), as well as calls for action among participants at a
well-attended AGU townhall meeting in 2011. The geomorphic community has
developed conceptual and mathematical models for how Earth?s surface will
respond to and feed back on changes in climate and land use. However, the
current state of knowledge in predicting land-surface response to climate and
land-use changes has not been synthesized and documented in one
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will involve web-based community
engagement during its preparatory stages, and bring 20-25 participants to
Biosphere 2 near Tucson, AZ, in May, 2013 to synthesize the community input and
produce a journal paper on the state of the science plus a separate white paper
on strategies for filling knowledge gaps. Two goals of the workshop are to (1)
assess and summarize the state of knowledge in predicting land-surface response
to climate and land-use changes, and (2) devise a strategy for filling knowledge
gaps that leverages the talent and resources of the community of land surface
scientists. Through this baseline assessment, the meeting aims to lay the
foundations for planning a follow-on meeting co-designed by geomorphologists,
hydrologists, soil scientists, ecologists, atmospheric scientists, and others to
synthesize knowledge and discuss how predictive models can incorporate knowledge
from all relevant disciplines.