* 1250220
* Determining the Areal Extent and Tectonic Significance of Mesoproterozoic (1.50-1.45 Ga) Sedimentation and Metamorphism along the Yavapai-Mazatzal Lithospheric Boundary, New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Christopher Daniel, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2015
* USD 142,653.00

Precambrian rocks in the western United States range in age from about 550
million years old to more than 2 billion years old and record the early tectonic
processes and major geological events that created and changed the North
American continent. Two recent detrital zircon geochronology studies in
Precambrian rocks of Arizona and New Mexico have discovered that some of these
rocks were deposited between about 1.45 and 1.5 Ga some 200 million years.
younger than previously thought. These new findings require a significant
reinterpretation about the tectonic evolution of the southwestern United States
between about 1.7 and 1.4 Ga. This research project will conduct a detailed
detrital zircon geochronology study of Precambrian metasedimentary rocks across
central and northern New Mexico to help delineate the regional extent of these
younger metasedimentary rocks and to better understanding the geometry of the
depositional basin and the tectonic setting of the region at this time.
Additional work will characterize the metamorphic history of these rocks using
petrographic analysis, appropriate major element and trace element
thermobarometry, equilibrium phase diagrams (pseudosections), and monazite
geochronology to determine the pressure-temperature-time-deformation history and
tectonic processes that followed deposition. The combined approach of detrital
zircon geochronology and metamorphic monazite geochronology in the same rocks
will constrain the maximum and minimum depositional age of these metasedimentary
rocks. These new data will be used to test and refine tectonic models that
describe how and when the continental lithosphere of the western United States
was formed and how it evolved in the mid-Precambrian.

Preliminary data suggest that convergent, possibly accretionary tectonic
processes may have occurred between 1.5 and 1.4 Ga. If additional data support
this hypothesis, it would constitute a fundamental transformation in our
understanding of the growth and tectonic evolution of North America.
Undergraduate research and education is an essential component of this research
project. This project will give undergraduate researchers experience with a
major research initiative, the opportunity to travel to major research
institutions and use cutting-edge research instrumentation, and develop critical
analytical skills through data acquisition and interpretation. Undergraduate
researchers will also gain experience presenting their results to the larger
geological community.