* 1250187
* Standing on the Fourth Pillar: Data Enabled Understanding of Flapping Flight
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Ramani Duraiswami, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 746,000.00

Flapping flight is known to be the single most successful mode of animal
locomotion that is exhibited by over 1000 species of bats, more than 9000 living
species of flighted birds, and somewhere between millions and tens of millions
of flying insects. Inspired by animal flight mechanics, proven capabilities of
the Fast Multipole Methods to study vortex interactions in fluid-structure
interaction problems, and advances in General Purpose computation on Graphics
Processing Units, an interdisciplinary team of applied mathematicians,
mechanical engineers, and computer scientists from Mechanical Engineering and
Computer Science has been assembled to pursue a three-year data intensive
program to further our understanding of flapping flight. The overall goal of the
proposed effort is to conduct creative computational studies informed by data
from experimental studies to advance computational algorithms for understanding
complex fluid-structure interactions associated with flexible structures as well
as to discover biological clues related to flapping flight. These clues can help
answer fundamental questions, to address which, advanced computational modeling
and simulation are needed in concert with experimental observations of flapping
wing insects. Computational studies coupled with parallel computing are required
to investigate and interrogate the system in ways that nature does not permit.
From simple parameter sweeps to flow field analyses, computational studies can
educate the analyst in ways that experimental studies alone cannot. The specific
goals of this work range from using experimental studies as a guide for
computational modeling and simulation to leveraging advanced computing for
carrying complex fluid-structure interaction simulations and applying advanced
computational architectures and algorithms to accelerate these
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A salient broader impact of the proposed
efforts will be the advancement of tools associated with the fourth pillar, data
intensive investigations into multidisciplinary, complex, and subtle systems. By
demonstrating how the power of experimental data and computational analyses can
be harnessed to a degree not attempted before, the efforts are expected to pave
the path for transformative investigations into important and diverse fluid-
structure problems such as flows interacting with small-scale micro-air-
vehicles, blood flow through arteries, and flows through biological organs.
Beyond data mining in the natural sciences, this work will usher in a new
generation of engineers and scientists trained to use the tools presented by the
fourth pillar, data intensive investigation. The cross-disciplinary research
will provide exceptional learning opportunities for all involved including a
postdoctoral researcher and two graduate students across programs and contribute
to the nation's talent pool. Furthermore, computational modeling and sciences
curriculum across departments will be enriched by the research findings of the
proposed efforts and lead to exciting new additions in undergraduate and
graduate courses such as computational dynamics and Fast Multipole Methods. Art-
in-science displays featuring captivating fluid-structure interactions and
flapping flight will be used to stimulate and nurture the interests of K-12
students who visit campus for different events including the annually held
Maryland Day that draws nearly 75,000 visitors each spring semester to campus.