* 1250533
* Mesoscale Vortex Interactions in Tropical Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* David Schecter, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2018
* USD 479,478.00

Predicting and understanding hurricane formation is one of the most challenging
problems in atmospheric science. A part of the difficulty in predicting
hurricanes stems from the complex interactions of mesoscale vortices in
developing systems. This research project aims to elucidate the physics of
mesoscale vortex interactions in developing systems and the consequences of such
interactions on the formation of hurricanes. The following fundamental questions
will be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the conditions and prevailing
mechanisms for the merger of moist-convective mesoscale vortices, and what is
the time-scale for merger to occur?&lt;br/&gt;2. How does the intensification
rate of surface winds depend on the variability of mesoscale vortex
interactions, such as whether or not merger takes place?&lt;br/&gt;3. How do
prior mesoscale vortex interactions affect the size, intensity and asymmetric
structure of a young tropical storm or hurricane?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above
issues have been addressed in the past, but only in the context of narrow case
studies, or somewhat broader studies using simplified models with questionable
applicability to the problem at hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present
investigation will consist of carefully designed computational studies using a
state-of-the-art cloud system resolving numerical model. These studies will
involve variation of the vortex parameters, the moist-thermodynamic state of the
atmosphere, the properties of the broader flow in which the vortices are
situated, and the parameters regulating air-sea interaction. Additional
numerical experiments will examine the sensitivity of results to details of the
microphysics and subgrid turbulence
parameterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This
project will lead to a comprehensive, quantitative understanding of moist-
convective mesoscale vortex interactions and their consequences in developing
tropical systems. As noted earlier, knowledge in this area is currently limited
to disparate case studies, and simplified modeling studies with insufficient
realism. In a general sense, the results of this project will not only advance
dynamic meteorology, but also the broader field of fundamental fluid
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The results of this
project will improve current understanding of when accurate hurricane prediction
requires the accurate initialization or assimilation of mesoscale vortices in
forecast simulations. Reducing the uncertainty of hurricane prediction is
clearly important for planning maritime activities and safety measures for
coastal communities. The educational components of this project will include the
advanced training/mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher, and presentations at
university seminars. The results of this project will impact the broader
atmospheric science and physics communities through journal publications,
conference presentations, and a research web page.