* 1250687
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Programming for Streaming Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/31/2011,05/31/2013
* Laurent El Ghaoui, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 150,473.00

A large amount of data is now easily accessible in real-time in a streaming
fashion: news, traffic, temperature or other physical measurements sent by
sensors on cell phones. Applying statistical and machine learning methods to
these streaming data sets represents tremendous opportunities for a better real-
time understanding of complex physical, social or economic phenomena. These
algorithms could be used, for example, to understand trends in how news media
cover certain topics, and how these trends evolve over time, or to track
incidents in transportation networks.

Unfortunately, most algorithms for large-scale data analysis are not designed
for streaming data; typically, adding data points (representing, say, today's
batch of news articles from the Associated Press) requires re-solving the entire
problem. In addition, many of these algorithms require the whole data set under
consideration to be stored in one place. These constraints make classical
methods impractical for modern, live data sets.

This project's focus is on optimization algorithms designed to work in online
mode, allowing for faster, possibly real-time, updating of solutions when new
data or constraints are added to the problem. Efficient online algorithms are
currently known for just a few special cases. Using homotopy methods and related
ideas, this work will seek to allow online updating for a host of modern data
analysis problems. A special emphasis will be put on problems involving sparsity
or grouping constraints; such constraints are important for example to
understand how a few key features in the data set that explain most of the
changes in the data. These new online algorithms will be amenable to distributed
implementations to allow for parts of the data to be stored on different
servers.

These methods will be applied to streaming news data coming from major US media,
and also to the problem of online detection, which arises when tracking some
important signal over, say, a communication network, in an online fashion.