* 1250869
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--Measurements of Speciated Volatile and Semi-volatile Organic Compounds During the Fourth Fire Lab at Missoula Experiment (FLAME-IV)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Elliot Atlas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 16,616.00

This proposal is to measure speciated volatile and semi-volatile organic
compounds during the Fourth Fire Lab at Missoula Experiment (FLAME-IV), to be
held in Missoula, Montana from October 15 to November 16, 2012. Aspects of the
investigation include: (1) the fast changes in volatile organic compounds
(VOCs), semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) and other species within the
first few hours after emission; (2) emissions of as-yet unidentified higher
molecular weight VOCs, which contribute to the formation of secondary products
such as ozone, secondary organic aerosol (SOA) and organic acids; and (3) the
interaction between emitted trace gases and particles with clouds. The
University of California, Irvine group will collect whole air samples in the
biomass burning emissions of globally important fuels using stainless steel
canisters followed by analysis using multi-column gas chromatography. The
University of Miami group will measure a selection of the whole air samples,
extending the measurements into the semi-volatile range, using a high resolution
time-of-flight mass spectrometer and solid adsorbent traps. Together these
measurements will yield important new information about the chemical and
physical properties of smoke, its evolution, and its interactions with
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that this is a multi-investigator project
focusing on the combustion of globally important fuels in a controlled
environment, it will be possible to examine processes that will eventually allow
better parameterization of biomass emission impacts in predictive
chemistry/climate models. The project will also help to develop next-generation
instrumentation via trace gas analysis using a new instrumental capability at
the University of Miami, a high resolution time of flight mass spectrometer. It
is expected that the high resolution spectra obtained from the different samples
will provide a unique characterization of the complex composition of smoke and
its variations during aging. The results from this project will help in the
development of a graduate course in Advanced Environmental Mass Spectrometry at
the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science
(RSMAS). The results from this study will be published in the peer-reviewed
literature and will be presented at international, interdisciplinary
conferences. The project will include members from underrepresented groups as
participants in this study, in both the sampling and analytical measurements.