* 1250215
* CDS&E: Large-Scale Computation of the Phonon Boltzmann Transport Equation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Sandip Mazumder, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

CBET-1250215 PI: Sandip Mazumder, Ohio State University

The inability to remove heat efficiently is currently one of the major
stumbling blocks towards further miniaturization and advancement of electronic
and optoelectronic devices. Overheating is one of the most common causes of
device failure. The characteristic dimension of an electronic device, such as a
transistor, could range anywhere from few tens of nanometers to few tens of
micrometers. At these scales, experiments are difficult to perform and modeling
provides a means to better understand heat transport. Heat conduction in
semiconductor materials is dominated by phonons. At the length scales of
relevance, phonon transport can be effectively modeled using the Boltzmann
Transport Equation for phonons. This project will develop a powerful simulation
framework that makes use of heterogeneous computer platforms for multi-level
parallelization and solution of the phonon Boltzmann Transport Equation for the
prediction of heat transport in semiconductor materials over a range of length
scales spanning all the way from nanometers to millimeters. Estimates indicate
that such computations will require ~1017 floating point operations (i.e., peta-
scale computing and beyond). The project goal will be accomplished using three
means: (1) development of new approximate formulations of the Boltzmann
Transport Equation that hybridize discrete ordinates, spherical harmonics and
Monte Carlo methods to reduce computational effort (number of flops), (2)
development of tools for automatic multi-level (multi-cores, graphical
processing units and central processing units) parallelization of sequential
Fortran90 or C codes that solve partial differential equations on unstructured
meshes, and (3) adaptation of the automatic parallelization tools to solution of
the Boltzmann Transport Equation by subsequent investigation and fine-grain
refinement of the underlying numerical algorithms.

The research will pave the way for simulation-driven discovery of new material
systems being used in applications such as thermo-electric energy conversion,
Peltier cooling, solid-state sensing, and semiconductor lasers. From a computer
science standpoint, while significant progress has been made on multi-level
parallelization of codes that use structured meshes, the proposed research on
unstructured mesh computations, being the first of its kind, will have
unprecedented impact in all scientific computation disciplines that employ
unstructured meshes. These include materials modeling, applied mechanics,
computational fluid dynamics, and computational electromagnetics. The project
will have impact on education through engagement of students at two levels: (a)
high school students within the local area and participating in Ohio
supercomputer center's summer programs and (b) graduate students through
advanced numerical methods courses that will introduce them to advanced parallel
computing using a variety of platforms (clusters, multi-cores, and graphical
processing units).