* 1250460
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Investigation of the Effects of Lithology and Melt Composition on Permeability and 3-D Melt Distribution in Partially Molten Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Glenn Gaetani, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2017
* USD 184,958.00

Beneath ocean ridges, the divergence of lithospheric plates causes hot mantle
peridotite to ascend and induces partial melting. The buoyant melt formed by
this process rises through the mantle, is focused towards the ridge axis, and
forms new oceanic crust. Because the chemical and physical properties of the
upper mantle and lower crust are strongly influenced by the amount of melt
present, better understanding of permeability of partially molten rocks is
crucial. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to place better
constraints on rates of melt migration and melt extraction within the partially
molten regions at depth. An approach that integrates state-of-the-art micro-
tomography, FIB/SEM CrossBeam imaging techniques, high temperature and pressure
laboratory experiments, and numerical models will be used to quantify three-
dimensional (3-D) melt distribution in partially molten mantle peridotite. With
the experimentally determined 3-D melt distributions as input data, permeability
of partially molten rocks with different compositions and melt fractions will be
determined. Empirical relations between permeability, melt fraction, and
pyroxene content will be derived. Permeability anisotropy for sheared samples
with stress-driven melt bands will also be calculated. This study will produce
the most reliable results to date on melt distribution and permeability of
partially molten rocks. These results will lead to a better understanding of the
geochemical and geophysical processes at mid-ocean ridges.&lt;br/&gt;