* 1250269
* Nature, Extent, and Timing of Ultrahigh-temperature Metamorphism, Acadian Orogen, Connecticut
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2016
* USD 318,284.00

Over the past two decades it has become clear that the continental crust can be
heated to extreme, ?ultrahigh? temperatures (UHT) in excess of 900 째C (about
1650 째F) over large regions during metamorphism and mountain building events.
How metamorphic rocks of the crust reach such extreme temperatures remains a
fundamental unresolved problem in the geosciences, with major implications for
rock strength, generation of magmas (which may ascend from depth to produce ore
deposits and volcanic eruptions), heat transfer, and Earth?s overall heat
budget. This project will focus on newly-discovered UHT rocks in northeastern
Connecticut, the first regional UHT locality found in the United States. The
rocks underwent extreme temperature conditions of roughly 1000 째C (more than
1800 째F) at depths of at least 35 km (about 22 miles) below the surface during
Appalachian mountain building in the Devonian Period. This discovery will force
a rethinking of how the deep rocks of the Appalachian mountains were formed, and
shed new light on how UHT conditions can be reached. Moreover, the rocks contain
abundant evidence for the former presence of CO2-rich fluids at ultrahigh
temperatures, and thus could have important implications for carbon cycling in
the crust and the long-term carbon cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental
hypotheses for UHT metamorphism will be tested including: rapid exhumation from
the mantle; underthrusting of radiogenic crust; asthenospheric upwelling;
mechanical strain heating; heat input from mantle-derived magmas; and heat
transfer by fluids. Basic data collection will involve field mapping of geologic
relations; electron microprobe analyses of minerals; bulk chemical analyses of
rocks; U-Pb dating of zircons by ion microprobe; and micro-Raman analyses of
mineral and fluid inclusion types. These data will be used to determine
pressure-temperature-time histories for the rocks; crustal fluid compositions;
radiogenic heat production due to the decay of uranium, thorium, and potassium;
and other geologic variables critical for hypothesis testing. The project will
support and train Yale Ph.D. and undergraduate students, and integrate research
results into public science outreach programs at the Yale Peabody Museum of
Natural History.