* 1250214
* Transitions in the Banda Arc-Australia Continental Collision as a Bridge to Understanding Mantle and Lithospheric Controls on Surface Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* A  Joshua West, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2019
* USD 715,000.00

Eastern Indonesia is one of the least well-understood geological domains of our
planet, and yet the region provides a truly remarkable natural experiment for
unraveling some of the major puzzles of plate tectonics. The recent collision of
the Australian continent with the active volcanic arc in the Banda region
effectively captures the initiation of continental mountain building and the
cessation of island arc volcanism, offering a rare glimpse into a set of
processes that have shaped Earth's evolution over geologic time. Since oceanic
subduction and subsequent continental collision have occurred in different
stages along the Banda arc, we plan to use the region to study and assess the
spatio-temporal evolution of this transition. This work will help fill
fundamental gaps in general understanding of collisional tectonics and formulate
answers to outstanding questions about the interrelationships between the
history of convergence and the present-day crustal, lithospheric and mantle
structure, and the way this relates to topography. This study of the Banda arc
holds promise for clarifying the relationships between surface uplift, crustal
deformation and recycling, lithospheric structure, subduction, and mantle
convection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have assembled an international
multidisciplinary research team to constrain a sophisticated dynamical model of
regional collision and subduction using passive seismology, topographic
analysis, targeted geochronology, and a collaboratively led geodetic campaign.
The research group includes scientists from Indonesia, Australia, Germany, the
Netherlands, Portugal, and the U.S., and an important outcome will be to
strengthen and catalyze future scientific collaboration between these countries.
The award is co-funded by the NSF Geophysics and Tectonics Programs, and the
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE). All results, data, and
newly developed methods will be shared freely online, benefiting future similar
imaging or tectonic modeling efforts.