* 1250625
* EAGER: Towards an Exact Analytical Conduction Toolbox
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Keith Woodbury, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,956.00

CBET-1250625 Cole

In the area of heat conduction and diffusion, many analytical solutions are
available already in classic books on the subject. The authors of such books
have assumed that the mathematical expression is all the reader needs, when in
fact for engineering applications, considerable additional work can be required
in order to obtain numerical values. Practically speaking, such analytical
solutions, like imported furniture packed flat in a box, should come with
instructions and tools needed to assemble them into a usable form.

This project is concerned with repackaging analytical solutions, by adding
information and tools, to make them better suited for engineering applications,
and to make these widely available. We propose to develop the EXact Analytical
Conduction Toolbox, or EXACT. This project will draw upon the experience of
senior researchers in the area of heat conduction and diffusion, to capture
their perishable knowledge. Because the field of heat conduction is mature, and
attracting fewer new researchers, it is important to act now, to harvest and
store the knowledge of experienced researchers, before this knowledge passes
away. Although research on heat conduction solutions may be going out of style,
analytical solutions themselves will never go out of style, because of the
ongoing need for verification of fully-numeric solutions, and, as direct solvers
in support of experimental measurement of thermal properties and heat flux. This
project will take advantage of the vast digital storage capacity in the ?cloud?,
combined with instantaneous world-wide communication, and combined with cross-
platform data-and-software compatibility, to disseminate the results in ways
impossible only a few years ago.

The information to be assembled for each exact solution will draw upon several
areas of intellectual merit. Some analytical solutions have the form of infinite
series, and regarding the number of series terms required, it is possible just
to take a large number and see if it is sufficient. This common procedure may be
satisfactory for 1D problems, but not for 2D or 3D problems, so specific methods
to address convergence will be included. Efficient computation of eigenvalues
will be addressed, with algorithms and computer programs supplied. Tied in with
the evaluation of infinite series is the concept of time partitioning which is
not well-known. A further related concept is ?intrinsic verification?, in which
the solution itself contains the means for checking that the numerical results
are accurate and precise. A numbering system for heat conduction will be applied
to both new and existing solutions to make them easy to identify, store, and
retrieve. The number system is transformative, because it provides a new way of
viewing the entire body of solutions in heat conduction and diffusion.

The results of this project will serve a wide community, including researchers,
working engineers, educators, and students, through improved access to precise
numerical values, from verified algorithms, for a variety of applications. For
example, experimentalists, including biologists, could utilize the solutions in
many ways to determine thermal and mass transfer properties. Because
computations based on analytic solutions are very accurate, sensitivities to
boundary conditions, thermal properties, and so on can be investigated with
precision, something that cannot be done with finite element, finite difference,
and other fully-numeric methods. Success in this project will serve as a model
for harvesting and storing knowledge in other mature fields of science and
engineering. In particular the numbering system, presently applied to heat
conduction and diffusion, could be extended to any field for which analytical
solutions have impact, for example in electromagnetics, acoustics, and fluid
flow. This project will have an impact on traditional publishing, as the project
results will provide a paradigm for moving from the publishing present -- where
books and databases are perhaps of equal importance -- to the publishing future,
where computer databases will be ascendant.

This project provides opportunity for many younger researchers to work closely
with a few senior researchers who are at or past retirement age. This affords a
significant opportunity to directly transfer expertise and sustain the flow of
knowledge across generations in the field of heat transfer.