* 1250422
* The Origin and Contamination of Magmas in the Lowermost Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 187,779.00

Granites are unique to Earth's continental crust, and granitic magma is the
source of the planet's largest explosive volcanic eruptions. Granitic magmas are
generally considered to originate in the middle or shallow crust, where water
and appropriate source rocks that partially melt to produce granitic magma are
abundant. However, the Athabasca Granulite Terrane of northern Saskatchewan, one
of the largest exposures of lower crustal rocks on Earth, provides evidence
showing that large volumes of granitic magmas form in the lowermost crust
(approximately 30 km beneath the Earth's surface). The rocks presently on the
surface in the Athabasca Granulite Terrane were part of the lower crust
approximately 2.6 billion years ago. This location provides the opportunity to
document the magma-producing processes now occurring at the crust-mantle
boundary in zones of collision of tectonic plates. Rocks in the Athabasca
Granulite Terrane were invaded by mafic magmas (the 2800-km-long Chipman dike
swarm) that caused the lower crustal rocks to partially melt. The partial melts
mingled and mixed with the mafic dike magmas, showing that hybridization
processes commonly identified in the shallowest magma chambers are common in the
lowermost crust as well. In this project, the lineage of granitic magmas of the
lower crust will be traced, from the origin of the parent rock from which they
partially melted, through the contaminating magmas that they encountered on
their journey from the lower crustal site of their origin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that
the lowermost crust is a common site of granitic magma production and
contamination, and of contamination of basalts that began as continental
underplates or interplates. Major, trace, and rare earth element geochemistry
and Nd and Hf isotopic analyses both on whole rock samples and on zircon,
garnet, and plagioclase crystals in situ will be used to identify: 1) the source
material characteristics of felsic and mafic end member magmas in the near-Moho
setting; 2) the compositional range of hybrids between Chipman dikes and melts
produced by two distinct melting reactions in the 2.6-Ga Fehr granite, 3) the
degree to which the Chipman dikes retain their near-Moho compositional
characteristics after migrating to the middle crust, and 4) the isotopic and
compositional characteristics of mantle partial melt that underplated and
interplated the lower crust during both the Archean (2.6 Ga Fon du Lac basaltic
sills) and the Proterozoic (1.9 Ga Chipman dikes). This study will
quantitatively evaluate the degree to which the fingerprint of heterogeneity in
both granites and basalts of the middle and shallow crust is a remnant of the
lithologically diverse magma environment of the hot, partially liquid
mantle/crust transition zone.