* 1250170
* EAGER:   The role of demographic stochasticity in community assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jean Burns, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2016
* USD 157,360.00

One of the great puzzles in ecology is explaining how similar species can
coexist in a community; presumably, one species should be a better competitor
and cause extinction of all similar species. Plant coexistence is especially
difficult to explain, because plants share a relatively small number of limiting
resources, which should greatly restrict the number of species that can coexist.
So, how it is possible for some plant communities to have hundreds of coexisting
species? At least two factors, in addition to the number of limiting resources,
might promote coexistence: conditions such as soil nutrient availability might
vary within a community (environmental heterogeneity) and individual plants
might have different rates of germination and death due to random chance
(demographic stochasticity). Dr. Burns and her collaborators will conduct a
novel experiment at Case Western Reserve University to ask: what is the relative
importance of environmental heterogeneity and demographic stochasticity in
creating conditions that allow for many species of plants to coexist? The
proposed experiment will manipulate heterogeneity of the soil environment and
introduce species into populations belonging to the same species and a closely
related species. This experiment will be able to clearly distinguish for the
first time the relative importance of environmental heterogeneity and
demographic stochasticity in determining which species can be found together in
a particular community.

Dr. Burns and her collaborators work closely with a local government
organization, Cleveland Metroparks, to answer important local management
questions and ensure open communication between scientists and land managers.
Cleveland Metroparks is an ~8000 ha series of parks that ring the greater
Cleveland area. The Cleveland Metroparks Natural Resources Division is committed
to maintaining the health and diversity of the parks. Maintaining plant
community diversity is essential for Metropark's ability to provide essential
ecosystem services, such as providing clean water to the Cleveland area. This
project will enhance our understanding of coexistence, and will help managers
prevent and control biological invasions and maintain plant community diversity.
For example, if more heterogeneous sites are more likely to be invaded by pest
species, managers can target those areas for monitoring to prevent new and
potentially detrimental biological invasions.