* 1250629
* Non-elite Political Economy, Agriculture, and a Sacbe at Ceren, El Salvador
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2016
* USD 113,492.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Payson Sheets and Dr. David Lentz
and their graduate students will explore authority in an ancient Maya village in
El Salvador. They will incorporate students from two Salvadoran universities in
fieldwork, laboratory analyses, and publication of research results. Researchers
will take advantage of an unusual volcanic eruption, of Loma Caldera at about AD
600, which preserved the ancient village of Ceren to an extraordinary degree.
For the first time archaeologists can explore the level in Maya society where
decisions were made, whether by the elite in the nearby city or by commoners in
the village of Ceren. The predominant understanding for decades among Mayanists
is that the elite controlled everything, including politics, economics,
religion, and agriculture. That became standard because virtually all research
was done in the big cities, focusing on the palaces, pyramids, temples, and
tombs of the elite. Little was known about commoners, even though they made up
some 90% of the population. However, recent research at the Ceren site is
indicating that the quality of life of Maya commoners was surprisingly high, and
that they may have been able to make decisions on their own, in certain domains
beyond elite authority. The discovery in 2011 of a "Sacbe," a formal Maya
roadway, leading southward from the Ceren village, provides an opportunity to
explore the level of decision-making. The Sacbe runs through agricultural fields
of corn and root crops. If the Sacbe was constructed and maintained by San
Andres, the city 5 km to the south, and the harvests hauled to it, researchers
will discover evidence supporting that. Or, if the Sacbe was built and
maintained by individual village farmers whose fields adjoined the Sacbe, the
field boundaries will coincide with differences in the Sacbe. The third
alternative is that authority was at the Ceren village, where elders organized
the Sacbe, and the bulk of agricultural production was brought into the village.
The volcanic ash preserved details such as relative amounts of foot traffic and
even hand-marks of shaping planting beds and maintenance of features. In
addition to examining the Sacbe through the agricultural area, it will be
instructive to determine its endpoint within the village. It could end at
Structure 3 and its plaza, which was the locus of political decision making. Or
it could end at Structure 10, the village ceremonial building. Or it could split
and connect those locations, or perhaps others. The end point or end points
within the village will provide evidence of the function or functions of the
Sacbe, and thus indicate what people or groups had authority over its
construction, maintenance, and use(s). Many Sacbes are known in the Maya
lowlands because they were constructed of limestone and have preserved well.
Limestone is unavailable in the volcanic Maya highlands and Sacbes were unknown
before this discovery. The Ceren Sacbe was constructed of compacted volcanic
ash, with no stone, and thus would not preserve for long after it was abandoned.
A replica will be constructed in 2013 and studied to see how natural processes
affect its preservation.