* 1250800
* Collaborative Research:   Macrophytes Across the Proterozoic - Phanerozoic Boundary: A Baseline Study of Macroalgae During a Critical Interval in Earth System History
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Shuhai Xiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 04/30/2016
* USD 80,000.00

Collaborative Research: Macrophytes Across the Proterozoic - Phanerozoic
Boundary: A Baseline Study of Macroalgae During a Critical Interval in Earth
System History &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steven LoDuca and Shuhai Xiao
&lt;br/&gt;Eastern Michigan University and Virginia Tech University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benthic macroalgae in present-day shallow marine
ecosystems play a critical role in primary production and habitat provision,
sediment generation, transportation, and accumulation, and organic carbon
burial. In a broader Earth system context, they play a key role in the dynamics
of the global carbon cycle and carbon isotope variations. Fossil data indicate
that macroalgae originated during the early Proterozoic, but little is known
about them across the Proterozoic-Phanerozoic boundary and into the early
Paleozoic. Yet, it is likely that macroalgae during this critical interval
played an even larger role in Biosphere and Earth system dynamics than today
because of the confluence of three factors: (1) widespread epeiric seas, (2)
lack of other marine macrophytes (seagrasses are Mesozoic in origin), and (3)
the occurrence of major animal diversification events during the Ediacaran-
Cambrian transition and in the Ordovician, which were focused within shallow
marine settings. Our lack of information about macroalgae during this timeframe,
therefore, amounts to a serious knowledge gap. This project will use the fossil
record of macroalgae, particularly noncalcified forms represented abundantly in
Ediacaran and early Paleozoic Konservat-Lagerst√§tten, to begin to fill this gap.
Specifically, this will be accomplished through a multidisciplinary, four-
pronged approach: (1) Integrative Analysis and Identification of problematic
nonmineralized taxa with gross morphologies permissive of both algal and animal
affinities, including species from the Lantian (Ediacaran), Burgess Shale,
Chengjiang, and Kaili biotas; (2) Morphospace Characterization, including
morphometric analyses of morphospace occupation, canopy heights, and thallus
surface area to volume ratios; (3) Paleoecological Characterization, including
comparisons with modern macroalgal communities; and (4) Stable Carbon Isotope
Investigation of carbonate, total organic carbon, and individual macroalgal
fossils, focusing on stratigraphic intervals known to yield an abundance of
noncalcified macroalgae and to host significant carbon isotope variations. Key
questions to be addressed during this investigation include: Did macroalgae
experience significant episodes of morphological diversification concomitant
with the Cambrian Explosion and Ordovician Radiation (GOBE) events? How do early
Paleozoic macroalgal communities compare with those of Ediacaran and modern
seas? Did the full array of macroalgal functional-form groups known from modern
seas exist by the end of the early Paleozoic? Did massive influxes of nutrients
caused by the initial colonization of the land by terrestrial plants trigger
colossal blooms of macroalgae in early Paleozoic seas, and could such blooms
have contributed to organic carbon burial thus driving major carbon isotope
excursions identified in the early Paleozoic sedimentary rock record? This
baseline study will establish the foundation necessary for larger-scale
investigations of the Earth-Life system during this critical interval, including
evolutionary feedback between early marine animals and algae and changing carbon
cycle dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are realized, in
part, through numerous educational dimensions built into the work, including
training for graduate and undergraduate students and public outreach efforts to
assist training of K-12 teachers through existing STEM programs. This project
also involves international collaborations with Chinese and Canadian
paleontologists. Directly related to the project, a website, entitled
"Prehistoric Marine Flora," will be constructed and linked to the Paleontology
Portal to promote the importance of this work to the general public. In
addition, the taxonomic data generated by this project will be uploaded to the
Paleobiology Database, and all fossil specimens will be reposited in publicly
accessible museums. Finally, in terms of broader benefit to society, this
research forms an important part of our quest to understand the origins of our
biodiversity. The deep past is part of our collective human heritage, and a
better understanding of our origins enriches us all.