* 1250802
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Technology to Support Mathematical Argumentation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Kimberle Koile, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2017
* USD 178,793.00

The big question being addressed in this project is, "How can technology support
the teaching and learning of mathematical argumentation?" This EAGER proposal
focuses on the first steps in moving towards the vision of helping youngsters
learn mathematical/algebraic argumentation. The project has two complementary
goals: to better define the technological tools needed to support elementary
students learning about proof and argumentation and to understand better how
elementary school students learn to make and defend mathematical claims when
such tools are available. The PIs envision and are developing an animation tool
to be implemented on tablet computers (so each child has his/her own electronic
notebook) that provides infrastructure for sharing and refining arguments in
small groups and across the class and for promoting concrete math discussions. A
big challenge is providing the right tools for expression; for sharing to
happen, learners need to first be able to express their understanding, and much
research shows that a concrete "written" (sharable) expression of understanding
provides better foundations for promoting concrete discussion than do
expressions of understanding that are simply verbal. The particular advance in
expression that is being made in this project is providing tools for dynamic
representations; that is, they are able to animate what happens when
mathematical operations are carried out. These concrete expressions of
understanding can then be played back, paused, and so on. Students create
animations by drawing, erasing, duplicating, moving, and grouping objects. They
can edit each others' animations, and the teacher will also be able to create
animations for students to view and edit. They record and save their oral
explanations along with the animations and play them back together, thus making
their verbal descriptions concrete, examinable, and sharable.

The ability to prepare and present a mathematical argument is a key component of
the mathematical competence students need to achieve in upper elementary school
(grades 3 through 5). Many students struggle with the subject matter and
therefore struggle as well with making mathematical arguments. The PIs envision
a computational tool set that young students will use to construct and share
mathematical arguments, in the service of learning to be competent algebraic
reasoners. In this EAGER project, they focus on first steps in developing that
tool set and on investigating how young learners make and defend mathematical
arguments when they have such tools available. This project represents work in
its early states on an untested but potentially transformative idea and is
likely to catalyze rapid and innovative advances in helping young learners
become mathematical reasoners.