* 1250818
* High Resolution Studies of the Sun Using the New Solar Telescope (NST)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Alexander Kosovichev, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,766,394.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and his team note that the New Solar Telescope
(NST) of Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO), with its advanced adaptive optics
system, will be the primary US observing facility for ground-based high-
resolution studies of the Sun for most of the next decade. This BBSO team will
utilize NST photometric and polarimetric data collected across the spectrum from
0.4-5.0 microns, as well as diffraction limited imaging and vector magnetograms
(VMGs) in visible and near-infrared light, to accomplish cutting-edge research
in solar physics. Among other science topics, the PI's team will study the
origin of ultrafine magnetic loops in the solar atmosphere, as well as plasma
eruptions along these loops, using high-resolution NST observations of plasma
flows and vector magnetic fields as a function of altitude. The team will
compare line profile data to simulation output to probe the physical origin of
the dynamics of these loops. The PI will also perform sub-arcsecond resolution
studies of the quiet solar atmosphere to probe small-scale emerging flux, the
Sun's "magnetic carpet," and the local dynamo while exploiting NST VMGs and
velocity maps along with simulations. The team's science objectives also include
the investigation of the small-scale structure and dynamics of sunspots, using
VMGs and velocity fields as a function of altitude, to clarify the formation and
evolution of sunspot elements, such as "umbral dots," Evershed flows, and
penumbral structures. The PI will also probe solar photospheric and
chromospheric dynamics, such as the magnetic network, spicules, and cool
chromospheric areas, using the NST's fully cryogenic solar spectrograph known as
CYRA. CYRA will observe in the 1-5 micron spectral regime, which heretofore has
not been well explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's team also plans to use the
NST as a unique test bed for the hardware, instrumentation, and data analysis
destined for use with the new off-axis, 4-meter Advanced Technology Solar
Telescope (ATST) expected to come online at decade's end. BBSO will develop the
next generation of solar instrumentation for the NST, which will serve as
important pathfinders for the ATST project. As a community facility, BBSO will
help train the next generation of scientists for building instruments and
developing modern data analysis techniques, in an integrated approach to
research and education. BBSO's high-resolution data, coupled with analytical
tools, will help increase our understanding of the origins of space weather
events and improve space weather forecasts. NST data will be made publicly
available online and through the solar physics community's Virtual Solar
Observatory infrastructure in near real-time.