* 1250035
* Classic Maya Political Dynamics at Motul de San Jose, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Antonia Foias, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 286,188.00

With NSF support, Drs. Antonia Foias and Kitty Emery together with an
international team from the USA, Canada, and Guatemala will carry out two field
seasons of archaeological excavations and environmental studies in the periphery
of Motul de San José, the capital of a small Classic Maya state in northern
Guatemala. The project brings together specialists in archaeology, soil studies,
chemistry, ecology, zooarchaeology, and archaeobotany to explore the causes of
the political dynamism of Maya states during the Late Classic period
(A.D.600-830). The recent consensus that Maya political organization was highly
dynamic with different states having variable sizes, scales, and developmental
trajectories has been well received, but this recent scholarship has not been
able to explain the causes of this dynamism. The traditional focus on major
centers has also not shed sufficient light on how subsidiary settlements engaged
with political power. But this dialectic between the rulers and the ruled lies
at the heart of political dynamics in all complex societies. Furthermore,
political decision-making occurs within an environmental landscape that offers
both context and resources directly relevant to politics, economics, and
ritual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate the
factors governing political dynamics by tracking how Motul de San José (MSJ)
controlled and/or interacted with its periphery, specifically with two of its
satellite centers (Chachaklu'um and K'ante'tuul). The MSJ polity provides an
ideal situation for the proposed research because it is small enough to allow
one to understand political relationships at low costs and because it is located
in a highly heterogeneous environmental zone that offers a diversity of
resources to different sites within the polity. Furthermore, a decade of
archaeological work at Motul by the Co-PIs has provided a broad overview of its
cultural history and environmental context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigations
at each site will include: (1) complete mapping; (2) environmental surveys; (3)
horizontally extensive excavations in 3 households of different socioeconomic
status; (4) stratigraphic test pitting and excavations of refuse deposits at an
additional 8 households and the largest public plaza; and (5) analysis of all
ancient remains. Finally, all these datasets will be integrated into a single
GIS database to understand the changing relationships between all components
through time. These studies will chart changing household construction and
activities as well as the extent and nature of the exploitation of environmental
resources (e.g., soils, water, animals, chert, clay) through the Late Classic to
understand if Motul ruled its peripheries through alliances with local groups,
or through conquest and territorial annexation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to our understanding of the political structure of
Classic Maya polities from the perspective of small communities which negotiate,
resist or support political domination. Ultimately how political agency is
combined with environmental exploitation at multiple levels within a polity
determines the stability and longevity of that particular state, or its
collapse, offering us lessons for the present time. The project will enhance
opportunities for work, education, research and cooperation for local
communities, archaeology students and professionals in Guatemala, Canada and
USA. The project will also promote sustainable stewardship and ecotourism in
this important area of northern Guatemala.