* 1250331
* Grain Boundary Diffusion in the Mantle: An Integrated Theoretical and Experimental Study of MgO
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2020
* Daniel Lacks, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2020
* USD 320,001.00

Transport of atoms along the boundaries between mineral grains is a fundamental
but poorly understood process that plays an important role in many important
geological phenomena, from the attenuation of seismic energy produced by
earthquakes to the many deformation and chemical transport processes associated
with mantle convection and plate tectonics. This project supports a combined
theoretical and experimental study of grain boundary diffusion in MgO, a major
component of Earth's deep mantle. The results of this study will improve the
ability to estimate grain boundary chemical transport rates and related
geophysical and geochemical properties of the deep Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combined experimental and theoretical research program
will specifically target the atomic-level mechanisms involved in grain boundary
diffusion, and the influence of pressure, chemical impurities and grain boundary
structure on element mobility. Grain boundary diffusion coefficients, and their
dependence on temperature, pressure and the presence of calcium and silicon,
will be determined using diffusion couple experiments, and first-principles and
classical molecular dynamics simulations. The theoretical simulations will
provide critical information on the diffusion mechanism(s), the relation of
grain boundary transport to grain boundary structure, and the extrapolation of
grain boundary diffusion data to the high pressures relevant to Earth?s deepest
mantle.