* 1250936
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Dynamical diffusion map methods for high dimensional data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Timothy Sauer, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2017
* USD 451,174.00

The planned research aims to radically transform the current state of the art of
dimension reduction, through the development of new approaches to
interpretation, resolution, and feature extraction for high-dimensional
dynamical data. These extensions fit into a larger program of data analysis
which seeks to find the intrinsic geometry tailored to each type of data set.
The development of diffusion maps first established a new way to recover
geometry from generic data sets. Recently, we showed how to recover the
intrinsic geometry for observations of a dynamical system, meaning data sets
that have the additional structure of a time ordering. In each case the focus on
discovery of the intrinsic geometry for the particular structure of the data
resulted in significant practical benefits in the form of new algorithms for
dimensionality reduction and noise reduction. With this progress as a
foundation, the proposal greatly expands the impact of this effort in two
important directions: (1) Overcoming critical weaknesses in the current
dynamical diffusion map approach, by (a) extensions to allow drift and
anisotropy in the Laplace-Beltrami operator represented by the diffusion map,
and (b) merging diffusion maps with discrete exterior calculus through the Hodge
star operator to handle higher-dimensional dynamics; and (2) development of an
automatically-constructed, data-adapted harmonic (or wavelet) basis in order to
capture essential features of spatiotemporal data. Our data-adapted construction
starts with an a priori spatial structure and then combines this with the data
itself to form the data-adapted spatial geometry. We then propose a novel method
of using the diffusion geometry, improved with the results of (1), to find
symmetries in the adapted geometry that represent intrinsic features of the
data.

The project involves a series of investigations in the development of
computational dynamical systems theory and methods, with the goal of
significantly changing the way massive spatiotemporal data sets are analyzed.
The algorithms resulting from the study represent a distinctly new form of time-
scale and space-scale separation that can break high-dimensional dynamical data
into parts adapted to the dynamics. This new approach will handle a wide range
of spatiotemporal inputs, such as high-frame-rate videos of physical
experiments, spatially and temporally irregular geophysical databases such as
oceanographic, weather or climate time series, econometric and logistical
databases, and multivariate measurements on complex dynamic networks such as
biological connectomes. The data comes from problems spanning diverse areas of
sciences and engineering, with special focus on physical and biological systems.
These modern high-resolution data sets are particularly vulnerable to the curse
of dimensionality, making current parametric statistical techniques impractical
due to exponential increases in model complexity and data requirements. Our
approach implicitly eliminates redundancies and selects features of interest in
an automatic data-adapted way, reducing the data requirements for statistically
significant analyses to feasible levels. Educational impacts include integration
of the research topics into undergraduate and graduate teaching, and the
enhancement of research infrastructure through joint research with collaborators
in physics, bioengineering, biology, and medicine.