* 1250522
* Timescales of Development of Sub-Ophiolite Subduction: High Precision U-Pb Dating and Geochemical Characterization of Late Magmatism and Metamorphism in the Oman-U.A.E. Ophiolite
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Matthew Rioux, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2016
* USD 218,043.00

The tectonic setting during ophiolite formation and emplacement are debated. The
Samail ophiolite in Oman and the United Arab Emirates is the largest and one of
the best-studied ophiolites in the world, and is an ideal place to study these
processes. This research project uses high precision U-Pb zircon geochronology
and radiogenic isotope, major and trace element geochemistry to study the
evolution from formation of the ophiolite crust to development of thrusting
below the ophiolite. The work will focus on late magmatic series that intruded
the ophiolite mantle and crust, and metamorphic rocks and associated leucocratic
pods within the metamorphic sole. The late magmatic series in the crust and
mantle have isotopic and trace element signatures that have been attributed to
thrusting or subduction below the ophiolite, and the combined dating and
geochemical analyses will determine the timing of thrusting or subduction
relative to crustal growth. Similar analyses from the metamorphic sole will
provide a complimentary record within the under-thrust plate. The complete
dataset will provide a detailed temporal record of the tectonic development of
the ophiolite and help to differentiate between existing models of ophiolite
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ophiolites are thin slices of crust that formed
at oceanic spreading centers and subsequently thrust onto the continents.
Because ophiolites are easier to access than in-situ oceanic crust, and often
expose cross sections through the crust and upper mantle, research on ophiolites
has played a major role in the development of current models for the structure
of the oceanic crust and the processes that form it. However, there are chemical
differences between ophiolites and in-situ oceanic crust, which suggest
ophiolites may form in more complex tectonic environments. To understand how
observations from ophiolites can be applied to the formation of the oceanic
crust, it is necessary to understand the tectonic setting during formation and
emplacement of ophiolites. Several authors have proposed that ophiolites may
form during the initial development of new subduction zones, and as a result,
research on ophiolites may also provide insight into the processes of subduction
initiation. The proposed research will generate a temporal and chemical record
of the formation of the Semail ophiolite, providing insight into both the origin
of ophiolites and potentially the processes of subduction initiation.