* 1250306
* Powerful User Interfaces for Interactive Theorem Proving
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Aaron Stump, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 99,791.00

Software's increasing role in aviation, medical devices, and other safety- and
mission-critical tasks is driving a major research effort in software
verification, in both academia and industry. This effort involves proving, using
formal mathematical methods, that software does what its authors intend it to
do. Interactive theorem provers (ITPs) are a key tool in software verification,
enabling users to create complex proofs of deep properties beyond the reach of
automated provers. In spite of the increasing need for their use, ITPs have
limited user interfaces that have hardly evolved in the past 20 years. This
makes it difficult for novices to begin using these tools, and limits the
productivity of experts. The objective of this research is to design, develop,
and evaluate powerful user interfaces for ITPs. The resulting user interfaces
will be made freely available to the public as open-source
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis is that a novel ITP user interface
that addresses ITP users' information needs through advanced editing techniques
will enable novices to prove theorems and understand proofs more quickly and
accurately than current ITP user interfaces, and increase productivity for
experienced users. Advanced editing techniques will include inference rule and
complex syntax visualization and manipulation, as well as proof previews.
Together, these techniques will enable users to understand how proofs evolve,
more easily read complex formulas, and quickly explore ways of advancing a
proof. The hypothesis will be tested using Coq, a widely adopted ITP. The
evaluation of the advanced editing techniques will include a comparison with a
widely used ITP user interface in terms of efficiency for completing and
understanding proofs. Successfully applying modern human-computer interaction
techniques to interactive theorem provers will result in a major step forward in
the usability and applicability of ITPs. This in turn will help facilitate the
increased use of formal methods and verification in academic research, but also
with industrial applications. Likewise, it will provide a useful tool for
teaching software verification courses by helping students concentrate on
proving theorems instead of focusing their attention on how to interact with
software. Project results will be disseminated by submission to venues in human-
computer interaction and interactive theorem provers.