* 1250029
* EAR-PF: Integrating Field Deposit, Remote Sensing, and Numerical Modeling Perspectives on the Injection and Fallout of Hazardous Volcanic Ash
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Alexa Van Eaton, Van_Eaton               Alexa          R
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 01/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Alexa Van Eaton has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the U.S. Geological
Survey and Arizona State University. This project aims to improve our ability to
predict and respond to the hazards of explosive volcanic eruptions. Dispersal of
fine volcanic particles injected into the atmosphere during these events pose
wide-reaching threats to infrastructure and the environment. Given the strong
national and international reliance on numerical predictions of volcanic cloud
movement, this project focuses on introducing new, field-based observations of
eruption dynamics into existing methods of ash dispersal modeling. Two key
questions motivate this approach: (1) how does the nature of particle
aggregation evolve with respect to measurable properties of volcanic clouds?;
and (2) what is the role of eruption column instability and surface water
interaction in controlling the vertical distribution of mass in the atmosphere?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial stage of the project targets assimilation of
field data from volcaniclastic deposits and remote sensing archives from the
well-documented eruptions of Redoubt, Alaska (2009) and Mount St. Helens,
Washington (18 May 1980). These observations will be used to characterize the
spatiotemporal impact of atmospheric feedbacks accompanying volcanic ash
dispersal, and provide inputs for 3d simulations of eruption column development
using a cutting-edge microphysical model known as ATHAM. Results will guide the
design and deployment of a new generation ash dispersal model that can account
for the impacts of ash aggregation and column instability in a fast-running,
operational setting. In addition, Dr. Van Eaton will partner with the Cascades
Volcano Observatory (USGS, Vancouver) and School of Earth and Space Exploration
(Arizona State University) to develop tabletop exercises educating undergraduate
students, K-12 geoscience teachers and TV broadcasters about responding to
volcanic ash hazards in the event of an eruption.