* 1250554
* Collaborative Proposal: Evolution of Lava Channel Networks: Implications for Lava Flow Hazards and Mitigation
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Katharine Cashman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2016
* USD 248,962.00

Rivers of molten lava are iconic manifestations of volcanic activity in places
like Hawaii. Although rarely fatal, lava flows commonly pose risks to property,
risks that may be sufficient that government authorities decide to build
barriers to divert those flows (for example, at Mt. Etna, Italy, in 1983, 1991
and 2001, and in Hawaii in 1960). However, barrier construction is more an art
than a science, and the interaction between lava flows and topographic barriers
has not been well researched. Barriers may also exist in the landscape over
which lava travels, either in the form of pre-existing topography or in
topography that is constructed as lava flows are emplaced and solidify. Lava
flows that encounter barriers will either split around them to form separate
(smaller and slower) lava flow lobes, or may be focused by large obstacles (such
as cliffs) into large (and fast-moving) flows. These behaviors must be
understood to model the advance of active flows, which is essential for
assessing and mitigating volcanic hazards in regions of frequent lava flow
activity (such as Hawaii, Italy and Iceland). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will investigate the development and stability of complex lava flows
using (1) analysis of channel networks preserved in recent Hawaiian lava flows,
(2) laboratory experiments performed to determine the effect of obstacles on the
downslope movement of viscous fluids (both analogue fluids and molten basalt)
when they encounter topographic obstacles, and (3) models developed from the
experiments and applied to active lava flows. Additionally, channel networks in
recent Hawaiian lava flows will be identified on high resolution digital
elevation models (DEMs) and aerial photos, analyzed for network patterns, and
investigated in the field. Field studies will include documentation of lava-
topography interaction structures via photogrammetry and construction of 3D
models of specific channel features. New digital elevation models will be
created for target areas using both TanDEM-X satellite-based radar imaging and
by photogrammetry. This multi-pronged approach will be made possible by
collaborations among scientists at the University of Oregon, University of
Bristol, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, and the USGS Hawaiian Volcano
Observatory.