* 1250990
* BIGDATA: Small: DCM: JetStream: A Flexible Distributed System for Online and In-Place Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Vivek Pai, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 700,000.00

Many research and commercial endeavors are experiencing dramatic transformations
through the use of Big Data, wherein large data repositories are collected and
analyzed to reveal trends, correlation, and information that may not be apparent
in smaller samples. Current approaches assume centralizing the repository, which
may be a poor fit in environments where the data generation rate exceeds the
network capabilities. In this project, the PIs investigate system architectures
for both real-time and historical analysis of geographically distributed data,
combined with research in adaptively reducing data volumes to optimize bandwidth
capabilities. This combination allows better use of the computation and storage
associated with smarter end devices, including, but not limited to, distributed
sensors, smart meters, and even full servers, without requiring network
upgrades. Given the historical trends of the growth of computation and storage
versus the capacity limits of wide-area networks, this research enables more
data collection and analysis to be performed at a lower overall system cost.
Further, the ability to dynamically adapt data precision and fidelity to
available network bandwidth allows systems to gracefully and automatically
improve performance in the presence of higher-capacity networks. The research
enables the collection and analysis of data that is currently left unanalyzed
because of network constraints. Such data can include finer-granularity usage
data, which could indicate actionable steps to reducing household energy
consumption, or it could include a greater olume of debugging and monitoring
data, which could better predict system failures or provide greater insight than
with current methods.