* 1250014
* Economic Organization of Prehistoric Pueblo Bonito, Chaco Canyon, New Mexico (850 - 1140 CE)
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Adam Watson, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 68,771.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Adam Watson and an
interdisciplinary team of researchers will complete a three-year investigation
of the social and economic organization of Ancestral Pueblo society in the Chaco
Canyon region of present-day northwestern New Mexico. The team includes
specialists in archaeology and mechanical engineering to explore the
relationship between trends in craft production, manufacturing techniques, and
microscopic wear-traces artifacts employed in different production processes.

The coalescence and transformation of many dispersed farming communities in and
around Chaco Canyon during the Bonito phase (850-1140 CE) is one of the most
widely cited examples of the emergence of politically complex society in pre-
Columbian North America. The development of social stratification, the regional
propagation of Chacoan ideology, great house construction, and thriving long-
distance trade networks are among the principal changes associated with the
Bonito phase. Despite more than a century of archaeological research in the
canyon, however, the extent to which these social, political, and economic
developments entailed corresponding shifts in the economic organization of the
society remains unclear. Although previous studies have shown that large
quantities of ceramics and raw materials flowed into the canyon from outlying
regions, until recently there was little indication of what may have been
produced locally and provided in exchange. Though largely invisible
archaeologically, perishable craft industries such as basketry, textiles, and
hide-working represented a major sector of the Chacoan economy.

This project investigates changes in the spatial organization and scale of craft
production through the study of the previously unanalyzed collection of bone
artifacts from Pueblo Bonito, an assemblage remarkable for both its size and
diversity. Overall trends in tool manufacture and use can be assessed in terms
of raw material choice and the relative intensity of basketry, textile, and hide
manufacturing in which these tools were utilized. The study of bone artifacts
using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), for example, permits the exploration
of microwear patterns that can then be used to differentiate the types of crafts
being manufactured. The introduction of texture analysis techniques originally
developed for applications in mechanical engineering allows the identification
of quantifiable parameters of variation in use-wear. On the basis of these data,
the study will evaluate the hypothesis that the sociopolitical changes evident
in Chacoan societal development was paralleled by increasing economic complexity
in the form of craft specialization.

The implications of this study are far-reaching and extend beyond the ongoing
regional debates with the potential to advance studies of political economy,
hierarchy, craft specialization, prehistoric bone industries, and microwear
analysis. Drawing upon recent advances in the fields of surface metrology and
mechanical engineering this research applies new scientific methods to address
longstanding archaeological questions. The creation of a web-based database that
documents variation in microwear is a critical step for reducing inter-observer
error, improving repeatability, and resolving key debates in the analysis of
use-wear. Through the American Museum of Natural History Science Research
Mentoring Program and Worcester Polytechnic Institute, high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students will participate in data collection and
laboratory analysis.