* 1250070
* EAR-PF:   Evaluating the forearc response to shallow subduction: a geo-/thermochronologic investigation of the world's type exhumed shallow subduction complex, southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Alan Chapman, Chapman                 Alan           D
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2015
* USD 85,000.00

Dr. Alan D. Chapman has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at Stanford University.
This work aims to quantify crustal fluxes associated with shallow subduction by
applying modern geo-/thermochronologic techniques (e.g., U-Pb geochronology,
(U-Th)/He thermochronology, and fission track analysis) to the best recognized
exposure of an ancient shallow subduction system on Earth, located in southern
California. The resulting dataset will be used to address: 1) regional issues
pertinent to the North American Cordillera, most notably the relative importance
of subduction erosion versus trench-linked transform faulting during the Late
Cretaceous to early Tertiary Laramide orogeny and 2) global questions centered
on processes by which crustal materials are recycled during shallow subduction
(e.g., tectonic erosion, delamination, underplating, and
magmatism).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will directly engage
faculty, postdocs, researchers, and students of active geo-/thermochronology and
subduction zone tectonics groups at Stanford. The results of this investigation
will provide new insights into subduction dynamics, addressing questions of
global importance regarding the life cycle of shallow subduction and the
mechanisms of mass transfer between the crust and mantle. This project will
deliver a wide range of data that address fundamental questions posed by the
Subduction Cycles and Deformation initiative of the GeoPRISMS Program, the most
pertinent of which concerns the origin and evolution of the continental crust.
The proposed education plan involves: 1) teaching a seminar on the topic of
shallow subduction followed by a field course to Big Sur, California; 2)
mentoring a high school intern through the Stanford High School Internship
Program; and 3) maintaining an active outreach program through the GeoKids
cooperative with the U.S. Geological Survey.