* 1250087
* An integrated multi-directional approach to understanding local hydrologic responses to global climate change
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Julie Vano, Vano                    Julie          A
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 11/30/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Julie Vano has been awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to
develop new approaches to understand future climate impacts on local water
resources in the Pacific Northwest. A warmer climate threatens to alter where,
when, and how much water is available for ecosystems and human communities. Yet
water resource managers, who constantly work to find balance between a diversity
of stakeholder needs, are unsure how to incorporate climate change into their
planning processes. This research addresses this challenge through developing
two new approaches to scenario planning that can be more effectively used by
water resource managers and decision-makers. These approaches use global climate
model output, hydrological models, and impact assessment tools to construct
scenarios of future hydroclimate. The first begins with climate scenarios and
hydrologic sensitivities to understand central tendencies and ranges of runoff
changes - sensitivities identified through modeled experiments of how changes in
temperature and precipitation translate to changes in streamflow magnitude. The
second explores runoff extremes by using the same modeling framework, but works
in the reverse direction: first, resource managers identify a metric of concern,
e.g. flow above 75 Kcfs at a certain gauge, then hydrologic factors that lead to
the metric are diagnosed, and finally connections to climate drivers are
quantified. Floods in the Columbia River will be the test case for this impacts-
driven approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried out at
Oregon State University, where it will leverage established networks between
researchers and stakeholders. The project aims to: (1) improve understanding of
and the connections between atmospheric conditions, hydrologic processes, land
surface properties, and local hydrologic impacts, (2) develop new approaches to
quantify local change through using concepts of hydrologic landscape
sensitivities to changes in central tendencies (incremental changes) and extreme
events, and (3) build lasting partnerships between science and management that
ensures decision-maker participation in the research process, so as to create
appropriate tools to better evaluate the sustainability of future water planning
options. Throughout this work, there will be a continued effort to insure
results are relevant to the larger management community through stakeholder
meetings, the experiences of which will be used to create a short-course on
stakeholder interactions for students at Oregon State University and the larger
science community.