* 1250208
* RAPID: Linking the Movement Patterns and Foraging Behavior of Humpback Whales to their Prey across Multiple Spatial Scales within the LTER Study Region
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Ari Friedlaender, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 76,833.00

Whales play a central role in the ecology and biogeochemistry of the Southern
Ocean. However, little is known regarding their distribution and behavior, in
part because of challenges associated with studying these organisms from large
research vessels. This research will take advantage of the unique opportunity
presented by the 2012-2013 test run of the smaller, more mobile R/V Point Sur.
This work will use the Point Sur to investigate humpback whales in the waters
studied by the Palmer Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Station off the
Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP). Employing a combination of long-term
satellite-linked tags and short-term suction cup tags, researchers will
investigate the distribution, abundance and foraging behaviors of whales in this
region. Whale biogeography will then be related to quantitative surveys of
krill, their primary food source. Hypotheses regarding whale distribution and
foraging strategies as well as physical oceanographic features will be tested.
The WAP is undergoing some of the most dramatic warming on the planet, and a
better understanding of the ecology of top predators is central to developing an
understanding of the impacts of this change. Results will be widely disseminated
through publications as well as through presentations at national and
international meetings. In addition, raw data will be made available through
open-access databases. Finally, this work will be coordinated with the extensive
infrastructure of the Palmer LTER site, enabling outreach and educational
activities.