* 1250366
* Analyses of Volatiles in Volcanic Glasses: Bridging the Gap between the Macroscopic and the Micron Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Thomas Shea, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2016
* USD 191,591.00

Synopsis: On earth, magmas feeding volcanic eruptions generally contain a
certain amount of volatile components (mostly H2O, CO2, S, Cl, F). These
volatiles tend to separate into a vapor phase during ascent of magma towards the
surface ("degassing"), which generally provides the driving force for volcanic
eruptions. The "explosivity" of volcanic eruptions greatly depends on whether
this vapor phase, which takes the form of gas bubbles, can easily separate from
the melt phase or not. In this sense, volatile components truly exert the main
control on whether an eruption ends up being effusive (example: lava flows in
Hawaii) or explosive (example: large volcanic plumes at Mt St Helens). The
remaining undegassed fraction of these volatiles can be preserved within
volcanic glasses that are quenched upon eruption ("interstitial glasses"), and
may yield essential information on how much of this vapor phase left the melt.
In addition, the initial volatile contents can sometimes be preserved by
fractions of melt trapped within the crystals that grow during magma ascent.
These "melt inclusions" are also cooled to a glassy state upon eruption, and are
often considered to be chronicles of the initial volatile contents of magmas. By
compiling large sets of volatile data collected in melt inclusions and
interstitial glasses, the mechanisms by which the gases separate and the extent
of degassing can be constrained for a variety of different eruptions. Yet, for
products of older eruptions (>1000-2000 years old), external volatiles such as
meteoric water can infiltrate the glass structure and overprint the purely
"magmatic" signal. In fact, the tendency for meteoric water to be incorporated
in glasses has been used for archaeological dating by measuring the thickness of
"hydration" within volcanic rocks. Therefore, a key challenge in quantifying
volatile components in glasses is the capacity to discriminate between primary
(magmatic) and secondary (meteoric) components. This project explores a variety
of analytical strategies to quantify these two types of components in volcanic
glasses, with the objective of tracking back the history of magmas ascending
towards the surface. The results from this proposal can then serve for
predictive physical models of magma ascent and eruption.

Technical abstract: Analyzing volatiles enclosed within the products of
eruptions (i.e., juvenile pyroclasts and the melt inclusions trapped within
their mineral phases) is an essential objective within the volcanology
community. Pyroclasts contain volatiles from the late decompression history
(i.e., within the groundmass glass), as well as from their evolution from the
reservoir to the conduit (i.e., within melt inclusions). Thus, they usually
provide the only available record of magmatic storage and ascent. Electron
microprobe analyses of Cl, F and other species are easily achievable; however,
the same cannot be said for lighter volatiles such as H2O or CO2, which are
often quantified using spectroscopy-based techniques such as FTIR. Regrettably,
a certain analytical divide still separates us from characterizing volatiles in
vesicular samples due to the low spatial resolution attained by most techniques.
MicroRaman spectroscopy is a good candidate to close-in on this resolution gap,
and is already used to quantify H2O in melt inclusions. Its high resolution
(spot diameter ~1-2 Âµm) is ideal for measuring water in tiny areas of glass,
providing that the technique is tested and its potential drawbacks defined.The
current project proposes to test and calibrate a microRaman spectroscopy routine
to measure H2O. Prior to applying the methodology to sets of natural samples,
pyroclasts from three case-studies (Vesuvius 79AD, Taupo 181AD, and Pu'u
Wa'awa'a 114ka) will be analyzed for potential secondary hydration contributions
to the total volatile content. H2O measurements in pumice glasses and melt
inclusions will be then coupled with Cl analyses obtained using EMPA to decipher
the large-scale degassing histories of the three selected eruptions. This part
of the investigation will uncover unknown aspects of the magmatic evolution of
both the Vesuvius and Taupo eruptions, and offer the opportunity to describe a
unique expression of silicic volcanism in Hawaii (Pu'u Wa'awa'a). The limits of
both analytical tools will be pushed to their maximum to characterize
microscopic scale variations and their effects on degassing during
decompression. In particular, significant attention will be given to the role of
shear localization in facilitating volatile exsolution during ascent in the
conduit.