* 1250148
* Geochemical constraints on the source, flux, migration, and seismic signature of volcanic fluids, Katmai Volcanic Cluster, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Taryn Lopez, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2016
* USD 309,907.00

Fluid movement in the subsurface of active volcanoes is frequently thought to
produce abundant seismicity (i.e. earthquakes); however the actual type of
fluid, including magma, volcanic gases, or hydrothermal waters, and the
implications of the fluid movement cannot currently be constrained from seismic
data. Knowledge of the type of fluid/s in the subsurface is critical for both
forecasting volcanic eruption and estimating the explosivity of the impending
eruption. Through comparison of high temporal resolution measurements of
volcanic gas composition and seismicity, it may be possible to identify the type
of fluid associated with unique seismic signatures. The ability to identify
magma movement from seismic data will enable scientists to better determine the
likelihood and/or timing of impending eruptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, geochemical measurements of volcanic fluids and complementary seismic
data from three historically-active Alaskan volcanoes will be used to: (1)
determine the source (i.e. subducted slab, mantle, crust) and flux of volcanic
gases, (2) determine proportions of magmatic and hydrothermal fluids within the
subsurface, and (3) distinguish trends in gas composition and/or flux that
correlate with seismic signatures of fluid movement. Gas composition will be
combined with total gas flux to help elucidate subduction and magma generation
processes. Daily measurements of gas composition and flux will be compared with
seismic data collected over a two-month period to help determine the type of
fluid movement associated with certain seismic signals. This project will answer
fundamental science questions applicable to GeoPRISMS objectives, specifically
regarding the storage, transfer, and release of volcanic fluids, and the
relationship between subduction and surface processes.