* 1250447
* Reconciling Different Deformation Mechanisms in Adjacent Sedimentary Lithologies at Raplee and Comb Folds, Monument Upwarp, UT
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,03/31/2016
* David Pollard, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 96,389.00

This project compares and evaluates the brittle deformation (jointing in
siltstone and sandstone) and the ductile deformation (shear zone development
with veins and solution seams in limestone) that occurred at the outcrop scale
in adjacent strata during kilometer-scale folding on the Monument Upwarp during
the Laramide orogeny. The goals of the research are: 1) to describe and map the
joints and conjugate shear zones at Raplee anticline and Comb monocline in
southeastern Utah; and 2) to construct and evaluate continuum mechanical models
using finite element methods to investigate the brittle elastic and ductile
plastic deformation associated with these structures. We seek to reconcile how
and why these different mechanisms were activated in close proximity and under
similar loading conditions during folding, and to deduce the stress-strain
behavior of the host strata. The hypothesis is that different constitutive
properties and strengths led to the activation of the different mechanisms. To
test this hypothesis we compare the systematic geometric features of the
structures (e.g. opening distributions and shapes of veins), to the results of
the numerical models. We anticipate that certain ranges of constitutive
properties and states of stress will result in similarity. This will provide
important insights about the mechanical behavior of sandstone and limestone, not
obtainable from laboratory testing at the decimeter scale in the absence of such
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Folds are one of the most common geologic
structures, occurring in all layered rock types at scales from hand samples to
mountain ranges. Folds in sedimentary rock take on the added importance of being
traps for hydrocarbons, and therefore a primary target for oil and gas
exploration. Being familiar with the stiffness and strength of sedimentary rock
slabs used as paving stones or counter tops, the general public must wonder how
such strata is contorted into spectacular folds such as those Comb and Raplee
anticlines. The proposed project addresses this question, which also is a
fundamental issue for structural geology: what deformation mechanisms operate
within sedimentary strata during kilometer-scale folding? One mechanism is
obvious: sandstone layers are broken by brittle fractures (joints). A second
mechanism is quite subtle: limestone layers lack joints, but contain shear
zones, alignments of surfaces (solution seams) along which calcite has been
dissolved, and orthogonal opening cracks (veins) filled with calcite. The
juxtaposition of brittle (jointing) and ductile (shear zone) mechanisms in
adjacent outcrops offers the opportunity to deduce how the mechanical properties
of the respective formations varied at the time of folding. The interplay of
detailed mapping and mechanical modeling promises to offer new insights and
original concepts about rock deformation during folding and to contribute new
insights for scientists working in the closely related disciplines of petroleum
geology, rock mechanics, and geodynamics. In addition to the research objectives
of this project, the award is supporting the training of a graduate student;
includes a partnership with faculty at Dine College to organize field trips for
Native American students who will participate in collecting data; and is
contributing to the broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in
the Earth sciences.