* 1250243
* EAGER Proposal for Research in STEM Learning: Research and Development of a Digital Play-Based Platform to Achieve Projective Reflection for 21st Century Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Aroutis Foster, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this award is to support the PI in developing a clearer
operationalization of the two constructs "projective reflection" and "possible
selves," which the PI sees as potentially transformative ideas for linking
strands of research from creativity, inquiry and identity in the context of game
design and game play.

The project will convene a workshop of leading researchers in the learning
sciences, experimental design, instrumentation, and game design to advise the PI
on how these ideas can be refined to construct dependent measures and guides to
observation of behavior. These behavioral advances would then inform the PI's
design of a learning game platform. The workshops would also inform the design
of a set of experiments to test conjectures related to the role of identity
formation in the learning of STEM knowledge. The ultimate target audience for
the game would be middle and high school science and mathematics classes.

The products and other deliverables will include project reports on the
blueprints for designing both electronic STEM games, and the experiments to test
the conjectures about the effectiveness of two now refined constructs of
"projective reflection" and "possible selves." If the workshop leads to
successful blueprints, these will be shared with the larger game design
communities in education via publications and conference presentations, and the
PI's research website. The longer-term broader impact of the work would be to
lead to richer instructional electronic games, and more valid and reliable
indicators of learning.