* 1250363
* Collaborative Research in Biophotonics: Towards high-resolution, label-free molecular imaging in deep tissue via stimulated Raman excitation and ultrasound detection
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vladislav Yakovlev, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 207,000.00

1066776/1066562&lt;br/&gt;Zhang/Yakovlev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grand
challenge of optical tissue imaging is the ability to penetrate deeply into
tissue while preserving molecular specificity and high spatial resolution. The
proposed project tackles this grand challenge by developing a novel imaging
modality based on stimulated Raman excitation and detection of the nonlinearly
induced photoacoustic waves. Referred to as stimulated Raman photoacoustic
microscopy, the proposed modality combines chemical specificity through the
molecularly selective stimulated Raman excitation with the deep penetration and
high-resolution photoacoustic imaging. Compared with existing spontaneous and
nonlinear Raman microscopic imaging, the maximum imaging depth is expected to be
extended by at least one order of magnitude. Compared with existing
photoacoustic imaging, the much needed molecular specificity is achieved without
resorting to extrinsic molecular labeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will extend the existing knowledge on how advanced spectroscopic tools can be
successfully used for biomedical imaging. It lays the foundation to develop a
stand-alone molecular imaging microscope, capable of providing high-resolution
deep tissue imaging without external labels. In the proposed research, the
mechanism of the photoacoustic generation under the stimulated Raman excitation
will be investigated. The investigations focus on how the elastic scattering in
tissue will affect the proposed imaging modality. Monte Carlo simulations will
model the effect of dual wavelength, short-pulse light propagation in scattering
medium. These results will direct the design of the optimal optical illumination
geometry in the future prototyping of the proposed microscope. Quantitative
experimental studies will be carried out following the guidance of the
theoretical estimation and Monte Carlo simulation. The sensitivity of the
photoacoustic detection will be improved by matching the signal bandwidth and
employing novel ultrasonic detectors. In non-scattering media, the sensitivity
of stimulated Raman photoacoustic detection will be experimentally quantified in
the presence of background linear optical absorption, whose effect will be
mitigated by wavelength and/or time-delay modulation.