* 1250171
* CDS&amp;E: Data Management and Visualization in Petascale Turbulent Combustion Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Peyman Givi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

CBET-1250171&lt;br/&gt;PI: Peyman Givi, Univ. of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for developments of
(1) a robust computational method for petascale simulation&lt;br/&gt;of
turbulent combustion, (2) a scalable data management system for such simulations
and (3) a systematic&lt;br/&gt;visual analysis of the generated data. The
computational method will be based on the filtered density
function&lt;br/&gt;(FDF) methodology for large eddy simulation (LES) of complex
turbulent flames. The simulation will&lt;br/&gt;be based on a new algorithm,
termed ?irregularly portioned Lagrangian Monte Carlo-Finite
Difference?&lt;br/&gt;(IPLMCFD) which facilitate FDF simulations on massively
parallel, up to petascale platforms. Data management&lt;br/&gt;will be provided
by addressing research challenges in management of annotations,
management&lt;br/&gt;of workflows and data archiving. Effective data
visualization and analysis will be conducted through a&lt;br/&gt;machine
learning ?feature-extraction? approach. This work crosses the disciplines of
engineering and computer&lt;br/&gt;science and expands the state-of-the-art in
high fidelity predictions of turbulent reacting flows. At
the&lt;br/&gt;conclusion of the work, an open source LES code will be provided
for use by the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will have a significant impact in combustion, both in gas-
turbine&lt;br/&gt;industry and in government. It is firmly believed that LES
will constitute the primary means of predictions&lt;br/&gt;for future design and
manufacturing of combustion systems. Having it coupled with robust and versatile
data&lt;br/&gt;management and visualization capabilities will be useful for both
basic and applied research purposes. Some&lt;br/&gt;of the other broader impacts
are through involvement of undergraduate students in research and
attracting&lt;br/&gt;them to graduate school, K-12 outreach, involvement of high
school students in research, and recruitment&lt;br/&gt;of students from minority
and under-represented groups.