* 1250319
* CSR: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Brokerage Services for the Next Generation Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anna Squicciarini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 144,920.00

Future cloud services are expected to increasingly involve and synthesize
capabilities from multiple clouds. Applications from different organizations may
establish collaborative relationships and share information dynamically in cloud
computing. In this increasingly complex scenario, both consumers and service
providers will face new challenges. For example, consumers will need to be able
to identify the best service providers from a potentially huge pool, which could
be computationally demanding. Service providers will need to be able to ensure
the security and privacy of data shared among loosely connected
subcontractors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a novel brokerage-
based architecture to promote cost-effective cloud provisioning. Specifically,
the PIs will devise efficient indexing structures to facilitate the management
of massive information generated by a large number of service providers with a
variety of properties. The PIs are developing necessary services to allow
effective cloud-brokerage, such as service selection for consumers, service
negotiation between consumers and their service providers, and service agreement
delegation among service providers involved in a compound service. Along with
the service development, the work will produce new policy analysis, composition
and delegation techniques that accommodate the unique characteristics of the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will help significantly
streamline the selection and management of cloud computing services, and will
open up new business opportunities by providing cloud brokerage services.
Moreover, the proposed approach may also help reduce the vendor lock-in problem
which is a long standing major concern among consumers.