* 1250473
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Processing Prosody and Syntax in Turkish
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2015
* Janet Fodor, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 03/31/2015
* USD 9,984.00

This research investigates the role of prosody (intonation and rhythm of speech)
in the processing of syntax in Turkish. Many experiments have shown that the
prosody with which a sentence is uttered can provide listeners with cues to its
syntactic structure; some have also observed that an inappropriate prosodic
contour can mislead the syntactic parsing routines, causing comprehension
difficulty. It has been proposed that when prosodic cues are not supportive of
the syntactic structure, the language processing mechanism ignores the prosodic
input and relies on syntactic parsing strategies such as Late Closure (a
locality preference). However, a closer look at the available findings suggests
that the lengths of phrases could have caused what appeared to be an effect of
default syntactic strategies, since it is known that phrase lengths can
influence the perceived informativeness of prosodic cues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the present study, four experiments will be conducted
to distinguish these alternative explanations. Misleading and facilitatory
effects of prosody will be examined in Turkish, a language that is typologically
different from more commonly studied languages (such as English) and has
properties well-suited to this purpose. Phrase lengths will be systematically
manipulated in all experimental sentences, such that optimal-length prosodic
phrasing is associated with late closure syntax in one condition, and with early
closure syntax in the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will make an
original contribution to current knowledge about the mental mechanisms
underlying human sentence processing. Outcomes for Turkish similar to those for
previously studied languages would strengthen the general hypothesis that
prosody-syntax interactions are guided by fundamental universal properties of
the human parsing mechanism. The specific results will disentangle two potential
accounts of how that mechanism responds to imperfect input with conflicting
cues, as is not uncommon in everyday language use. Other potential contributions
include text-to-speech/speech-to-text software development in Turkish with a
wide range of applications including programs to aid the visually handicapped.