* 1250340
* EAGER: Quick Draw Semantics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Lois Delcambre, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 226,499.00

This project is developing methods and tools for ordinary web content creators
to indicate the structure inherent in their content by drawing a few simple
lines or figures over their web site. Their motivation for doing so is to use
enhanced browsing and searching capabilities in their local site based on these
mappings. These new browsing and searching capabilities are based on the
definition of canonical structures (i.e., data model fragments) and domain
patterns (a set of instantiated canonical structures) with associated navigation
and access paths where domain patterns are easily recognizable by content
creators and easily articulated using a simple drawing approach. This work is
complementary to yet distinct from much existing effort to transition to a more
semantic Web; the focus here is on (simple) local specification (drawing) of
mappings with local benefit. This project uses a form of crowd-sourcing to
create ontology mappings and (indirectly) create ontologies. This project
applies decades of work on data modeling and schema mapping but with structural
fragments rather than complete schemas/ontologies, without view update problems
(because of the focus on browsing/searching), and with immediate local benefit.
The research is motivated by and will be showcased in a series of websites that
support public access to instructional materials. In general, this work is
expected to contribute (nearly effortlessly yet in a high-quality way) to
achieving the vision for the semantic web.