* 1250260
* SAVI: EAGER: for Global Research on Applying Information Technology to Support Effective Disaster Management (GRAIT-DM)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2014
* USD 325,845.00

Disasters cause damages estimated in many billions of dollars and many lives
lost every year. Disaster management is a challenging task due to the seemingly
unpredictable alterations of the environment and impact on people. With the
primary focus on the application of information technology and Big Data, this
award establishes a "virtual institute" for Global Research on Applying
Information Technology to Support Effective Disaster Management (GRAIT-DM). It
will foster research collaborations and community activities, with the goal of
improving our preparedness for, response to, and recovery from disasters. Led by
partners at the Georgia Institute of Technology and the University of Tokyo, the
virtual institute is a U.S.-Japanese cooperative effort that should grow to
become a global collaboration in the near future.

Information technology has transformed modern disaster management, as
demonstrated by Twitter which was a valuable information source during the
Tohoku Earthquake. A Big Data-based approach to disaster management research can
be both transformative and challenging, at both human and social scales.
Reflecting this, the GRAIT-DM project supports the collection of large data sets
from environmental sensors and information networks shared by many researchers
working on various aspects of disaster management. This virtual institute
promotes global research on the application of information technology by
engaging the big data producers (e.g., sensor networks researchers), big data
consumers (e.g., disaster management researchers), and big data managers (e.g.,
data analytics researchers) who connect the big data producers to consumers.
Concrete activities include community-building workshops in the U.S. and Japan,
outreach and publication of research reports, educational activities such as
summer schools for graduate students and junior researcher exchanges, and a web
portal to provide access to data and support for software tools for community
use. Broader impacts include beneficial leveraging of international research and
infrastructure investments, enhancement of on-going projects through cross-
fertilization, an accelerated rate of innovation relevant to disaster
management, and the development of a work-force with specialized talent, capable
of excelling in a new, highly interconnected world that must cope with
disasters.

This award has been designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI)
award and is being co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering.