* 1250565
* Temperatures and Fluids on Faults Based on Carbonate Clumped-isotope Thermometry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Brian Wernicke, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 175,723.00

The Miocene Mormon Peak detachment is a low-angle normal fault along the Sevier
orogenic front in the Basin and Range province in southern Nevada. It is often
cited as one of the best examples in the world of a large-displacement (&gt;20
km) normal fault that both formed and slipped at dips of less than 25 degrees,
and therefore its origin is relevant to the problem of how brittle fracture and
slip can occur on planes oriented at a high angle to the maximum principal
stress. In recent years, the detachment has alternatively been interpreted as a
system of catastrophically emplaced gravity slide blocks (two independent
research teams) or a zone of large-scale dissolution with limited tectonic slip
(a third research team). These hypotheses challenge the notion that large-
displacement extensional detachments are important tectonic elements in the
earth?s crust. The objective of this project is to continue to test predictions
of the detachment, landslide and dissolution models by fully characterizing the
temperature and origin of fluids preserved along the fault in veins, breccias
and fault gouge, using the new "clumped isotope" carbonate thermometer to
distinguish between predictions of the landslide model (cold footwall vein
systems, hot gouge on the fault surface) and detachment model (warm footwall
veins and warm gouge). Regardless of the outcome of these and other tests for
various structural hypotheses, low-temperature carbonate thermometry of fault
rocks and vein systems is a new field that has never been applied to a problem
in structural geology, and the proposed work accordingly has the potential for
transformative impact. It will represent the first characterization of both the
temperatures of crystallization and the fluid sources associated with an upper
crustal fault.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the primary obstacles to our
understanding of the mechanics of earthquakes and faulting is informally
referred to as the "stress paradox." The stress paradox is simply that the
forces in the earth along fault planes are too low to permit either fracture or
continued frictional sliding, yet obviously the faults move and generate
earthquakes. There is at present no consensus as to why this is the case, and
hence the problem is a major research focus area in geology and geophysics. The
stress paradox is most acute for a class of faults known as "low-angle normal
faults," which accommodate horizontal extension of the earth?s crust. This
project is designed to test competing hypotheses for the origin of one of the
best-exposed low-angle normal faults in the world known as the Mormon Peak
detachment, located in southern Nevada. Several research teams have presented
evidence they claim demonstrate that the Mormon Peak detachment is not a low-
angle normal fault at all, and thereby question the notion that any such faults
even exist. We will use state-of-the-art geochemical techniques to investigate
the timing, depth and temperature of deformation along the detachment, which we
expect will falsify one or more of the proposed hypotheses. In addition to the
research objectives of this project, it is supporting the training of a graduate
student; is contributing to the broadening of participation of underrepresented
groups in the earth sciences; is contributing to the development and application
of a new isotopic thermometer that has transformative potential for a wide range
of disciplines, including rock mechanics, structural geology, seismology,
seismic hazards analysis, economic geology, and others.