* 1250477
* High-pressure and Temperature Elasticity and Equation of State of Hydrous Phase
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Mainak Mookherjee, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2016
* USD 287,672.00

Hydrous phases are stabilized in the oceanic crust through constant interaction
between the lithosphere and the overlying hydrosphere. These hydrous phases lock
up substantial amounts of water and, over geological time scale, play a
significant role in influencing the global sea-level. Subduction zones, which
are major tectonic features, transport water into the Earth's interior. The
efficiency of the transport of water and the extent of mantle hydration are
intimately linked with the thermodynamic stability and thermoelasticity of
hydrous phases. Since water has considerable effects on melting and on the
elastic and transport properties of the Solid Earth, it is important to
constrain the degree of mantle hydration.

This research attempts to put more accurate constraints on the transport of
water into the Earth's interior and on mantle hydration. It will contribute to
scientific understanding of the crystal structure, thermodynamics, equation of
state, and elasticity of various hydrous phases that are likely to be stabilized
in subduction zone settings. It will relate the energetics and thermoelasticity
of hydrous phases with the following aspects: transport of water into the
Earth's interior; extent of mantle hydration; observed low velocity layers; and
large anisotropy in subduction zone settings. The research will be conducted by
using a unique combination of experimental and theoretical methods.