* 1250414
* Collaborative Research: The Behavior of Sulfur During Magma Mixing and Implications for Magma Degassing and Ore Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Philipp Ruprecht, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2016
* USD 173,799.00

The proposed experimental study will elucidate the effect(s) of magma mixing on
the mobility of sulfur and sulfur-affine elements. In particular, this study
investigates the interaction of sulfur-rich magmas coming from the mantle that
mix with more evolved magmas that are typically stored for extended times in
magma chambers below the volcanic edifice and have relatively low sulfur
concentrations. Understanding the behavior of sulfur during such mixing should
significantly improve our ability to forecast volcanic behavior. In the
atmosphere, volcanic-released sulfur (often during magma mixing) modulates
climate and leads to acid rain in humid volcanic regions. Furthermore, sulfur
mobility during magma mixing is thought to facilitate metal transport from
silicate melt to magmatic aqueous fluids that are responsible for the evolution
of societally important magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quantitative understanding of how sulfur is mobilized
and how it facilitates mass transport during magma mixing of andesite and dacite
magma remains unexplored experimentally. As magmas hybridize during diffusive
re-equilibration, sulfur-bearing phase stability is investigated as a function
of time and oxidation state. Given differential diffusivities of different
components in diffusion-couple experiments, diffusive gradients lead to
transient local environments, in which sulfides and/or sulfates may in one spot
be precipitated while in another area they may be dissolved. This drives complex
mass transfer between the mafic and felsic magma. Reduced and oxidized
conditions will allow the team to assess the role of sulfur oxidation state on
these processes.