* 1250435
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Heat Flux from the Shallow Geothermal System, Yellowstone Caldera, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Peter Larson, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2017
* USD 295,134.00

Estimating the heat flux from the Yellowstone volcanic system has been pursued
in different ways over the past 50 years. Understanding the geothermal flux from
Yellowstone is important for many reasons: heat and mass flux are an important
part of determining the volcano's eruptive potential, and it has been suggested
that changes in heat flux or hot brine migration may be correlated with
inflation/deflation of the caldera floor or large seismic events. More
fundamentally, the heat flux at the land surface is controlled by the quantity
of heat entering the bottom of the system. The overall active heat budget of the
Yellowstone caldera has been estimated in the past using chloride mass balance
in spring discharges. This method is subject to assumptions and uncertainties.
This project will explore the feasibility of a new method to infer mass and
energy fluxes for Yellowstone hot springs. The team will use cross-correlation
of spring and atmospheric temperatures that allow estimates for spring discharge
(mass flux) and the inflow spring temperature (and hence enthalpy flux).
Estimates of the advective mass and energy flux (using a time-series method)
combined with the diffusive energy flux between springs will allow them to
derive a comprehensive description of mass and energy fluxes between the shallow
subsurface and the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data to be obtained in
this project will be used to improve estimates of heat and mass flux for the
shallow hydrothermal system in the Yellowstone caldera. The methods that to be
developed will define a template for future heat and mass balance studies of
hydrothermal systems. It is expected that the methods to be employed in this
study and the data to be gathered in the course of this project will be
important to volcanic hazard assessment, as well as contributing to public
education and enjoyment of Yellowstone and other national resources. It is also
possible that the time-series method of evaluating heat and mass flux of
hydrothermal springs as developed here could be approached via satellite-based
telemetry. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the research
and their training in this project will provide them with career-building
opportunities. They will be well prepared to face societies future challenges
with thoughtful solutions.