* 1250452
* EAGER: A detailed investigation of topic modeling of CBET research
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2013
* David Newman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 03/31/2013
* USD 2,812.00

This EAGER project is "high risk high payoff" in that it involves a radically
new approach to investigate the mechanism of peptide-lipid interfacial
interactions using a freely oscillating sensor called a Quartz Crystal
Microbalance with Dissipation (QCM-D). Life depends on the integrity of
biological membranes and their ability to maintain function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Disrupting bacterial
membrane integrity with peptides on purpose is a new strategy to kill toxic
bacteria. Alternately, protecting mammalian cell membrane from disruption by
peptides or oligomers is a strategy to mitigate Alzheimer?s (and many other
amyloid-related) disease(s) (AD). In both cases, very little is known about how
the peptides bind to biological membranes (or to membrane mimics called
supported lipid bilayers, SLBs) and how they aggregate and penetrate to form
pores and/or induce lipid loss. Various models of interaction include the
formation peptide adsorbed on a SLB surface, pore formation with and without
release of lipids from a SLB. Previously, methods such as interfacial tension
(Langmuir-Blodgett (LB)), leakage, spectroscopy (NMR, EPR, CD) and scattering
measurements (reflectometry with light, X-rays and neutrons) have been used to
analyze protein-lipid interactions. Limitations include the presence of a
nonnatural lipid-air interface (LB) and low sensitivity (NMR, EPR). Leakage
measurements using fluorescence or electrical current changes are useful for
determining the contiguity of the SBLs but do not provide much mechanistic
insight. Scattering techniques are complementary to the proposed QCM-D
measurements and will be pursued at Oak Ridge National Labs (our proposal to
conduct neutron reflectometry in the Fall 2012 was successful) on the same
problem described here. This is a complex interfacial binding, disruption and
transport challenge, which occurs at the surface of SLBs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose the use of a novel technique, QCM-D, to
interrogate this interfacial and transport problem with a variety of peptides
and SBLs with the hope of designing more potent peptides and establishing a
foundation for inhibiting Aâ disruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to
measure the interfacial interactions and transport between two different
families of amphipathic peptides (anti-microbial, AMPs, and amyloid protein, Aâ)
and model membranes (SLBs) in order to discover more potent AMPs and establish a
basis to prevent Aâ disruption.&lt;br/&gt;Their experimental plan of attack,
materials choice and technique of measurement in combination are novel. No one
has developed rules for a widely accepted mechanism of peptideinduced disruption
of model cell membranes like SLBs. Our new approach will measure two independent
parameters, changes in frequency and dissipation, or changes in mass and
rigidity, respectively, and binding kinetics. They have recently made progress
and observed disruption of SLBs with both AMPs (picidin 1 &amp; 3) and Aâ
fibrils for the first time. At low concentrations, picidin 1 &amp; 3 appear to
form porelike structures while at high concentrations, they extract parts of the
bilayer and form micelles and large cavities in the SLB. The results from the
proposed study are important because they will help establish design principles
with greater efficacy to disrupt bacterial membrane integrity and formulate
strategies to protect mammalian cell membranes from disruption by peptides or
oligomers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two specific goals are: Aim I: Investigate
the rupture mechanism of bacterial-like SLBs by AMPS, and Aim II: Investigate
the disintegration mechanism of mammalian-like SLMs by Aâ1-42 oligomer
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The proposed study will provide a
fundamental understanding of the interactions of peptides with SLBs. This has
broad relevance to inactivating bacterial infections and to mitigating amyloid
diseases like Alzheimer?s, Huntington?s, Parkinson?s and over 20 others. As
bacteria increase resistance to antibiotics, new and different methods are
urgently needed to deal with bacterial infection. Deactivating bacteria with
AMPs offers an exciting alterative to antibiotics. Results of this research will
benefit society by optimizing AMP design for treatment and for coating hospital
walls to deactivate airborn bacteria. The project will promote training and
learning by involving undergraduate science and engineering majors through the
Rensselaer Undergraduate Research Program and by involving high school seniors
through the RPI Questar program. Female and minority students will again be
recruited to broaden participation of underrepresented groups, exposing students
to modern interfacial science.