* 1250444
* Paleomagnetic Investigation of Rock Formations from Junggar Basin, NW China
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Xixi Zhao, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 305,659.00

Plate tectonic theory postulates that the Earth's lithosphere is broken into
tectonic plates or blocks that move and slide past or toward each other over
geological time. Our knowledge of the kinematics and duration of collisional
events between various Chinese tectonic blocks and Siberia is still poorly
known. Similarly, the accretionary history of the Central Asian fold belt itself
is contentious. A lack of basic information regarding the tectonic assembly of
asia hinders our understanding of the complex tectonic history of this region.
The primary goal of this research is to study the Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks
from the Junggar Basin, Northwest China, to address key questions that are
currently debated: Terrane Accretionary History of the Central Asian Belt;
Coherence of the Junggar Basin; and Excessive Crustal Shortening. A common
thread running through the proposed work is to obtain reliable paleomagnetic
data bearing on the tectonic and geodynamic evolution of Asia, including the
sequence of configurations leading up to collision of oceanic terranes and
continental blocks along its southern margin and the large-scale displacements
and rotations that ensued during the long process of accretion. To address these
questions we are collecting paleomagnetic and geochronologic samples from the
Junggar Basin. In addition to the scientific objectives of this research, the
project is contributing to the education of graduate and undergraduate students
in a STEM discipline and is promoting significant international collaboration
with scientists from Taiwan and The Peoples Republic of China. Geophysical
insight and refinement of paleogeographic maps from this study may help identify
the ancient environments that were conducive to the formation of the rare-metal
mineralization and petroleum potential in the central Asian belt region. The
scientific results from this project will be germane to a broad range of
scientists studying continental tectonics with interests ranging from the growth
of the lithosphere to deep-mantle dynamics to examining questions regarding
possible relations between plume activity, large igneous province production,
and geomagnetic polarity superchrons. The data from this study will be presented
at national meetings, reported to the NSF, and disseminated in peer-reviewed,
high-profile international journal articles and web-based paleomagnetic database
for wider dissemination. This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.