* 1250638
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   A Novel Approach to Investigate Psychological Processes in Language: Contrasting Bilinguals and Interpreters
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Andrew Conway, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2015
* USD 14,139.00

In many studies comparing bilinguals to monolinguals, researchers have found
that bilinguals outperform monolinguals on certain measures of cognitive
control. This is called the bilingual advantage. The bilingual advantage most
likely is caused by the bilingual's experience regularly switching between two
languages and their respective grammatical properties. In order to appropriately
switch between languages, the bilingual must a) control the selection of the
target language according to the linguistic environment and b) resolve conflict
between competing alternatives. If this hypothesis is true, then 1) the more
language switching performed and language conflict resolved, the more cognitive
advantage she will have, and 2) the more experience a bilingual has managing
language switching and conflict, the more cognitive advantage she will have.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to investigate this claim, the researchers are
recruiting college students in training programs that are either a) being
trained to manage low levels of bilingual language switching and conflict such
as learning a second language that is a signed language, which competes less
with the native spoken language, or b) being trained to manage high levels of
bilingual language switching and conflict, specifically simultaneous
interpreting. Simultaneous interpreting is a complex cognitive task in which the
bilingual must concurrently comprehend and produce two languages with differing
grammatical properties. The participants are either beginning or advanced
students (in both the low-switch/conflict and the high-switch/conflict groups)
so that the role of experience will also be investigated. In addition, the
researchers are recruiting both bimodal (signed language-spoken language)
bilinguals and unimodal (spoken language-spoken language) bilinguals for each of
the groups. A variety of language ability and cognitive ability measures are
administered to the participants. The research will speak to differences and
similarities between unimodal and bimodal bilinguals, and will investigate the
role of cognitive enhancement based on amount of language switching and conflict
resolution and experience managing the switching and conflict. It will also
contribute to the training of a promising scholar.