* 1250555
* Collaborative Research: Managing Cloud Usage Allocation and Accounting for the NSF Community
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 160,000.00

Cloud computing platforms such as Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, Cornell
Red Cloud, and the SDSC Storage Cloud have emerged as important research
computing resources. These resources are already popular in research and
education due to their instant (on-demand) access, seemingly infinite
scalability, ease of configuration for widely varying needs, and ability to
offer higher-level, easier-to-use services to less-than-expert users. However,
as usage of Cloud resources by the NSF community continues to grow, challenging
issues of resource allocation, accounting, reporting and billing emerge. This
award develops a framework that can simplify Cloud usage for researchers and
educators while also enabling allocation, monitoring, and management by those
responsible for strategic and budget planning and reporting. The PI's partner
with Amazon, Inc., Eucalyptus Systems, Inc., and MathWorks, Inc.,
the&lt;br/&gt;Globus Online team from the University of Chicago and the Red
Cloud team from Cornell University to develop and evaluate a prototype service
called Globus Usage that can be leveraged by individuals and their research
groups, academic institutions, NSF projects, and XSEDE to integrate a range of
cloud services into their research computing environments, with the ability to
implement allocation, accounting, reporting, and billing all from a single Web-
based dashboard.