* 1250402
* Collaborative Research:  RUI: Orogenic Exhumation and Neogene Foreland Basin Evolution, Central Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* J. Brian Mahoney, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2017
* USD 224,916.00

Synorogenic Neogene foreland basins of the southern Central Andes (32-35 degrees
S) provide a sensitive, but poorly constrained, record of the spatial and
temporal patterns of tectonics, magmatism and orogenic exhumation across this
classic convergent continental arc system. Basin evolution is strongly
influenced by the segmentation of the Nazca plate: North of 33 degrees S, the
subducting slab is subhorizontal, producing basement-involved thick-skinned
contractional deformation, a broken foreland, and sparse magmatism; south of 33
degrees S, the subducting slab attains a normal subduction angle, with episodic
magmatic activity, thin-skinned structural deformation and development of
stacked piggy back basins. Segmentation of the margin into flat, transitional
and normal slab segments produces longitudinal variations in arc magmatism,
structural deformation and basin development that provide an ideal laboratory to
examine contrasting along-strike patterns of orogenic exhumation and basin
evolution. The primary objective of this investigation is to document the
temporal-spatial pattern in Neogene orogenic exhumation and its relation to
structural deformation, topographic evolution, basin development and sediment
dispersal patterns in the southern Central Andes (32-35 degrees S). More
specifically, this investigation will examine the relationship of spatial and
temporal distribution of synorogenic foreland basins to variation in slab dip,
the variation in pattern and rate of orogenic exhumation along strike, and the
control of pre-existing basement configuration on orogenic exhumation and basin
development. A systematic field-based research program will integrate isotopic
analyses of detrital zircon (U-Pb, Hf, (U-Th)/He) with stratigraphic analysis,
whole rock geochemistry and apatite (U-Th)/He thermochronology to constrain the
timing, episodicity, provenance, depositional architecture and subsidence rate
of Neogene synorogenic basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The south-central Andes
Mountains provides an ideal laboratory to examine the dynamic linkage between
the rate and magnitude of orogenic exhumation and the spatial and temporal
pattern of adjacent basin development. Understanding this linkage will provide
insight into the use of basinal stratigraphy to constrain the magnitude and rate
of tectonic uplift in seismically active regions, the evaluation of the
accumulation and preservation of economic resources and the accurate
reconstruction of earth history. The project is tightly integrated with two
international (Argentina, Chile, France, and United States) multidisciplinary
regional-scale investigations studying Neogene crustal dynamics along three
cross-Andean transects (32-35 degrees S). Students and faculty from University
of Wisconsin Eau Claire and San Diego State University will collaborate closely
with these groups in field and laboratory work and joint publications. Research
in Argentina will be integral in interdisciplinary experiential learning
activities at the University of Wisconsin Eau Claire. The project is supported
by the Tectonics Program and the Office of International &amp; Integrative
Affairs.