* 1250353
* Collaborative Research: An EARTHTIME Chronology for the Matuyama-Brunhes Geomagnetic Field Reversal
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Robert Coe, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2018
* USD 64,449.00

The Earth?s magnetic field is still useful for navigation, but perhaps more
importantly today it forms a protective shield against cosmic radiation that
otherwise would lead to further depletion of the ozone layer that protects us
from UV radiation and interfere with the satellite communications so essential
for society. The stronger the field, the greater the shielding. That the Earth?s
magnetic field has weakened profoundly, reversed polarity hundreds of times, and
attempted to do so on many other occasions, is one of the great enigmas of
science. There are a variety of ways by which geoscientists advance our
understanding of the magnetic field, which is widely thought to be generated by
the flow of hot molten iron that swirls around in Earth?s liquid outer core to
generate a magnetic dynamo. These include: (1) creation and study of analog
dynamos made of molten sodium or other (dangerous) electrically conducting
metals, (2) supercomputer modeling of dynamo processes that produce polarity
reversals and field excursions, and (3) amassing and interpreting observations
from natural rocks that record the magnetic fields of Earth?s past. This study
falls into the latter category, and we have proposed to greatly expand the set
of observations that bear on understanding the last reversal of Earth?s magnetic
field that took place about 770 thousand years ago. This grant will permit a
collaborative team of scientists to acquire new age determinations using the
potassium-argon radio-isotope decay clock, as well as new information on the
intensity and direction of the field, as recorded in sequences of lava flows
that erupted during the last full polarity reversal of Earth?s magnetic field.
The information we plan to collect will, in turn, provide fundamental data from
the real Earth?s past that can help to inform and validate approaches that rely
on analog or supercomputer simulations of this process.

Reversals and excursions of Earth?s geomagnetic field create global marker
horizons in sedimentary and volcanic rocks and polar ice. An accurate and
precise chronology of these geomagnetic field instabilities is fundamental to
quantifying the timing and rates of climate change, surface processes, and
biological evolution. Moreover, knowing the structural and temporal evolution of
reversals and excursions is essential to understanding the geodynamic process by
which reversals occur. Advances in rock magnetic measurement techniques in both
sediments and lava flows, astrochronologic methods applied to sediment cores,
and radio-isotopic dating of lava flows during the past two decades, using the
40Ar/39Ar variant of potassium-argon dating, has produced a number of
paleomagnetic records of the most recent polarity transition from the Matuyama
reversed chron to the Brunhes normal chron. Given the importance of an accurate
and precise age for the the Matuyama-Brunhes reversal, our objectives are to:
(1) Greatly enlarge the set of 40Ar/39Ar ages from lava flows that bear on the
timing of this reversal while improving the precision and accuracy of these age
determinations, (2) Test the hypothesis that the discrepancy between the
astrochronologic age of 773,000 years before present recorded in sediment cores
and the 40Ar/39Ar age of lava flows reflects the accuracy of the very limited
40Ar/39Ar data available from the lava flows, and (3) Determine the
paleointensity of lavas that record directional changes associated with the MB
reversal and its precursor on Maui and in Chile. This project is an
international collaboration between scientists in Japan, the Netherlands,
Denmark, and the USA. We will train undergraduate and graduate students in both
state-of-the-art radio-isotopic geochronology and paleomagnetic methods in the
labs at UW Madison and UC Santa Cruz, respectively. A geochronology summer short
course will be held at UW for graduate and undergraduate students. Moreover, The
PI will work with staff in the UW Geology museum to create a display that
highlights how geologists tell time, including the use of 40Ar/39Ar dating and
astrochronology.