* 1250163
* CAREER: A Multi-scale Methodology for Assessing the Reductions in Seismic Risk Possible through Building Retrofit Design and Policy, from Buildings to Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Abbie Liel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program
award is to develop multi-scale models to evaluate the impacts of retrofit
design and policy on a community for earthquake risk reduction. The emphasis on
retrofit is motivated by the large number of older buildings that predate major
changes to seismic code provisions and, as a result, are vulnerable to
earthquake-induced damage. To date, progress in retrofitting these buildings has
been slow to significantly reduce risk of damage, in part because building
owners find retrofit costs are expensive in competitive market. This research
addresses the problem of seismic retrofit at three levels of analysis:
individual buildings, communities, and policy choices. The study will begin by
developing a probabilistic methodology for classifying and characterizing
retrofitted structures for the purpose of systematically assessing the fragility
of retrofitted buildings and the reduction in seismic risk. These evaluations
will be combined, using advanced methods to quantify correlations and
interdependencies in structural response, to produce community-scale assessments
of seismic risk. The research will also model the influence of retrofit policies
on community seismic risk reduction, incorporating historical data on policy
implementation.

The outcome of this research will be a framework for evaluating seismic retrofit
and other potential mitigation alternatives through integrated assessment of
structural response and community impacts. The methodology lays the groundwork
for a re-evaluation not only of seismic retrofit and policy making, but also
mitigation activities to reduce risks from other hazards. The integrated
education plans will lead to the development of new service-learning course
modules. In these modules, students will partner with Colorado-based non-profit
organizations that help needy individuals and organizations build and improve
homes or other facilities. These service learning modules are a vehicle to
improve practical learning about structural analysis, design and retrofit, to
improve retention of diverse and motivated students in structural engineering,
and to prepare students to be leading practitioners in dealing with vulnerable
existing buildings. Curriculum materials developed for service learning will be
made available to other faculty and universities.