* 1250374
* Coronal Magnetography of Solar Active Regions via 3D Modeling and Radio Imaging Spectroscopy
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2017
* USD 542,081.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and his team will investigate the use and
interpretation of radio imaging spectroscopy observations of solar active
regions through advanced theory development and 3D modeling of gyroresonance
(GR) and free-free emission. The GR process permits radio emission to provide
direct measurements of magnetic field strength and direction in the solar
corona, and so supplies the key to understanding the basic mechanisms underlying
all of solar activity. This team's recent work in comparing spatially and
spectrally resolved radio emission with magnetic field extrapolations of
photospheric magnetograms and other data has suggested that an extension of
existing theory to non-Maxwellian particle distributions may be needed to
account for the observed altitudes of solar radio sources. The PI therefore will
develop a comprehensive modeling framework for flaring loops that is capable of
reproducing physically realistic solar atmospheric structure, including
distributions of non-thermal particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's existing
tools have already successfully calculated both gyrosynchrotron (GS) radio
emission and hard X-ray emission for forward-fitting microwave and X-ray
observations of solar flares. Here, the team plans to modify this general
framework to model GR emission. This requires a separate development effort to
deal with specific issues arising from the GR process, including grid resolution
problems, the treatment of the process in spherical coordinates to deal with the
large fields of view involved in active region emission, and the development of
a consistent way to specify ambient solar plasma temperature and density in
addition to the magnetic field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this effort, the PI's
team will develop user-friendly software tools for the solar and space weather
community, and then widely disseminate them online through the SolarSoft
software distribution library. Since this work will be performed at the Center
for Solar-Terrestrial Research at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT),
the activity will advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
training, and learning. The PI plans to integrate the analysis tools developed
here into graduate courses at NJIT, including curricula in radio astronomy,
solar physics, and plasma physics. This research will also broadly be applicable
beyond solar physics, given that both magnetic fields and plasma particle
distributions are fundamentally important in astrophysics studies.