* 1251685
* Workshop and Summer School on Dynamics of Language and Music
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Christopher Kello, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,520.00

Lay abstract - Workshop and Summer School on Dynamics of Language and
Music&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Language and music are unique to human intelligence,
some would argue, in that both kinds of behavior go well beyond even the most
sophisticated communicative systems and songs found in other species. Part of
what appears unique to human language and music is the complexity with which
perceptually discrete elements, such as syllables and chords, are organized into
hierarchically structured sequences of symbols. Also, both language and music
play foundational roles in social systems and cultures that are essential to the
intelligence of humans as a species. However, while language and music can both
be viewed as systems of communication, researchers debate whether they are
supported by a common set of brain and behavioral
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support of the National Science Foundation,
Dr. Kello and Dr. Matlock at the University of California, Merced will help
organize a workshop and summer school on dynamics of language and music. The
intellectual motivation for this meeting is that language and music share
patterns in how their hierarchical structures are expressed in the timing and
sequencing of neural and behavioral activities. The meeting will bring together
humanists, neuroscientists, and cognitive scientists with a range of relevant
backgrounds to share knowledge about dynamical patterns in language and music.
An overarching goal is to build capacity in research at the intersection of
these fields, where state-of-the-art experimental, analytical, and modeling
techniques can be brought to bear on deep questions about the similarities and
differences between language and music as two pinnacles of human intellect.
Students will be trained in these techniques as applied to dynamical theories
and hypotheses, and a schedule of speakers and artistic performances will be
designed to stimulate and enhance summer school activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and researchers at UC Merced will partner with
students and researchers at UC San Diego, and with the Temporal Dynamics of
Learning Center located there. As an NSF Science of Learning Center, TDLC
supports researchers with expertise and interest in temporal dynamics, and the
acquisition and learning of languages and musical skills is central to the
mission of the Center. The expertise at UC San Diego complements the expertise
at UC Merced, and together with a diverse set of student applicants and invited
worldwide experts, the meeting is anticipated to provoke new ideas and provide
opportunities for new interdisciplinary collaborations.