* 1251515
* Collaborative Research:  Mantle Dynamics, Lithospheric Structure, and Topographic Evolution of the Southeastern US Continental Margin
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 04/30/2017
* USD 197,766.00

The surface geology of the eastern United States is extraordinary in its
complexity. This complexity reflects a wide range of tectonic processes that
have operated in the region over the past billion years, including episodes of
subduction and rifting associated with two complete cycles of supercontinent
assembly and breakup. A record of these processes is preserved in the geological
units and topography we see at the surface today. It is unknown, however, how
the crust and mantle lithosphere have responded to these tectonic forces over
time, and whether and how the geological units preserved at the surface relate
to deeper structures. The persistence of Appalachian topography through time
remains a major outstanding problem in the study of landscape evolution. There
is an ongoing interplay among erosion, topography, rock type, and mantle flow at
depth that controls the structures we see at the surface today. However,
understanding the complex role played by each of these factors requires better
constraints on the history of topographic change and its relationship to the
deep structure and dynamics of the mantle. Our project, known as the Mid-
Atlantic Geophysical Integrative Collaboration (MAGIC), aims to address these
fundamental questions about the geophysical evolution of the eastern United
States by studying surface processes, crustal and lithospheric structure, and
deep mantle flow across Virginia, West Virginia, and
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAGIC involves a collaborative effort among
seismologists, geodynamicists, and geomorphologists. We are undertaking a two-
year deployment of 28 broadband seismometers in a dense linear transect from the
Atlantic coast to the continental interior. In combination with EarthScope
USArray Transportable Array (TA) stations our experiment geometry will provide
an opportunity to image isotropic and anisotropic crust and mantle structure
from the coast to the continental interior in unprecedented detail, using
techniques such as shear wave splitting, receiver function analysis, and
tomographic inversions. The dense linear array allows us to target small-scale
crustal and lithospheric variations for imaging. Our geodynamical modeling
effort focuses on quantitatively testing several different hypotheses for the
pattern of mantle flow by using 3-D, time-dependent, numerical models to make
testable predictions about mantle anisotropy and surface topographic change,
which will be tested against results from the seismology and geomorphology
components of the project. The geomorphology component of the project uses
quantitative stream profile data and cosmogenic isotopes to understand the
history of erosion rates and topographic change throughout the Appalachian
region. Insights into uplift history and the approach to equilibrium among
lithology, topography, and erosion (and their spatial variation) will be
compared to inferences on the mantle flow field and deep crustal and
lithospheric structure gained from the geodynamics and seismology components of
the project. Insight from all three efforts will be combined to obtain a
vertically integrated picture of tectonic processes from the surface through the
crust and mantle lithosphere to the asthenosphere and deeper mantle. The
education and outreach component of this project focuses on the involvement of
undergraduates in scientific research, opportunities for graduate students to
mentor and advise undergraduate students, and forging ties with colleges and
universities (including many primarily undergraduate institutions) in our study
region that are not currently involved with the EarthScope initiative.