* 1251877
* Collaborative Proposal: Relation of Exhumation to Lithsopheric Architecture Along a Steep Continental Margin, Idaho-Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 91,414.00

The aim of this project is to determine the link between topographic uplift,
erosion and exhumation, pre-existing geologic boundaries, and the underlying
mantle dynamics that drive deformation. The field area is the Salmon River
suture zone of western Idaho, which is the boundary between Precambrian North
America underlying most of Idaho and younger (Phanerozoic) accreted terranes of
the Blue Mountains in Oregon. The Idaho batholith formed exclusively on the
North American side of this boundary. Post-collision and ongoing deformation
affect different parts of the region differently, representing differences in
pre-existing geologic structure and/or in deep driving forces. The timing,
rates, and amounts of uplift of the various mountain ranges will be related to
the current subsurface geometry -- determined using seismic data -- to identify
motions in the Earth?s crust and mantle that elevated topography on regional
scales. The work entails a combination of seismic data analyses, to provide a
detailed sub-surface architecture, and thermochronology, to determing the timing
of uplift and exhumation of rocks from depth and the development of the current
topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work spans three main study areas and
includes a final project synthesis: 1) Documentation of the exhumation path of
the Atlanta lobe of the Idaho batholith to determine if it was uplifted by
younger magmatism; 2) Evaluation of potential differential exhumation along the
trans-Challis fault zone that cross-cuts the Idaho batholith; and 3)
Documentation of exhumation in the Blue Mountains, in order to compare its
history to that of adjacent North America. A particular focus is whether the
Salmon River suture zone was reactivated by post-Columbia River Basalt
extension. The combination of the thermochronology and seismic results with
recent geology, geochronology, and geochemistry studies will allow synthesis of
a regional tectonic evolution and can illuminate the relationship between
inherited lithospheric structures and active tectonic
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate and two undergraduate students at
the University of Florida and Virginia Tech are directly supported by this work.
Tectonic synthesis will involve graduate students at all three institutions,
several of whom are funded by other sources.