* 1251316
* Whom Can I Trust?   A Cooperative Contingencies Framework for Predicting and Reducing Intergroup Bias
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Dominic Packer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 01/31/2017
* USD 313,736.00

Despite a substantial decline in overt prejudice and discrimination, intergroup
disparities persist. The research will test key hypotheses derived from a novel
"cooperative contingencies" framework that can account for biased and
discriminatory behavior among otherwise low prejudiced people. Shared group
memberships enhance cooperation, which often provides a powerful instrumental
incentive for individuals, regardless of prejudice level, to preferentially
affiliate with ingroup over outgroup members. Critically, incentives to
preferentially affiliate are likely to be contingent on the full set of
cooperative affordances available in an environment. If shared group memberships
afford the best available means of facilitating cooperation between individuals,
people are likely to preferentially rely on ingroup members. However, when
effective non-group based mechanisms for fostering and sustaining cooperation
are present or when groups are not likely to enhance cooperation, individuals
low (but not high) in prejudice are less likely to exhibit intergroup biases.
This hypothesis is particularly important because it suggests that external
social structures and institutions that facilitate cooperation among individuals
(e.g., sanctions for non-cooperation, rule of law) may cause people to rely less
on shared group memberships and thereby reduce intergroup bias.

Scientifically, this approach to understanding and reducing bias in favor of
one's group is complementary to and advances on existing theories on intergroup
relations. Importantly, it can account for a range of phenomena and generate
predictions that extant approaches do not. This research is also directly
relevant to a pressing societal problem. By focusing on the instrumental
incentives that can drive bias among low-prejudiced people and examining the
influence of situational aspects on these processes, this research promises to
inform new interventions for reducing prejudice and discrimination. In addition
to the sorts of educational and training programs that have been developed to
combat such bias, leaders and policy-makers may also have a range of structural
tools at their disposal. Scientifically-informed use of cooperation-enhancing
social structures may provide a powerful means of reducing the biased choices
that lead to wide-spread intergroup disparities. This project also includes
extensive educational training and knowledge mobilization components. Graduate
and undergraduate students will work closely with the researcher on all aspects
of the research, and will have substantial presentation and publication
opportunities. Research findings will be publicized in local and national media
and presented in public lectures.