* 1251732
* SusChEM:   Controls on struvite neogenesis and reactivity in engineered and geochemical systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Ashaki Rouff, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2015
* USD 301,492.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorus (P) can be recovered from
human and agricultural wastes as the mineral struvite (MgNH4PO4Â·6H2O), which can
be used as an alternative to traditional fertilizers. This project addresses the
properties and reactivity of struvite when generated from different types of
wastes, and as compared to geochemically produced struvite. The goal of the
research is to elucidate the overarching conditions and parameters that dictate
the physical and chemical properties of struvite, independent of source of
neogenesis. Struvite will be precipitated from swine effluent, greenhouse
wastewater, and Mono Lake water. The animal and plant wastes are commonly used
in engineered systems for struvite recovery, and Mono Lake is a geochemical
system with a historical occurrence of struvite. Model solutions, with deionized
water as the solvent, will be used to determine the specific controls; i.e. pH,
ionic strength, dissolved organics; on the resultant mineral properties. The
sorption of trace contaminants such as metals, prevalent in starting solutions,
will also be assessed. This is particularly critical because the impact of
struvite properties on sorption processes has not been previously determined,
and conversely the effect of sorbed impurities on the mineral structure and
stability are not known. The research will implement several advanced and
innovative techniques, including P XAFS, 31P NMR, 33P radiotracers and TG/DSC-
FT-IR, which are transferable to the study of other phosphate minerals.
&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research can be used to manipulate the properties
of struvite in engineered systems, contingent upon waste composition and
implemented conditions. The ability to better engineer struvite from wastes will
advance the use of struvite fertilizers and encourage the sustainable use of
P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importance for Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human
phosphorus (P) cycle is unsustainable. This is because P is a limited natural
resource, the cycling of which is accelerated by human activity due to its use
as fertilizer. With diminishing geologic P reserves, and an ever increasing
global population, P lost in the human cycle needs to be recouped. This can be
achieved by the recovery of P from human and agricultural wastes as the
phosphate mineral struvite. The use of recovered struvite as an alternative
fertilizer source will promote the sustainable use of P, conserve natural P
resources, and limit the release of additional P sequestered in rocks to the
human cycle. This project will provide an improved understanding of the physical
and chemical properties of struvite when generated from a variety of sources,
including animal and plant wastes. Results can be used to predict, and
potentially control, the properties and contaminant content of recovered
struvite based on wastewater composition and recovery conditions. This provides
the security that struvite delivered to soils as fertilizer can function as
required and does not pose a contamination risk, and thus an environmental
liability to soils, agro-ecosystems and geochemical systems. Ultimately, the
reuse of struvite recovered from wastes as a source of P will introduce
sustainability to the human P cycle by providing an alternative, sustainable
fertilizer to feed a growing global population.