* 1251862
* Collaborative Research: Parenting for STEM Success in African American Families
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Stephanie Rowley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,138,067.00

This collaborative proposal focuses on African American parents' racial beliefs
and experiences as mechanisms shaping their parenting relevant to youths'
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) success. The purpose of
the longitudinal study is to investigate the relationship of parents' race
related beliefs to their socialization (particularly their fostering of science
and math skills) of their early adolescent children. The project links race as a
social identity with parenting and young adolescents' performance in science and
mathematics. The investigators will obtain survey data in Grades 6, 7, and 8
from 380 African American students, one of their parents, and their teachers.
Hypotheses regarding the relationships between parents' race-related experiences
and beliefs (i.e., racial discrimination, knowledge of inequalities, racial
identity, and endorsement of race stereotypes) and the academic socialization of
their children will be tested. Differences in these processes by child gender
and ability will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual
merit is its potential to advance understanding about STEM success for
underrepresented youth. The focus will yield new insights in an area where
African American youth are likely to face negative stereotypes and
discriminatory treatment, and where most prior research has focused on classroom
processes rather than parenting. Broader impacts of the work are in the realms
of education and training; inclusion of under-represented groups; and
dissemination to teachers, families, the public, and to the scientific
community.