* 1251424
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:   The Perceptual Basis of Collective Behavior in a Model Vertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Esteban Fernandez-Juricic, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2016
* USD 89,951.00

A fundamental problem in biology is understanding how complex systems work from
interactions among its components. In many animal groups, such as schooling fish
or flocking birds, coordinated movements are thought to result from self-
organizing social interactions among individuals. However, little is known about
the social cues that the organisms within groups pay attention to and how they
integrate them during decision-making, or how these interactions produce
collective behavior. The proposed research combines novel experimental and
computational approaches to investigate the relationship between sensory input
and collective behavior using zebrafish as an experimental model. The research
focuses on vision, which is essential in the coordination of many animal groups.
The researchers will: (a) characterize key dimensions of the visual system, (b)
use this sensory information to model the visual saliency of social cues, (c)
incorporate the zebrafish visual information in current models that track the
motion of individuals in real shoals, (d) develop and implement new technologies
to investigate behavioral responses, and (e) measure these behavioral responses
under experimental conditions that manipulate the visual saliency of group
mates. Ultimately, this project will increase our understanding of how and why
organisms coordinate their behavior in groups. The PI and collaborator will
disseminate the results and technologies to the broader scientific community
through publications, and give public lectures to broad audiences and schools.