* 1251193
* Crustal Deformation across the U.S. from Harmonic Analysis of Receiver Functions
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Kevin Mahan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 04/30/2018
* USD 205,414.00

The EarthScope Transportable Array is collecting seismic data on a previously
unprecedented continent-wide scale with station locations ~70 km apart. Since
the thickness of the crust across the U.S. varies from ~20 - 55 km, such dense
station spacing still offers mostly spot illumination of the crust under each
station when teleseismic earthquake waves (with steep incidence angles under the
station) are used for imaging structure. With such illumination, the crustal
structure is typically assumed to be locally one-dimensional (locally horizontal
interfaces) when teleseismic body waves and ambient noise and teleseismic
surface waves are used. Crustal material is also typically assumed to be
seismically isotropic (direction-independent wave propagation).

The receiver function technique illuminates interfaces under a seismic station
where an incident compressional wave partly converts to a shear wave. If an
interface is not horizontal, or if a contrast in seismic anisotropy is present,
the converted waves show a systematic and potentially high-amplitude signal that
varies with the azimuth of arrival of the incident wave. Across the
Transportable Array, roughly 20% of the radial and 40% of the transverse
component total receiver function signal amplitude consists of arrivals with a
systematic variation matching dipping or anisotropic interfaces, and the signal
strength is well correlated to tectonic provinces. Dipping crustal interfaces as
well as crustal anisotropy result from deformation of the crust. The azimuthally
varying signal in receiver functions can therefore be used to map crustal
deformation. Rather than attempting to fit the waveform exactly by varying
interface dip and/or anisotropy, which is a highly non-unique process, this
project maps the signal strength, depth, and orientation of interfaces and
anisotropic layers (somewhat akin to mapping delay time and fast orientation in
split SKS waves, except that the receiver function method also offers depth
information). The resulting maps are compared to surface geology and models or
geological histories of crustal deformation and thus offer the chance for
hypothesis testing related to those models or histories. The project is based on
close collaboration between a seismologist and a geologist and engages
undergraduate research assistants through RESESS (Research Experiences in Solid
Earth Sciences for Students, a program providing research opportunities for
minority undergraduate interns by pairing them with mentors).