* 1251601
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Time Course of Givenness Effects in Language Production Models
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Jennifer Arnold, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2015
* USD 17,632.00

Speaking effectively requires producing multiple words in a row, smoothly and
efficiently. The relative ease we experience while doing this belies its
complexity. When planning what to say, we engage in processes like selecting
words, choosing appropriate sounds for those words, and ensuring that each word
receives enough attention to get produced quickly and accurately. Understanding
these individual processes, and thus how people produce language, requires
understanding the timing of each word. This project explores the relationship
between basic processes in language production, such as choosing a word and its
sounds, and the duration of that and surrounding words.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments test the hypothesis that facilitating the
process of selecting a word or selecting its sounds influences that word's
duration. Further, they test whether this effect extends to each of the words
surrounding the facilitated word. The method modifies an established paradigm,
the Picture-Word Interference (PWI) task, to investigate the timing and
involvement of semantic and phonological processing. Participants name a picture
while ignoring a spoken distractor. Distractors influence processing when they
relate closely in meaning or sound, so the experiment controls these
relationships. It also controls the relative timing of the appearance of the
pictures and distracters, which influences processing as well. This tight
control over timing and relatedness allows for a close investigation of how sub-
processes of language production contribute to the duration of individual words.
It will also show how facilitation of meaning-irrelevant processing affects the
duration of surrounding words. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the processes
that underlie duration is fundamentally important for understanding speech
production, because the duration of each word in a sentence reflects not only
its own processing, but also how the production system manages multiple words
simultaneously. This project will take the first steps toward understanding the
relationship between processing and duration. It will also support the
scientific training of a promising scholar.