* 1251529
* Collaborative LTREB Renewal: Long-Term Ecosystem Response to Chronic Atmospheric Nitrate Deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Andrew Burton, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 181,056.00

As the Earth's climate warms over the next century, ecosystems throughout the
northern hemisphere will be exposed to elevated rates of atmospheric nitrogen
(N) deposition. Understanding this complex environmental change lies at the
heart of our ability to anticipate the degree to which forests will sequester
human-produced carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. An interdisciplinary team of
scientists will investigate the interaction between climate warming and
simulated atmospheric N deposition using a long-term, regional-based, field
experiment located in a sugar maple-dominated forest ecosystem common over
eastern North America. During the past 18 years, simulated atmospheric nitrogen
deposition at rates expected to occur by 2050 have increased tree growth and
slowed the decay of dead leaves and roots, increasing the amount of carbon
stored in this wide-spread ecosystem. However, it is uncertain whether carbon
storage will attain a higher equilibrium over the long-term as atmospheric
nitrogen deposition increases or whether expected warming will counteract this
effect. The proposed research will quantify the amounts of carbon stored in
overstory trees, forest floor and soil over the next decade, allowing this team
of scientists to test hypotheses regarding the interaction of climate warming
and atmospheric nitrogen deposition on ecosystem carbon sequestration.

Using NSF support, this team will continue conducting the annual Global Change
Teachers Institute. Through lectures and field-based learning, middle and high
school teachers will continue to develop an understanding of the causes and
ecological impacts of global environmental change, thereby bringing this
information into science curricula.