* 1251922
* Collaborative Research: Paleocolor--The Mechanics and Evolution of Plumage Color in Birds and Other Dinosaurs
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Julia Clarke, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 03/31/2017
* USD 140,223.00

Collaborative Research: Paleocolor- the mechanisms and evolution of plumage
color in birds and other dinosaurs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Matthew Shawkey, Univ.
Akron, EAR-1251895&lt;br/&gt; Julia Clarke, Univ. Texas, Austin,
EAR-1251922&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by NSF's
International Science and Engineering section.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will greatly improve our knowledge of
the physiology of melanin-based color production, will provide unique insight
into the significance of color and color-based novelties to the evolution of
birds, and may provide inspiration for new optical nanostructures. The recent
discovery that evidence of feather coloration can be found in the fossil record
in the form of preserved melanosomes (melanin-containing organelles) now allows
investigation of plumage coloration in a framework considering both extinct and
living dinosaur species. PIs propose to identify how melanosome morphology and
chemistry relate to color production in extant birds, determine how these
relationships may be altered by fossilization, and then use these data to test
hypotheses on the significance of plumage color to avian evolution. This
interdisciplinary proposal, involving morphology, paleontology, evolutionary
biology and chemistry, is therefore divided into two linked sections with
specific deliverables. In the first section, PIs will use ultraviolet-visible
reflectance spectrometry to objectively measure color of extant feathers,
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to quantify melanosome morphology,
synchrotron-based mass spectrometry to examine chemistry and atomic force
microscopy to examine surface texture of melanosomes. The use of these multiple
measurements, and statistical analyses to quantitatively identify relationships
between them and color, will allow them to make confident reconstructions of
color based on assessment of fossil samples. Experimental degradation of
feathers and melanosomes will help PIs determine how melanosome shape and/or
chemistry may be altered. The second section brings data from the first to
address previously untestable hypotheses concerning the origin and role of color
diversity in feather evolution. Using focused ion beam (FIB) milling and
microscopy, PIs will identify the presence of novel morphologies contributing to
color diversification in birds, i.e. iridescent nanostructures and hollow,
flattened melanosomes that produce some of the brightest colors in nature. That
will allow PIs to estimate how melanosome morphological diversity and thus color
may have shifted from early in evolution of feathers through modern birds and
whether this diversification was associated with major transitions in the
evolution of feathers. The color of dinosaurs presents an engaging context to
bring fundamentals of chemistry, physics, and biology to the classroom and the
lay public. PIs propose several public outreach programs that will capitalize on
strong public interest in this work. Development of publicly available data
analysis tools will allow broad applications of their techniques by the
scientific community.