* 1251694
* Children's Use of Visual Information to Guide Selection and Timing of Motor Behaviors
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2018
* James Cremer, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 11/30/2018
* USD 574,827.00

Whether bicycling or walking across roads, children must make decisions about
whether gaps are large enough for safe crossing. This involves assessing how
long it will take for the oncoming car to arrive in relation to how long it will
take for them to cross the street. Past work suggests that gap decisions and
crossing movements are less well coordinated in children than in adults.
Children and adults choose the same size gaps, but children typically end up
with less time to spare between themselves and the oncoming car. Tightly linking
gap decisions and crossing movements may be particularly difficult when children
are just beginning walk or bicycle across roads on their own. If so, we might
expect developmental patterns to repeat themselves at different ages for
pedestrian and cyclist road crossing. However, little is known about how
pedestrian and cyclist road-crossing skills are related to each other because
there have been no direct comparisons of the two skills. This project examines
children's use of visual information to guide selection and timing of motor
behaviors. The investigators will use large-screen, immersive pedestrian and
bicycling simulators to safely and systematically compare how 6- to 12-year-old
children select gaps and time their movement when walking vs. bicycling across
intersections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide new information about
children's perceptual-motor development in the context of a real-world problem
where the visual information (i.e., traffic) stays the same, but the mode of
locomotion differs (i.e., walking vs. bicycling). This research will also
contribute to our understanding of the risk factors for collisions involving
children and motor vehicles, a significant public health problem. As such, this
work will help lay the foundation for future intervention studies designed to
reduce the risk of such collisions.