* 1251499
* A Thematic Workshop on, "Drilling into High-enthalpy Geothermal Systems:  A Collaborative Initiative to Promote Scientific Opportunities".
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Wilfred Elders, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2015
* USD 49,996.00

In an effort to advance Continental Scientific Drilling in the USA, DOSECC is
organising a&lt;br/&gt;series of topical workshops. The workshop proposed here
has two objectives, firstly to advance&lt;br/&gt;scientific studies of active
high-enthalpy hydrothermal systems, and secondly to foster
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between academic scientists, government agencies, and
industry. Such collaboration is highly&lt;br/&gt;desirable because the
scientific study of active hydrothermal systems requires drilling
and&lt;br/&gt;sampling boreholes whose costs far exceed budgets normally
available to academic scientists,&lt;br/&gt;whereas the geothermal industry
commonly drills wells that access them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Iceland Deep
Drilling Project (IDDP) represents an excellent example of such a
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;From the outset academic scientists have been deeply
involved in that project. The IDDP is&lt;br/&gt;investigating the economic
feasibility of producing electricity from supercritical
geothermal&lt;br/&gt;reservoirs. To test this concept an industry consortium
planned to drilled a deep well in&lt;br/&gt;the volcanic caldera of Krafla.
However drilling had to be terminated at 2.1 km depth when&lt;br/&gt;900C
rhyolite magma flowed into the well. Today the well is highly productive,
estimated to&lt;br/&gt;be capable of generating &gt;35 MWe of dry superheated
steam at a well-head temperature of ~440C.&lt;br/&gt;There is a significant
undeveloped potential for developing high-enthalpy geothermal
systems&lt;br/&gt;in the western USA, Hawaii and Alaska. Although drilling into
these deep unconventional geothermal&lt;br/&gt;reservoirs is more expensive, the
higher productivity per well should offset this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
proposed to compile and distribute a report that addresses industry's interest,
abilities,&lt;br/&gt;research needs, and potential for collaborative projects
that drill high-enthalpy systems.&lt;br/&gt;This will be based on the results of
a broadly distributed questionnaire, and a three day&lt;br/&gt;workshop with
participation by industry, government and university scientists. Hopefully
this&lt;br/&gt;will help create a national program that enhances the scientific,
technological and institutional&lt;br/&gt;basis for the development of new and
more economic sources of alternative energy.