* 1251443
* Experimental calibration of stable isotope and REE partitioning in bioapatite
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Samantha Evans, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* diane mcknight
* 04/30/2016
* USD 142,843.00

Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The geochemistry of biogenic calcium phosphate
(bioapatite) is widely used in studies of paleoclimatology, paleoecology,
paleoceanography, anthropology/archeology, fossil forensics, geochronology, and
tooth caries. Many such endeavors are compromised by poor understanding of the
fractionation of stable isotopes of oxygen and carbon in structural carbonate
(CO3), and partitioning of rare-earth elements (REE) between bioapatite and
aqueous solutions. Stable isotope fractionations and REE partition coefficients
will be measured by synthesizing bioapatite in isotopically- and chemically-
characterized solutions at temperatures ranging from 10 to 60 Â°C. Particular
emphasis will be placed on identifying the crystallographic site of CO3
substitution as a control on isotope fractionations, calibrating spectroscopic
measurements of tooth chemistry, and characterizing particle sizes and surface
areas to distinguish intracrystalline vs. adsorption partition coefficients for
REE. Time-series experiments will be conducted to ensure close approach to
equilibrium, and past experimental methods will be reproduced for improved
particle size characterization and comparison to new chemical and isotopic
data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical/Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This grant
funds a comprehensive calibration of the geochemical behavior of bioapatite -
the mineral that constitutes bones and teeth. This work is important for
validating past research and improving quantitative interpretations in numerous
fields ranging from paleoclimate and paleoceanography to anthropology, forensic
discrimination of fossils, geochronology and possibly dental stability.
Specifically, we will calibrate methods to determine the carbonate (CO3) content
of bioapatite, which strongly controls tooth enamel solubility, and synthesize
bioapatites with different CO3 contents. The tendency for bioapatite to
accumulate lanthanide-group elements and the heavy isotopes of oxygen and carbon
will be calibrated and compared with sparse previous measurements. These data
will inform past interpretations of modern tooth and fossil geochemistry and
improve targeting of future studies involving modern and fossil teeth.
Educational outreach includes research training for a graduate student, and
development of undergraduate research for underrepresented groups. Additional
training includes development of mentorship skills for a young female research
scientist. Boise State serves a large proportion of returning and part-time
students with an average undergraduate age of 27. Thus, research and education
activities impact a different demographic than at most other universities.