* 1251827
* EAGER: Declarative Crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Neoklis Polyzotis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2014
* USD 199,931.00

A variety of applications are increasingly relying on crowdsourcing services,
such as Amazon Mechanical Turk or CrowdFlower, in order to access human
computation at a large scale and solve problems that cannot be tackled using
only machine computation. Despite the surge in crowdsourcing platforms, it
remains very difficult and error-prone to employ crowdsourcing within an
application: existing services mostly expose a procedural interface to post
individual human-computation tasks, and provide little support (if any) for task
coordination, reward management, or clean-up of the obtained answers. As a
result, a large fraction of the application logistics is devoted to
orchestrating and optimizing the interaction with the crowdsourcing service.
This project explores the novel paradigm of declarative crowdsourcing through
the development of the Deco database system. Deco models and offers support for
accessing the collective knowledge of the crowd by posing declarative queries
over a relational-like database. The project explores methods to mitigate the
effect of "noisy" human workers who provide data of low quality and to model the
resulting uncertainty in the answers returned by Deco. The two problems are
tightly coupled with a tradeoff among the latency to contact human workers, the
expense to recruit them and the quality of the data they provide. Handling this
tradeoff in the context of query optimization is one of the key technical
challenges addressed by the project.

The project represents a high-risk research effort, as it targets non-trivial
problems that are inherent in the usage of crowdsourcing in practice. The
corresponding high payoff is that the results of this research provide a robust
and principled foundation for declarative crowdsourcing, thus enabling a wide
variety of applications to incorporate crowdsourcing as a core component of
their software stack. Moreover, this project identifies desirable features of
crowdsourcing services in order to support this novel declarative interface,
thereby providing valuable guidance for the design of next-generation
crowdsourcing platforms. Finally, the project provides training to students and
the opportunity to engage in the emerging research area that lies in the
intersection of databases and crowdsourcing. Details for the project can be
found at the project web site (http://db.cs.ucsc.edu/deco).