* 1251546
* Workshop: Enhancing Well-being and Attentional Control through Games and Interactive Media: A Neuroscientific Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Laird Malamed, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 49,999.00

Behavioral training interventions have received much interest as an efficient
and cost effective way to maintain brain fitness or enhance skilled performance
with impact ranging from health to job training. In particular, neuroscience and
behavioral research has documented the importance of explicitly training
attentional control, in order to enhance perceptual and cognitive fitness,
physical exercise, to promote physical fitness and rehabilitation as well as
kindness and compassion, to produce changes in adaptive emotion regulation and
well-being. During this same time period, video game play has become pervasive
throughout all layers of society providing a potentially unique vehicle to
deliver such controlled training at home in a cost-efficient manner. Given the
potential impact of these interactive systems, it is necessary to understand the
underlying scientific principles that govern the development and deployment of
interactive computer games in healthcare and education. The search for the
deeper understanding requires the involvement of expertise from a wide variety
of areas ranging from neuroscience to computer science and engineering. To this
end, the workshop brought together experts from a wide range of academic
disciplines with engineers and software developers. The goals of the workshop
was to identify the remaining challenges and roadblocks that represent barriers
in making these sophisticated interactive systems to be among the key components
supporting the future healthcare delivery with emphasis on prevention and
quality of life. This workshop provided a unique opportunity to define new
approaches to the design, assessment and distribution of video games for
enhancing well-being and attention, opening a unique path to addressing key
health care and societal concerns in a user-friendly and cost effective manner