* 1251429
* The Real-Time Grammar of Chamorro WH-Dependencies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Sandra Chung, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2016
* USD 332,144.00

This project investigates language comprehension: how humans make predictions as
they hear a sentence about how the sentence will continue. Language
comprehension promises to shed light on how the mind integrates general
knowledge with past experiences to deal with new situations. However, past
studies of language comprehension have been limited to 'major' world languages
(English, other European languages, Chinese, Japanese) and college-age students.
This severely underrepresents the diversity of the world's languages and
populations, and could potentially lead to scientific conclusions that are
distorted or incomplete. This project broadens the range of research on language
comprehension through the study of Chamorro, an Austronesian language of
Micronesia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chamorro is spoken by 45,000 people in the
Mariana Islands, which are part of the U.S. and its possessions. It is currently
in the early stages of language endangerment. Dr. Matthew Wagers (a
psycholinguist), Dr. Sandra Chung (a linguist), and Manuel Borja (a Chamorro
native-speaker and educator) will undertake experimental studies that build on
special linguistic features of Chamorro to uncover how Chamorro speakers
comprehend their language in real time. In Chamorro, the verb comes first in the
sentence; verb agreement differentiates questions from non-questions; and
sentence structure is affected by animacy. Although these features also occur in
other languages, they are rarely studied in psycholinguistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies will involve participants of many ages and
educational levels in three of the Mariana Islands. Several young Chamorros will
be trained in the goals and methods of the research and will help administer the
studies. This project will broaden the empirical base of research on language
comprehension. The experimental protocols developed can be extended to research
on other languages not spoken in highly industrialized societies. The
investigation will expose community members to scientific research, and in so
doing, will affirm the unique contributions that a language can make to the
scientific understanding of human cognition.