* 1251931
* Upgrade of microRaman spectrometer for in-situ, high-temperature and high-pressure experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2014
* USD 45,385.00

Award funds will be used to upgrade the excitation laser used for microRaman
spectroscopy, which plays a central role in experimental characterization of
minerals, melts, and fluids at high temperature and pressure. These data are
central to our understanding of the formation and evolution of the solid Earth,
its oceans, and atmosphere. The most important research areas are:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Structure of silicate-C-O-H-N components in and
partitioning between melt and fluid to advance modeling of transport properties
and processes that involve fluids and melts in the Earth and terrestrial
planets. &lt;br/&gt;2. Equation-of-state and structure of COH fluids at high
temperature and pressure. &lt;br/&gt;3. Characterization of stable isotope
partitioning between minerals, melts, and fluids at high temperature and
pressure. &lt;br/&gt;4. COH fluid structural speciation and isotopologues in
hydrothermal environments &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives are reached by
using externally-heated hydrothermal diamond anvil cells (HDAC) and probing the
samples with vibrational (Raman and infrared) spectroscopic methods. The HDAC is
employed for sample containment wherein in-situ spectroscopic measurements with
samples at desired temperature, pressure, and redox conditions are carried out;
optical observations can be made at the same time through the diamond windows.