* 1251101
* Behavioral and neural bases of the perception of facial expressions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Paula Niedenthal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 474,158.00

Effective social communication and interaction rely on accurately detecting and
interpreting the facial expressions of others. Facial expressions can convey
many things, including emotions, attitudes, and intentions, and errors in
interpreting the meaning of facial expressions are relatively common. These
errors can be costly, given that accurate interpretation is critical in many
different contexts. For example, it is important when establishing relationships
with others, or for those who have to make quick judgments of intent (e.g.,
security agents). Dr. Paula Niedenthal and colleagues (University of Wisconsin
at Madison) investigate the behavioral and neural processes that individuals use
to interpret the meanings of the facial expressions they see in their social
world. Their research focuses on the smile because of its fundamental role in
guiding social interaction. While folk wisdom holds that smiles signal happy
feelings, everyday experience and research findings document the extreme
complexity of this expression. Niedenthal and colleagues propose a social-
function typology. They hold that there exist three physically and dynamically
distinct smiles that evolved to solve basic tasks of social living. The tasks
include 1) rewarding the behavior of self and other (reward smiles), 2) creating
social bonds (affiliative smiles), and 3) negotiating social hierarchies
(dominance smiles). How, then, do individuals arrive at an accurate
interpretation of a given smile, and why do inaccuracies sometimes occur,
especially in cross-cultural interactions?

Niedenthal and colleagues will study the roles of two social behaviors, eye
contact and facial mimicry, in the process of interpreting smiles. Eye contact
is hypothesized to be a trigger of facial mimicry, facilitating the reproduction
of the perceived smile on the perceiver's own face. Facial mimicry, consistent
with recent "embodied emotion" theories of emotional information processing is
hypothesized to yield a simulation of a corresponding affective state, which
provides sufficient information for the accurate interpretation of the smile.
The neural bases of these social behaviors, as well as the role of other neural
systems in creating the "feeling" of a smile in the perceiver of the smile, will
be tested in neuroimaging studies. Finally, the central role of culture in
moderating the tendency to achieve eye contact and to engage in facial mimicry
will be explored.

This research promises to advance the theory and techniques that scientists use
to conduct research on human facial expression, and on the ways in which an
individual's behavior and brain work together to decode facial expressions,
including but not limited to the smile. Undergraduate and graduate students at
the University of Wisconsin at Madison will work, in teaching and laboratory
settings, to advance these ideas. A number of clinical conditions, including
autism, schizophrenia, and Parkinson's disease, are associated with striking
deficits in interpreting facial expression of emotion. Understanding of these
populations will be facilitated by the insights from this research, and new
relationships, such as those between humans and robots, will be informed.
Finally, as the most frequent and the most rewarding facial expression, the
smile is critical in all international relations. Cultural relativity in
interpreting the smile, revealed in the present investigations, will promote
greater understanding among the world's peoples.