* 1251643
* DCL WORKSHOP: ICES-GMU Workshop on Internationalization & Competitiveness
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Daniel Houser, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 49,998.00

This award supports a workshop (on internationalization and its competitive
impacts) to be hosted at George Mason University in Arlington VA in early 2013,
responsive to the Dear Colleague Letter (12-010) on Describing the Conduct of
Science in the Information Age. The workshop is organized around two academic
themes: the measurement of the extent of internationalization of research groups
(university departments, corporate R&D facilities, etc.) and the linkages
between these measures of internationalization and the competitive performance
of the research groups' sponsors (e.g., the results of university technology-
transfer departments, overall company performance, etc.). Although both
internationalization and performance are justifiably seen to be generally
desirable, both workshop themes, of the proper metric of internationalization
and the competitive implications, are important and unstudied at the level
required to make scientific policy recommendations. Basic and easy-to-collect
measures, such as the percentage of a given patent's named inventors who were
born outside the USA, do not capture the international collaborations among
multiple research groups that lead to truly breakthrough innovations.

Broader impacts: Linking this measure of internationalization with competitive
performance is an essential precursor to creating innovation policy related to
internationalization in the US and elsewhere; while a number of social-science
theories predict a generally positive statistical relationship between
international collaborative activity and competitive performance, measurement
difficulties on the independent internationalization variables have made it
difficult to make policy recommendations based on the simple correlational
studies done to date. The workshop's invitees combine capabilities for metric
creation and evaluation, expertise on the intellectual property development
process, international collaborations, and the causal drivers of competitive
performance.

The international component of this workshop, in addition to the focus on the
competitive implications of internationalization, includes direct collaborations
with research colleagues in Sweden. The Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) provided support for this international component and joint
support for the involvement of junior faculty members and doctoral candidates.