* 1251589
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   The Use of Segmentation Cues in Second Language Learners of English
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Rochelle Newman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2015
* USD 13,482.00

The first step in speech comprehension is to break up the speech signal and
identify the individual words. To do so, one must locate where one word ends and
the next begins. Unlike in written text, where there is a visual gap between
pairs of words, no such reliable cue for word boundaries exists in spoken
speech. Research has shown that native English listeners can utilize a set of
cues to segment continuous speech, including the structure and meaning of
sentences, knowledge of what constitutes a real word in English, sensitivity to
whether a sound is allowed in a certain position in the word, and the emphasis
given to a part of the word. However, it is not clear whether these segmentation
cues are used by nonnative listeners in a similar fashion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of cues may be influenced by nonnative listeners'
English proficiency. Beginning or intermediate second language (L2) learners may
have less established knowledge about what constitute a real word in English.
Also, L2 learners' use of cues may be influenced by the characteristics of
sounds in their native languages. Four groups of participants, including a
monolingual English group and three nonnative groups (Mandarin, Korean, and
Spanish), will participate in four experiments. Each experiment will examine how
L2 learners differ from native listeners in the use of cues and how the three L2
groups differ from each other as a result of their native language
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding speech is a critical component
in language acquisition and identifying cues that can facilitate this process
will benefit both learners and teachers. There are nearly 40 million L2 learners
in the U.S.; improved English proficiency will help them become more competitive
and productive in the work place. This study also contributes to the training of
a promising young researcher.