* 1251322
* Sleep and Adaptation for Preschool Children
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Brian Vaughn, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 05/31/2017
* USD 599,974.00

Sleep is a critical element of adaptive functioning across the whole human life
cycle, and is crucial during infancy, childhood, and adolescence. The
fundamental importance of sleep, as both as state and a process, for development
has been recognized by developmental scientists for over 20 years and studies
have linked quantitative (e.g., total amount of sleep per night) and qualitative
(e.g., sleep efficiency--time in bed that the person is actually asleep) sleep
parameters to a broad range of health-relevant outcomes in samples of children.
Researchers also have identified many biological and social factors that
influence both sleep quantity and quality, however, the bulk of research with
children has focused on infancy, school-age children, and adolescents; with
relatively little research attention devoted to the impact of sleep during early
childhood (nominally 2.5-6 years). Moreover, most studies covering the early
childhood period relied on subjective reports from sleep diaries or
questionnaires completed by parents and examined problems associated with
medical conditions or with sleep deficits. Finally, most of these studies
recruited families in which children were cared for at home by a parent. This
study of up to 270 children (90 in each of 3 consecutive years), recruited
between the ages of 2.5 and 4.5 years of age and followed up to two years after
initial enrollment, starts from the premise that sleep parameters are continua
ranging from maladaptive to optimal, with most children falling in a mid-range
that is adequate for normal growth and functioning, rather than from the premise
that sleep parameters are either "disordered" or not. The investigators for this
project will recruit the sample from a high-quality early education center in a
large metropolitan area from the Southeastern USA. Selecting such a sample
allows them to consider both the positive growth promoting benefits of sleep as
well as the constraints on development and adaptation imposed by less adequate
sleep. The sample also allows generalization of prior research on home-reared
children to the most common child-care setting now being used in the USA (group
care). The researchers will also measure sleep objectively by using activity
monitors worn by the children over a week's time, which makes it possible to
examine the trajectories of nighttime and naptime sleep in greater detail than
is possible from parent reports; although the project will retain the parent
diary method so as to provide contextual information (e.g., any illnesses the
child suffered while sleep was monitored; medications taken, etc.) to supplement
the sleep measures from activity monitoring. The investigators also will conduct
a comprehensive assessment of child adaptation in their homes and early
education center classrooms, including the domains of social, emotional,
cognitive, and academic functioning. These assessments involve extensive direct
observations of child behavior at home and in the classroom, standard tests of
receptive vocabulary and age-appropriate academic achievement, laboratory tasks
designed to assess self-regulation, emotion knowledge, executive functioning,
and parent/child and teacher/child relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will provide fundamental information about the developmental course of
sleep (quantity and quality) over early childhood and the environmental factors
that constrain and/or promote adequate and optimal sleep. Because children will
be observed repeatedly over the course of the study, the researchers will also
be able to examine the temporal/causal influences of parent/child relationships
on sleep (and vice versa), as well as the relative influences of both sleep and
adult/child relationships on the quality of social/emotional and
cognitive/academic functioning assessed in the classroom. A fourth valuable
contribution of the study arises as a consequence of the sample itself. The
early education program collaborating with the study serves a multi-ethnic but
predominantly middle-class population (about 30% ethnic minority status families
enrolling children) but also serves children from low-resource families (~10% of
total enrollment). This distribution of children will permit testing hypotheses
concerning health disparities between minority ethnic status and/or more
economically challenged groups (compared to majority ethnic status and/or middle
SES groups) with regard to sleep and its consequences. In addition to these
fundamental contributions to the science of sleep, this study will likely have
broad implications for childcare policy, curriculum development for young
children, teacher training, and parent education.