* 1251267
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: DCM: Measurement and Learning in Large-Scale Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 746,783.00

In the context of social networks, "big data" generally involves information on
very large social systems whose elements of interest display complex dependence.
State-of-the-art statistical models for such systems require the use of
computationally expensive stochastic simulation techniques to capture this
dependence; these techniques do not generally scale well to the large-population
case. One potential solution to this problem is to focus detailed modeling
efforts on smaller subpopulations (e.g., groups, communities, etc.) extracted
from the larger system. While scalability of the subsystem models is less
challenging in this case, one must have appropriate methods for sampling from
large networks in such a manner as to permit principled inference, and modeling
techniques that recognize the coupling between local subpopulations and the
broader network in which they are embedded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
bridge the gap between expensive, highly detailed models and the limits of
computability imposed by Big Data by combining expertise from machine learning
and social network modeling within a unifying exponential family framework. The
research will develop novel methods for the scalable measurement and analysis of
large social networks, validating these techniques by deploying them in the
context of dynamic data collection from online social networks. Specifically,
the researchers will combine probabilistic graphical models and exponential
family random graph models (ERGMs) to: (i) identify models with low
computational requirements by exploiting limited-range dependence; (ii) develop
machine learning techniques for identifying weakly coupled regimes in large
networks to facilitate sampling and subgraph modeling; and (iii) develop
integrated sampling and modeling strategies for inference from subgraphs of
large networks that capture coupling to the structures in which they are
embedded. This proposal investigates these questions in both the cross-sectional
and dynamic contexts, for networks with and without vertex attributes. The
sampling techniques created via this project will be deployed as an extension of
a broader infrastructure for data collection in online social networks developed
and maintained by one of the PIs, allowing for evaluation in a practical
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed via this research will allow
for analysis of data relating to many problems of public interest, including
epidemiological, security, and emergency management applications; data
collection and analysis activities within the project will include applications
in the natural hazard context, with the potential to inform policies that can
save lives and property during disasters. The project will be integrated with
graduate and undergraduate education, as well as postdoctoral mentoring. Tools
developed via this project will be released as part of a widely used open-source
toolkit for statistical network analysis (statnet), allowing widespread
dissemination to researchers and practitioners in a range of fields.