* 1251817
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic and Political borders in the Senegambia region
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Brian Joseph, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2015
* USD 15,089.00

A border drawn around the Gambia River by French and British colonial powers was
officially recognized in the 1889 by the Berlin Conference, as part of the
process known as the "Scramble for Africa." This colonial boundary has left an
enduring political rift between the nations of Senegal and The Gambia in spite
of their shared history, ethnicities, and indigenous languages. One of the major
ethnolinguistic groups divided by this border is the Wolof. Although Wolof
continues to be an important shared language between these countries, speakers
recognize divergence in the Wolof of Senegal and The Gambia. Language is often
used to construct and reinforce ethnic, social, and national identity and can
evoke a strong sense of solidarity or separation among speakers. As Peter Auer
has argued, not only can the national border help construct a linguistic border,
but the linguistic divergence can also serve to reinforce the national border.
This dissertation will focus on the border in a multiethnic, multilingual area
where ethnicity is strongly associated with language.

Under the direction of Dr. Brian Joseph, Jane Mitsch will spend eight months in
the Senegambia border areas conducting sociolinguistic interviews and
ethnographic fieldwork among Wolof people. This dissertation aims to examine the
linguistic practices of people with shared ethnic identity but different
national identity, to explore the role of the political border in the linguistic
practices of these young nations, to elicit data on different identity
affinities (national, ethnic, religious etc.), and to compare the linguistic
results to other linguistic studies of political borders. This study will bring
linguistic input to political science questions about the strength of African
nations and their borders. This research will also lead to the creation of a
corpus of spoken Wolof that will capture some of the important aspects of the
Wolof oral tradition such as folktales and proverbs.