* 1251490
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   A Priming Paradigm for Eliciting Neural Correlates of Concealed Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Stephen Crites, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 01/31/2014
* USD 12,377.00

Recent deception detection approaches (e.g., lie detector tests) rely upon a
brainwave sensitive to concealed information, such as a murder weapon at a crime
scene, called the P3. Yet this concealed information approach does not apply in
many circumstances where concealed information is important. For example, it has
no screening potential. Therefore, researchers have begun to investigate other
approaches that can use the P3 signal and that are sensitive to additional
information such as attitudes, rather than just information about objects.
However, important questions remain, such as how to elicit other brainwaves,
which could enhance the accuracy of the test.

The primary intellectual merit of this project is its extension beyond prior
concealed attitude studies. They advance the field by outlining both practical
implementations and techniques for better understanding the basic neural
processes of deception. Through use of a scenario known to elicit the memory-
related brain wave and a brain wave for competing responses to deception, the
research builds upon prior studies using brain signals to detect knowledge,
extending them here to detect intentions.

These findings have important implications for law enforcement practice because,
unlike other tests of concealed information, this test may be a useful security
screening tool to detect when someone has an extreme attitude. Therefore this
doctoral research project will contribute to detecting deception about attitudes
and intentions, rather than objects. In addition, the research will be conducted
at a Hispanic Serving Institution, thus potentially expanding opportunities for
science research among members of underrepresented groups.