* 1251667
* Collaborative Research: Imaging Stress Transients and Fault Zone Processes with Continuous Cross-Well Active Source Seismic Measurements at SAFOD
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Fenglin Niu, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 463,348.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquakes are caused by the sudden
release of stresses along faults. Plate tectonics describes the process of long-
term strain accumulation, but the specifics of stress release -- what ultimately
leads to fault failure and whether an earthquake (small or large), tremor, or
slow slip results -- are still not well understood. The time-varying
stress/strain field at the depths where earthquakes begin is one of the most
important properties controlling the sequencing and nucleation of these
seismic/aseismic events. The importance of deformation transients has been
illustrated by the success of predicted stress changes in accounting for the
spatial distribution of aftershocks, as well as providing one explanation for
the clustering of large seismic events, such as the nearby 1992 Landers and 1999
Hector Mine earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurement of stress,
however, is notoriously difficult, particularly at depth. Geodesy provides
important constraints on the surface deformation field, which can be related to
stress through an assumed rheology. Yet, the constraints on the depth
distribution of stress and strain from geodesy are limited. These surface
constraints need to be combined with other techniques that, while not as
directly related to stress and strain, have superior depth resolution. The most
promising techniques at present appear to be seismic. For example, patterns of
seismicity have long been used to make inferences about the stress state before
and after seismic events. Yet, a basic requirement for this approach to work is
that changes in stress over time generate seismic waves that can be observed at
the surface, which means that aseismic changes in stress and/or strain cannot be
observed in this manner. One way of assessing this fully aseismic component is
through observations of temporal changes in the elastic properties of the crust.
Indeed, such earthquake-related changes have long been predicted and sometimes
observed, due to stress-induced changes in the characteristics and or
distribution of fluid-filled cracks. Yet, it has been difficult to conclusively
observe temporal variations in the medium, due both to the small signal level,
and to the problem of accounting for other systematic effects that may produce
apparent changes, such as variations in source location or shallow environmental
influences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
are conducting a continuous cross-well active-source seismic experiment
utilizing the SAFOD (San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth) pilot and main
holes. The broad, long term goal of this experiment is to develop a tool to
monitor the time-varying stress field associated with earthquakes and other
stress-dependent earth processes, such as aseismic slips and non-volcanic
tremors through the detection of temporal changes in the crustal velocity
structure at seismogenic depths. This technique would be a type of "stress
meter". Such a monitoring system would perhaps be the single most important
means of understanding the triggering processes of seismic and aseismic events.
The fundamental physics behind a seismic stress meter is well established.
Numerous laboratory studies over several decades have shown that seismic
velocities clearly exhibit stress dependence, usually attributed to changes in
the physical characteristics of cracks (e.g. crack density, crack orientation).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current experiment is built on a previous experiment
we conducted at the SAFOD site in 2005 and 2006. Over a two-month period, we
observed a negative correlation between changes in the time required for a shear
wave to travel through the rock between the pilot and main hole (a few
microseconds) and variations in barometric pressure (about 1 kilopascal). This
result is a "calibration" of the stress sensitivity of seismic velocity at our
experiment site. We also observed two large excursions in the travel-time data
that are coincident with two earthquakes, a magnitude 3 and a magnitude 1
earthquake, that occurred sufficiently close to produce large coseismic stress
changes at the SAFOD site. The two excursions started approximately 10 and 2
hours before the magnitude 3 and 1 earthquakes, respectively, suggesting that
they may be related to pre-rupture changes in crack properties, as observed in
the early laboratory studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the current experiment,
we are using a similar equipment configuration to collect data that sample 10-15
magnitude 2 to 3 local earthquakes. We are using a cross-correlation based
method and the coda wave interferometry technique to image systematic changes in
medium near the SAFOD site, and use them to monitor temporal changes in fault
zone processes near Parkfield, CA. This project has important implications for
the study of earthquakes and for the EarthScope program. It will demonstrate
whether there are measurable changes in seismic velocity structure near the
source region of an impending earthquake immediately preceding the rupture. As
such, this work could lead to significant improvement in our understanding on
physical processes prior to earthquakes. It will represent significant progress
toward measuring stress transients associated with earthquakes and other
processes, demonstrating that tectonic stress could be continuously monitored
with continuous active source borehole observations.