* 1251422
* Development of a High-Resolution Stromatolite Facies Model: Environmental Impacts at the Dawn of Oxygenation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Russell Shapiro, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 03/31/2016
* USD 59,103.00

Development of a High-Resolution Stromatolite Facies Model: Environmental
Impacts at the Dawn of Oxygenation

Russell Shapiro California State University, Chico State

The Paleoproterozoic iron-bearing formations of the Animikie Basin host some of
the best-preserved microfossils and diverse stromatolites from a time when the
Earth was switching from anoxic to euxinic oceans. This interval, known as the
"Great Oxidation Event," is an increasingly important research area for
paleobiologists, geochemists, and economic geologists. However, important
questions still exist as to the paleoenvironmental setting of the stromatolitic
deposits, limiting the understanding of the complex interplay between oceanic
conditions and the localized bacterial ecosystems. This proposal addresses how
stromatolites vary in space in response to changing oceanographic and
environmental conditions by applying powerful 3-D modeling software (Petrel
v.2010) to an extraordinary collection of proprietary drill core. Specifically,
this proposal addresses: (1) To what extent can the stromatolites be used to
delineate shoreline geomorphology, enhancing paleoenvironmental reconstructions?
and (2) What is the role of taphonomy in both stromatolite and microfossil
preservation?

Four major stromatolite types are found in roughly two, meter-scale horizons
throughout the Animikie Basin, though not necessarily as continuous horizons.
Mapping of open taconite mine walls (now flooded) demonstrated that
macrostructural variability appears at scales of 10 to 100 meters. The
stromatolites are biogenic and formed under normal marine conditions, above the
chemocline, in suboxic waters. Based on this work, it is believed that the
macrostructural forms of stromatolites, together with the sparse but well-
preserved microfossil record, can be integrated with the sedimentologic and
stratigraphic data to develop a model of stromatolite biofaces that will help to
constrain the unique oceanographic variability in this critical interval of
Earth history. The proposed research project will address stromatolite variation
and the paleoenvironmental tectonic implications at a spatial resolution that
has not been achieved in previous studies of this interval. Broader Impacts. The
results of this project will be valuable to researchers studying paleontological
and biogeochemical patterns in other pre-Cambrian basins during the "Great
Oxidation Event." The dissemination plan calls for the development of a series
of YouTube short films that will open up the dynamic and complex world of
microbial-sediment interactions of the early oxygenated Earth to a broad
audience. The research will provide critical primary research experience for
several undergraduate students at a primarily undergraduate institution. The
teaching methods of the PI will be enhanced with a greater understanding of this
critical interval and opportunities for project-based learning which form an
integral component of his pedagogy.