* 1251069
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Coupling Data-Intensive Modeling, Simulation, and Visualization with Human Facilities for Design: Applications to Next-Generation Medical Device Prototyping
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hakizumwami B. Runesha, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 501,000.00

The goal of this research project is to transform the way that scientists,
engineers, and medical professionals make use of big data in order to further
science, solve challenging problems in medical device engineering, and,
ultimately, improve the nation's health. The approach makes use of big data from
medical imaging, supercomputer simulation, and other sources. These exciting
datasets are just now becoming available and have great potential to
revolutionize science, engineering, and medicine. Unfortunately, scientists
today cannot take full advantage of these data because they lack the appropriate
tools to work with such large and complex datasets. This research addresses that
problem by creating new computer graphics-based data visualization tools and
coupling these with novel human-computer interfaces that specifically support
data-driven engineering design. The new style of interactive visual computing
that these tools provide can be especially powerful for supporting the human
process of design. Thus, an anticipated major scientific result of the work is a
new approach for supporting creative human-in-the-loop tasks when working with
big data. The impact of this new approach is demonstrated through a series of
applications to medical device design problems, such as designing improved
breast biopsy devices and cardiac leads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
objectives of this project are to enable a paradigm-shifting future for
simulation-based engineering with big data and to demonstrate this future
through specific applications to challenging problems in medical device design.
The approach is to couple the intense amounts of medical imaging, physical
simulation, and other life sciences data that are generated today with new
computational tools that not only support automated data analysis but also
powerfully leverage our own human capabilities to see, touch, explore, and
analyze. By adopting a human-centric approach to big data science, including
significant new research in the areas of data visualization and human-computer
interfaces, the work is expected to not only accelerate basic research and
discovery but also make the results of big data science accessible to doctors,
medical device engineers, and countless other creative thinkers who do not
necessarily have a core background in computational methods. There are three
main thrusts to the research: (1) Advancing medical device engineering through
applications of new data-intensive design tools; (2) Developing a creative new
as-direct-as-possible inverse method for simulation-based engineering; and (3)
Coupling data-intensive virtual design with new tangible tools for working with
big data.