* 1251989
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inconsistent input and amount of exposure: child second language acquisition of Fering, a dialect of North Frisian
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Karen Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2015
* USD 15,118.00

Investigations of language acquisition are fundamentally concerned with how
children acquire language given the input they receive. However, these studies
often focus on the amount of input rather than the type of input. Recent studies
have used artificial languages to study how children acquire inconsistent input.
Pennsylvania State University doctoral student, Alison Eisel Hendricks,
supervised by Drs. Carrie N. Jackson and Karen Miller, investigates current
theories of language acquisition of Fering, an endangered language spoken in
northern Germany. The dissertation compares the acquisition of consistent versus
inconsistent input by children and young adult-learners of Fering.

Grammatical gender is a system that categorizes nouns into genders, often
resulting in different versions of the definite article "the". Fering speakers
produce grammatical gender inconsistently, with speakers using both genders
interchangeably. On the other hand, speakers largely agree on grammatical
number. Half of Fering-speaking children acquire it as a native language, while
half learn Fering in school. Thus, this project tests the influence of input
type and amount of exposure on language acquisition.

This dissertation tests elementary and high school students' comprehension and
production of grammatical gender, number, and general fluency. Parents will
complete a language use questionnaire and Fering-speaking parents will complete
the same experiments as their children. Adult community members will participate
in free speech interviews to further measure community language input.

This project contributes equally to linguistic theory and minority language
studies. By testing a natural language and tracking acquisition of inconsistent
input over time, the project furthers general knowledge of child language
acquisition. Using qualitative and experimental tasks betters our understanding
of the task facing children learning minority languages. This dissertation
investigates North Frisian, but the results inform other cases of minority
language revitalization, and will interest teachers and language planners. The
project also contributes to the training of a graduate student.