* 1251962
* EAGER: Human Behavior Based Authentication for Smart Wireless Networked Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Mohammad Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2016
* USD 169,422.00

Smart wireless devices are increasingly becoming the preferred method for
accessing physical locations, bank accounts, and other valuable resources.
However, their use for authentications comes with increased security
considerations, since they can be stolen and are vulnerable to different types
of software attacks. The objective of the research is to develop a new type of
pervasive authentication for smart wireless networked systems based on
macroscopic human behavior. The key hypothesis is that the regularity in a
person's behavior can be used to uniquely identify her, as well as to substitute
static passwords with one-time authentication challenges pertaining to her past
behavior. To this end, this project will focus in three integrated components:
(1) methodologies for behavioral data collection and authentication, spanning
from physical layer fingerprinting techniques to privacy-preserving
authentication protocols; (2) algorithms for discovering and modeling the
regularity in a user's behavior to pervasively authenticate her; and (3) methods
for generating one-time authentication challenges based on the user's
preferences, schedules and routines. The expected result of the research is a
radically new paradigm in authentication that will eliminate the risks
associated with smart wireless devices, and can also find application in other
domains such as online authentication. The research outcomes and parts of the
developed authentication framework will be disseminated to the widest audience
possible, including application developers, through the project?s website. The
educational component of the project includes integration of the research agenda
with curriculum development, and outreach activities that engage high-school
students and underrepresented communities in computer science and engineering.