* 1251879
* Consenting to searches and the 4th Amendment:   Situated social cognition within the "totality of circumstances" analysis
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Jennifer Groscup, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 214,158.00

Under the 4th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, people have the fundamental
right to be free from unreasonable searches. A search does not violate the 4th
Amendment when a person voluntarily consents to be searched, and people
routinely and frequently consent to police requests to search. The reasons why
people consent to police searches, even when they are in possession of illegal
material, are poorly understood. As a result, it is difficult for courts to
assess voluntariness of consent in a systematic way. The purpose of this
research is to identify factors that influence the voluntariness of consents and
to identify factors that may increase coercion to consent. Situated cognition is
a psychological theory arguing that the social and physical situation in which
events occur can affect how a person perceives an event and behaves during an
event. This project will apply situated social cognition to the consent search
situation to determine what aspects of the social and physical situation in
which the consent search takes place might make people more likely to feel
coerced to consent. Across a series of studies, the influence of situational
factors will be investigated such as the physical environment (size of the
search space, lighting and temperature), the relative physical positions of the
searcher and person being searched, and the physical and psychological
connection between the person and the property being searched. The research will
be conducted by creating a situation in which a request to search will be made.

This new application of situated social cognition to the legal system will
advance the theory generally, making the research important theoretically. The
results of this research will provide important information to courts in their
consideration of consent searches which will be essential to the protection of
fundamental Constitutional rights.