* 1251049
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Collaborative Research: From Data to Users: Providing Interpretable and Verifiable Explanations in Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Suresh Venkatasubramanian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The fruits of data mining pervade every aspect of our lives. We have books and
movies recommended; we are given differential pricing for insurance; screened
for potential terror threats; diagnosed with various diseases; and targeted for
political advertising. The ability to sift through massive data sets with
sophisticated algorithms has resulted in applications with impressive predictive
power. And yet there is still a gap between what such tools can deliver, and
what the users of data mining really need. It is often hard to interpret the
answers produced by a learning algorithm, due to its sophistication and the use
of large data sets to build models. The results of mining are often "one-size-
fits-all", and convincing a user that results are actually relevant to them is
difficult. Finally, there is the important problem of validation. As the results
of data mining affect more and more of our lives, the more crucial it is that
the user be able to validate decisions made on their behalf and that affect
them. The common theme tying these issues together is a user-centric perspective
on the problems of data mining. Rather than asking "What patterns can be found
in this mountain of data?" this work instead asks "What structures in this data
affect me?" These issues arise precisely because of the vast amounts of data we
now have the ability to mine, and the sophisticated methods at our disposal to
analyze this data. In this research, the PIs develop a computational framework
and key tools for user-centric data mining. A central theme in this research is
the idea of interaction. In both machine learning and in the foundations of
complexity theory, interaction has been used to allow a (weaker) entity to probe
a much more powerful system and determine answers that it lacks the resources to
compute directly itself. The PIs use formal interaction mechanisms both from the
perspective of a user interacting with a powerful algorithm, as well as a client
interacting with a computing source with access to large data, in order to
enable the user to interpret and validate the results of data mining.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a computational
framework for user-centric data mining that enables existing users to tailor
data analysis to their needs and facilitates the use of data mining in new areas
where existing The team proposes interactive mechanisms that start with the
results of a learning process and, via interaction with the user, produce an
explanation expressed in terms of meaningful features, drawing on ideas from
active learning, feature selection, and domain adaptation. 2. Locality: Answers
that are relevant. Here, the focus is on providing information that depends more
on a user?s local neighborhood, achieved via a new local notion of stability. 3.
Verifiability: Answers you can check. The team proposes a framework for the
validation of computationally-intensive data mining by the computationally-weak
user, with ideas from interactive proof theory and stream algorithms. Tools for
analyzing patient medical data have become more sophisticated and individual
medical profiles play a far more significant role in diagnosis and treatment.The
research examines user-centric data mining via three core primitives
(classification, regression and clustering), and studies the three problems of
interpreting results, providing local explanations, and validating the results
of data mining. Firstly, the research draws on ideas from active learning,
feature selection and domain adaptation to build interpretable results via
interaction with users. Secondly, it introduces local notions of stability as a
way of validating predictions for a specific user. Finally, it develops a
general framework for validation of an analysis by a computationally-weak user,
by drawing on ideas from the theory of interactive proofs and streaming
algorithms.