* 1251343
* Collaborative Research:   Constituents and heads in prosody perception:   A comparative study
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jose Hualde, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2017
* USD 202,581.00

This project investigates how prosody is used in spoken language to signal how
words are grouped into phrases and how each word and phrase contributes
information to the discourse. In text these functions are signaled through
punctuation and text enhancement (eg., boldface), but in spoken language pitch,
timing, loudness, voice quality, and other properties of speech convey such
information. Linguists propose that underlying the prosody of all languages is a
universal structure, the Headed Constituent (HC), which groups syllables and
words together, with one prominent element per constituent designated the Head
element. These constituents determine how speech sounds are coordinated (at a
physical level), and how speech is mapped onto syntactic and semantic structures
that determine utterance meaning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prosodic constituents
are examined in English, Spanish, and French, three languages that are known to
differ not only in their prosody (eg., intonation and rhythmic patterns), but
also in the associations linking prosody to syntax and semantics. Experiments
conducted in Illinois, Barcelona and Lyon will show how how listeners perceive
the prosodic phrasing and prominence patterns of an utterance when presented
with speech samples that differ in their phonetic properties (pitch and timing),
and in syntactic and semantic features. A novel method of real-time, auditory
transcription with non-expert listeners and conversational speech samples is
intended to best approximate conditions of normal language use. Parallel
experiments on English, Spanish, and French will provide critical evidence
regarding the universality of the Headed Constituent as the structure that
underlies prosodic form, and will also shed light on differences among languages
in the role of prosody in communicating linguistic meaning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project findings will contribute valuable benchmark data
on how prosody functions in conversational speech, with future applications in
clinical settings to identify speech disorders involving prosody, in second
language teaching, and in development of speech technologies for human-computer
interfaces.