* 1251653
* RAPID: Assessing Vulnerabilities from Climate Change: Impacts of Water Provision, Power Relations and Perceptions of Risk on Ecohydrology in the Tampa Bay Region Socioecosystem
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Mark Rains, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2015
* USD 88,766.00

Thr research supported by this award will build on activities supported by NSF
Urban Long-Term Research Area (ULTRA-Ex) Award 0948986, which investigates how
social organization and distribution of power in a socioecosystem-driven
resource redistribution of a key resource, water, in the Tampa Bay metropolitan
region. In previous work, the investigators have identified relationships among
wetland ecohydrological conditions, water redistribution, social power, and
perceptions of ecological change in the Tampa Bay regional socioecosystem.
Through this award, they will develop and examine new scenarios regarding how
this complex socioecological network might be modified by climate change. The
investigators will focus their efforts on three core questions: (1) How have
social organizations and distribution of power shaped current planning,
perceptions of risk, and adaptation to climate change in the water provision
system in Tampa Bay? (2) How do key stakeholders, decision makers, and residents
perceive climate change vulnerabilities related to water quality and quantity in
the Tampa Bay regional socioecosystem? (3) How will natural systems respond to
regional socioecosystem-specific climate change scenarios that will impact water
quality and quantity? They will collect and analyze quantitative and qualitative
data on perceptions of risk and adaptive capacity of the region's water system
to climate change through interviews with key stakeholders, and they will
statistically downscale currently available Florida climate scenarios for the
region. They will develop three climate change scenarios of varying impact (low,
moderate, and high), building on existing scenarios, drawing on interview
responses, and testing these scenarios by using surveys with a second sample of
key stakeholders and residents to assess perceptions, acceptability, and
adaptive capacities. They also will measure and analyze ecological indicators in
order to model the biophysical behavior of the water systems under the varying
climate change scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
ethnographically informed scenarios of climate change impacts on water quality
and quantity that will reveal power differentials, conflicting values, and
institutional barriers that shape adaptive capacity, contributing to
socioecological and political ecology theory. Research results will have
fundamental research value and will be disseminated broadly through
presentations at public meetings, easily accessible summary reports, and through
formal interactions with project partners, such as Tampa Bay Water, the primary
regional water-supply wholesaler, and the Southwest Florida Water Management
District, the water-supply regulatory authority. Communication with research
teams conducting similar projects at other ULTRA-Ex sites will facilitate
development of more impactful measures and indicators of urban vulnerability to
climate change. This project is supported with funds transferred to the National
Science Foundation by the Environmental Protection Agency.