* 1251702
* Young Children's Causal Learning from Probabilistic Social and Physical Displays
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Andrew Meltzoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,210.00

DRL: 1251702

Abstract

This purpose of this project is to explore the origins of scientific reasoning
in early childhood through innovative experiments investigating young children?s
learning about probabilistic cause-effect relationships in informal settings.
Children?s ability to learn from observing probabilistic causal outcomes is an
ecologically valid, but understudied issue with implications for STEM
educational theory and practice. Much of the causal learning that takes place in
infancy and early childhood is by the observation of other people?s actions.
Crucially, learning about causes in informal, non-laboratory settings means that
an observer often needs to learn cause-effect relationships from probabilistic
evidence?observing relations or patterns that do not occur with 100% certainty.
This proposal has three objectives: To establish whether young children learn
about physical causal relationships from the observation of probabilistic
evidence; To investigate whether young children learn about social causal
relationships from the observation of probabilistic causal evidence; To
investigate whether young children observing a confounded causal system
preferentially attribute probabilistic outcomes to variability in social causes
or to variability in physical causes.

This project proposes a series of five converging experiments using a newly
established methodology to examine the developmental roots of probabilistic
causal reasoning in children as young as 24 months of age. In Experiments 1 and
2 young children will observe probabilistic causal displays involving physical
objects. In Experiments 3 and 4 children will observe a pattern of probabilistic
causal evidence between social agents?people interacting with one
another?instead of physical objects. In Experiment 5 children will observe a
confounded probabilistic causal display in which the probabilistic nature of the
causal relationship could either be attributed to the person performing the
intervention or to the physical object being acted upon. In each experiment, the
dependent measure is what goal-directed action children take on their own to
achieve the outcome based on what they observed.