* 1251274
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Classification Platform for Novel Scientific Insight on Time-Series Data
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Joshua Bloom, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 07/31/2018
* USD 733,536.00

BIGDATA: Small: DA: Classification Platform for Novel Scientific Insight on
Time-Series Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deepest
insights into the nature of complex physical systems arise from the measurement
of how observables of those systems change with time. Such dynamism - witnessed
on scales ranging from atomic to Universal - reveals the underlying forces that
govern the interaction of the constituents of those systems. The temporal
sampling of data from sensors and from simulations, then, may be seen as a
primary vector towards the deepest scientific insight. In this respect,
mechanisms to quickly and robustly extract and mine knowledge from diverse time-
series data can be fundamental tool of modern data-driven science. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a webservice portal for scientific teams to
train state-of-the-art machine-learning algorithms on existing data and receive
autonomously generated classification statements on new data, whatever the
scale. Massive data storage and the scaling/parallelism of computational
algorithms (using commodity cloud services) will be abstracted from the end
users. The envisioned framework will act both to simplify the algorithm
selection and application processes as well as to educate the broad user base in
modern machine-learning approaches. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
lead to the implementation of novel and efficient feature extraction algorithms
on irregularly sampled time-series data, and will make them available in the
context of a robust and scalable platform integrated with classification and
cross-validation, that will lead to informed use of the algorithms for reliable
scientific insight. This learning and prediction platform will accelerate data-
intensive decision-making, and will be a new data analytics tool for the
autonomous discovery of knowledge across a diverse range of scientific
disciplines. Geo-scientists may use it to find new robust earthquake trigger
algorithms, enabling on-the-fly decision-making to improve emergency response
times. Astronomers may rapidly detect anomalies, identifying a class of new
variable stars buried within data from a time-domain imaging survey.
Neuroscientists could incorporate improved real-time feedback and prediction
into prosthetics control systems. As an intelligent agent, the platform could be
used as an automated annotator for streaming biomedical data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This work will deliver a new open-source toolkit and web platform
that can serve as a fundamental tool for time-domain science. By design, it will
grow organically as user-contributed code is integrated into the platform. With
burgeoning adoption among some data-driven science disciplines the webservice
will emerge as an educational platform in the use of learning algorithms for
time-series data and as a societal service that can be used by anyone (even
outside of traditional scientific disciplines) to test hypotheses on large
scales with minimal effort. The website will also act as a public repository for
large, well-described datasets useful for validating new time-series
classification and prediction algorithms. A series of short and semester-long
courses will be developed (and broadly disseminated) to teach a new generation
of scientists how to use the platform (and other widely available resources) as
central 21st century research instruments.