* 1251897
* Why are Immigrant Neighborhoods Low Crime Neighborhoods?  Testing Immigrant Revitalization Theory and Cultural Explanations
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Harmon Hosch, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Helena Silverstein
* 01/31/2016
* USD 134,598.00

Contrary to popular opinion and the predictions of some long-established
criminological theories, over the last decade a growing body of research shows
that crime is much lower than expected in immigrant neighborhoods, especially
given high rates of poverty and other sources of disadvantage in these
neighborhoods. Moreover, this relationship is robust, appearing across a range
of different immigrant groups and cities and, as suggested by longitudinal
research, may be causal in nature. However, there are two key gaps in knowledge
that the proposed project will address. First, tests of the immigration-crime
relationship are limited to serious violent crime, primarily homicide, meaning
that the generality of this relationship is unknown. Second, theoretical
explanations developed to explain the inverse association between neighborhood
immigration and crime are largely untested owing to the lack of direct measures
of theoretical variables. Thus, the overarching goal of the proposed project is
to address these two shortcomings in knowledge by: (1) assessing the generality
of the relationship between neighborhood-level immigration and crime using a
variety of crime measures; and (2) directly testing a number of important
theories regarding this relationship. This will be accomplished through analyses
of survey data collected from random samples of adults who reside in a random
sample of neighborhoods in El Paso County, Texas, which is located on the
U.S.-Mexico border and possesses a number of recent, as well as long-
established, immigrant neighborhoods, making it highly desirable for this
project.

The results of the proposed project will impact a variety of audiences,
including governments, NGOs and criminal justice agencies, by enhancing their
understandings of how immigration, which represents a substantial source of
social change over the past two decades, has influenced neighborhoods and
American society as a whole. In addition, the research will be conducted at a
Hispanic Serving Institution and will involve a number of undergraduate and
graduate research assistants, thus broadening their participation in scientific
endeavors.