* 1251717
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Experimental Investigations of Multiple Wh-Questions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* David Pesetsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 03/31/2015
* USD 4,953.00

Under the direction of Dr. Martin Hackl, Ms. Hadas Kotek will conduct
psycholinguistic experiments on the real-time processing of multiple wh-
questions in English (e.g., "John asked which students could not read which sign
last night"). Multiple wh-questions are a central construction in the debate
regarding the existence of Covert Movement (CM) operations. The debate revolves
around the question of whether CM operations are responsible for the
interpretation of semantic operators at the syntactic level of Logical Form
(LF), or whether alternative mechanisms must be adopted. The CM hypothesis holds
that, in contexts like the example above, both "which students" and "which sign"
are treated as semantic operators that take scope over [x could not read y last
night] by covertly moving out of that structure despite the fact that "which
sign" remains a constituent of that larger unit in the (overt) phonological form
of the sentence. The results of this research project will contribute to this
debate by experimentally testing the existence of CM operations in multiple wh-
questions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to provide a detailed and
theoretically informed description and analysis of the Logical Form of wh-
questions. Crucial new evidence will be collected that will distinguish between
two main approaches. Although these approaches differ substantially in their
treatment of the syntax and semantics of interrogatives, traditional means of
investigation have not been successful in choosing between these approaches. One
reason for this lack of success is that off-line judgments collected from native
speaker informants regarding the acceptability, felicity, and semantic content
of multiple questions do not provide direct evidence about CM, and have not
pinpointed the grammatical causes of CM for wh-expressions. The project proposes
an experimental investigation of multiple wh-questions which goes beyond off-
line judgments. In particular, it proposes to conduct three real-time sentence
processing experiments to test differing predictions made by these two
approaches. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The grammatical configurations that these
experiments will investigate focus on so-called intervention effects, which have
been central to current debates about the syntax and semantics of multiple wh-
questions. This project will provide novel experimental evidence for the
existence and nature of intervention effects, which have not been previously
tested empirically. This award will also support the scientific training of a
promising scholar.