* 1251437
* The influence of higher education on local phonology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* William Labov, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2016
* USD 222,219.00

A college education has become a near-necessity for much of the U.S. population:
the equivalent of a high school diploma for earlier generations. As a result,
ever greater numbers of students find themselves in contact with peers from
beyond their own neighborhoods and home cities. The project will investigate the
linguistic outcomes of this contact in two directions: speech modifications made
by local students who have accommodated to non-local peers, and longer term
changes in local dialects as a result of students bringing modifications into
the community during and after college. The primary goal is to evaluate the
effect of these outcomes on current models of language change.

The two communities are Philadelphia, PA, where there is considerable awareness
of local dialect features (e.g. 'wooder' for 'water') and Lansing, MI, where the
vowel system has undergone radical changes (e.g. 'hud' for 'head') that are un-
noticed by the public. In each city, first-year undergraduates from local high
schools will be recruited in institutions with varying concentrations of local
speakers: in nationally oriented research universities, regional universities
and community colleges. They will be interviewed by the research team using
sociolinguistic techniques which focus on their social networks, as well as
their linguistic experience in their first college year. A second interview will
take place the following year to assess the impact of college on their local
dialect features. The students interviewed will themselves learn interviewing
techniques, which they will use to record younger members of their families and
groups of high school friends. These recordings will trace the development of
the college-influenced Philadelphia and Lansing dialects over time.

The broader impact of this study is the documentation of how language affects
successful adjustment to the social environment of higher education,
particularly for minority students whose dialects are marked by features
considered non-standard. Over the two years of the project the relation between
language adaptation and academic adjustment will become evident and should
contribute to an understanding of the factors that ultimately determine
completion rates in higher education.