* 1251562
* Collaborative Research:   Understanding and improving curriculum materials design practices for effective 'large scale' implementation in science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Christian Schunn, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 425,676.00

This is a project to improve understanding of practices critical to the design
of curricular materials for implementation in a broad range of educational
contexts. Three organizations - TERC, the University of California-Berkeley's
Lawrence Hall of Science, and the University of Pittsburgh's Learning Research
and Development Center - will collaborate to explore and codify practices that
enhance the success of efforts to design K-12 science curriculum materials for
large-scale implementation. Investigators from these three organizations will
conduct and synthesize results from a series of retrospective and live-design
practice, broad and 'deep dive' studies, with the goal of articulating a
conceptual model of educational design for large-scale use. Of particular
concern are the processes and strategies designers employ to address key
challenges to producing curricular materials capable of having meaningful
impacts on large numbers of learners (e.g., to achieve deep understanding and
rich performance, to connect to and leverage diverse social and cultural
experiences, and to facilitate implementation in diverse and resource-limited
settings). These issues will be explored from a variety of perspectives,
including: interviews with designers and document reviews to identify structural
project characteristics that appear to be empirically associated with scaling
success; retrospective case studies to identify salient features and lessons
learned from more and less successful large-scale design initiatives for science
education; and deep dives (involving participant-observation, interviews, focus
group discussions, and document analysis) into sustained design practices over
an extended period to explore how design teams address key design challenges
while developing educational materials for large-scale use.