* 1251232
* EAGER: Nanopipette-based immunosensor
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Michael Mirkin, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 05/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

Mirkin 1251232

Intellectual Merit Solid-state nanopores have been widely employed in different
sensing applications from Coulter counter to DNA sequencing devices. These
versatile sensors can detect analytes of different size ranging from single
molecules to bacteria. However, most reported applications of nanopores are
qualitative, and their physical size and geometry are often not suitable for in
situ measurements in microenvironments. This proposal is aimed at developing a
new biosensor platform for the detection of antibodies and protein biomarkers
based on the use of nanometer-sized pipettes. Like a nanopore, a pipette can
sense the analyte that enters its aperture and partially blocks the ion current
flowing through it. However, a nanopipette offers several important advantages
including the ease of fabrication, small physical size, and needle-like geometry
that makes it suitable as a probe for scanning electrochemical microscopy
(SECM). The translocation of metal nanoparticles will be used as a model system
to establish the principles of resistive-pulse sensing with nanopipettes. By
thoroughly characterizing the pipette size and geometry, we will demonstrate the
quantitative relationship between the frequency of the recorded single particle
events and the diffusion flux of particles to the orifice. This will enable
quantitative determination of analyte species in solution. Following proof-of-
concept experiments with bare metal particles, we will work on the detection and
quantitation of antibodies (e.g., antipeanut antibody) attached to nanoparticles
and cancer biomarkers (e.g., prostate specific antigen, PSA). Overall, the
proposed work will result in the development of a new biosensing platform for
quantitative analysis at the level of single biomolecules or single
nanoparticles. This potentially transformative concept can cause the paradigm
shift in bioelectroanalytical chemistry. Broader Impacts The proposed approach
to biosensing can enable accurate diagnostics of allergies, cancer and other
diseases based on the detection of low concentrations of antibodies and protein
biomarkers. It can find other applications in biomedical testing including DNA
sequencing. The requested support is mostly for graduate and postdoctoral
stipends. The graduate students and postdoctoral fellows involved in this
project will get multidisciplinary research experience in sensors,
electrochemistry, bioanalytical chemistry and nanoscience. The results of this
research will be broadly disseminated through publications and professional
presentations. The requested funds will enable us to contribute to ongoing CUNY
efforts to recruit underrepresented minority STEM students and participate in
its diversity initiatives. This project will provide research opportunities to
undergraduates and high school students.