* 1251573
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID: Assessing the Ecophysiological and Biogeochemical Response to Deliberate Nutrient Loading in the Southern California Bight
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Raphael Kudela, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2014
* USD 112,703.00

In autumn 2012, Orange County Sanitation District (OCSD) will divert ~150
million gallons/day of secondarily-treated effluent to a nearshore (1 mile
offshore) outfall pipe over a period of ~4 weeks. No discharges of this
magnitude have been conducted in decades. The planned diversion is expected to
create a buoyant surface plume that will spread over much of the coastal region.
Because OCSD plans to "super-chlorinate" and then dechlorinate the discharge,
the effect of the plume should be predominantly a nutrient addition rather than
direct addition of intact microbial populations. The PIs propose to address two
broad questions through a study of the plume. First, what happens ecologically
and physiologically to the phytoplankton assemblage when nutrients are
discharged in the surface ocean for extended periods of time? Second, can this
dynamic and shifting environment be sampled by deploying multiple technologies
to identify the physical/chemical drivers of the biological response at
ecologically relevant space and time scales? They will test two hypotheses: H1:
Continual discharge of nutrients to the surface ocean results in a
dinoflagellate-dominated bloom which leads to dampening or cessation of vertical
migration of the dinoflagellates and drives a shift to net heterotrophy. H2: The
bloom will initially result in a strong local sink for carbon dioxide which
gradually develops into a strong source as heterotrophy develops.

The study is expected to provide a time-evolving picture of interactions within
and between autotrophic and heterotrophic communities and will illustrate the
short-term biogeochemical and ecological consequences of sustained nutrient
discharge to a shallow coastal site. The planned diversion provides an
unprecedented opportunity to study the ecophysiological response in a natural
setting over a period of weeks, including the interaction of biology, chemistry,
and physics, and it will contribute to basic understanding of anthropogenic
nutrient loading to the coastal ocean. Undergraduate and graduate education and
training will be furthered through active participation in lab, field, and data
synthesis activities involving academic, government, and industry partners.