* 1251305
* Analytic Support for the Geoscience Education and Diversity Program
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Joan Ruskus, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 112,000.00

The American Institutes for Research is synthesizing the major findings of
selected projects in the Opportunities for Enhancing Diversity in the
Geosciences (OEDG) Program portfolio, supported by NSF since 2002. Results of
this synthesis will be used to inform the Committee of Visitors (COV) review of
the Geoscience Education and Diversity (Geo E&amp;D) Program in January 2013.
The project emphasizes knowledge generated by a carefully selected subgroup of
projects from OEDG's program portfolio ? projects selected because of the
relatively high validity and generalizability of their findings. A team of AIR
researchers is reviewing a variety of reference materials for the selected
projects, including final NSF reports, annual NSF reports, publications in peer-
reviewed journals, and project websites. Telephone interviews with a sample of
principal investigators are being used to flesh out the details of best
practices and to follow up on institutionalization, model replication, and
longer term outcomes for participants after NSF funding expires. Results of the
review and interviews are being summarized in a final report that identifies
evidence-based successful strategies in achieving OEDG program goals and the
conditions under which they succeeded. This project builds on the project-level
findings reported in the 2007 Journal of Geosciences Education special issue on
the status of racial diversity in the geosciences and expands on the two
articles in that volume that addressed lessons learned and best practices
gleaned from results of Federal research investments made during the previous
decade. Since publication of the special issue of JGE, projects funded by OEDG
have built on the body of knowledge presented therein, making this systematic,
scholarly assessment and synthesis of the most significant findings of projects
supported by OEDG very timely. This project, relying on the most significant,
high-quality research supported by OEDG over its history, is expected to clarify
best practices in fostering minority participation in the geosciences and the
conditions under which various strategies are most likely to succeed. Analysis
of new knowledge, understanding, and best practices will benefit substantially
the 2013 COV, NSF GEO E&amp;D Program managers, current OEDG projects, the
broader geosciences community, and other NSF minority-serving programs.