* 1251804
* Sulfur isotope studies of drill cores from the Barberton Greenstone Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* James Farquhar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 16,304.00

This proposal requests funds to support analysis of four sulfur isotopes in 70
bulk samples from three cores collected as part of recent ICDP drilling in the
Barberton Mountain Land, South Africa. Samples include black shales,
disseminated sulfide and sulfide layers in chert and barite. The proposed
analyses will provide a first glimpse into the sulfur isotope geochemistry of
these Palaeoarchean era (3600 to 3200 million years ago) sedimentary sequences
with an excellent state of preservation. One goal of this work will be to
evaluate the possibility that evidence exists supporting microbial reworking of
sulfur, and if so, what information it provides for understanding sources of
sulfur to and controls on sulfate concentrations in the oceans. A second aim of
this work will be to evaluate whether variations in the relationship between
&amp;#916;36S and &amp;#916;33S that are seen in other successions are present
in the Paleoarchean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project is part of a broad
international collaboration on sulfur isotopes on these core materials involving
the PI, and scientists at University of Utrecht, Westfälische Wilhelms
University (Muenster, Germany), the Swedish Museum of Natural History
(Stockholm, Sweden) and the Institute de Physique du Globe (Paris, France). All
of these groups are currently either involved in existing collaborations or are
planning to work together under the umbrella of the Barberton Drilling project.
This is seen as a unique opportunity to study a large number of samples using
shared techniques at a high level of detail from the approximately 2 km of
sedimentary drill core, providing ample room for joint studies and coordination
between sub-projects to yield a more significant and comprehensive dataset. At
minimum, one joint overview publication in a major international journal will
results from this work.