* 1251616
* Functional Regulation of Claudins in the Fish Gill Model
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Christian Tipsmark, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 614,500.00

Salt and water balance is a basic requirement for most vertebrates to keep
separate internal chemical conditions, irrespective of external influence.
Therefore, the physiology of transport epithelia is fundamental to vertebrate
life and the impairment of function is involved in many health problems. In
fish, the gill, gut, and kidney perform the homeostatic regulation of water and
salt transport. Euryhaline fish species like trout can move between diverse
salinities and this requires a unique functional plasticity in these organs,
which in turn makes them ideal models in the study of epithelial physiology. The
proposed research will use the trout gill model to study tight junction proteins
of the claudin family. These proteins are essential for regulation of epithelial
permeability. The overall goal of the research is to comprehend the regulation
and specific function of claudin proteins. We will provide new insights into
basic physiological mechanisms, which ultimately will enhance our understanding
of related pathological conditions in fish as well as in higher vertebrates. Our
current data suggests that claudin-10e is involved in sodium secretion in
seawater fish and possibly subject to rapid regulation, while claudin-28a is a
target for prolactin induced freshwater acclimation. Accordingly, the aims of
the project are to test the following hypotheses: i) the secretion path for
sodium in the gill of seawater trout is primarily defined by the presence of
claudin-10e, ii) phosphorylation of gill claudin-10e is involved in the control
of gill permeability and is critical during seawater-acclimation, iii)
prolactin-induced tightening of the gill epithelium during freshwater
acclimation is mostly dependent on claudin-28a expression. The project is
designed to demonstrate key principles of tight junction remodeling in the gill
of euryhaline fishes and to explain how rapid onset/offset of sodium secretion
may be controlled. Multidisciplinary methods will be applied, ranging from
analysis of transcript and protein expression, tissue localization, and
electrophysiological studies of monolayered cell cultures. These methods will
complement each other and are ideal for gaining novel molecular insight into
basic biological mechanisms. During the project several undergraduate, two
graduate students and one postdoctoral fellow will gain a broad training in
vertebrate biology and biochemical, molecular and physiological methods.
Outreach include, a partnership with the George Washington Carver research
program that provides summer research experiences for undergraduates from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Hispanic serving institutions.
The broader scientific impact of the proposed research relates to potential
health applications based on the increased understanding at the molecular level
of water and salt management in vertebrates along with applications in the
biotechnology and aquaculture industry. The project will also contribute to the
development of research resources and capacity in Arkansas, an EPSCoR
jurisdiction.