* 1251544
* EAGER: Developing a Framework for a Cyber-Infrastructure General Practitioner Program
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Amy Apon, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 298,870.00

This project will perform an in-depth study on the development of a framework
for a cyberinfrastructure (CI) general practitioner education and internship
program targeted at creating highly-capable and innovative information
technology (IT) professionals. This project will establish a methodology by
which to develop a prototype model that implements an applied internship program
within an academic setting. This methodology will include evaluating both
undergraduate and graduate curriculum content needs, exploring a set of desired
practical workforce competencies, forging the appropriate mix of private sector
partnerships, conducting a fit/gap analysis of current curriculum offerings, and
developing the prototype offering of a CI general practitioner program that
explores an internship style model for instructional delivery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States faces several challenges in addressing
the necessary aptitudes that future information technology professionals will
need. Traditional computer science and computer engineering degrees tend to
focus only on theoretical foundations of computing, and these programs often
lack the time to guide the students through a comprehensive apprenticeship
program. Curriculum development programs that focus only on undergraduate
education miss the large population of knowledgeable graduate-level student
researchers who are often well prepared to employ practical cyberinfrastructure
(CI) skills in advancing their research and teaching activities. A standardized
educational model that enables both undergraduate and graduate students to gain
much needed extracurricular CI skills does not exist. In addressing these
challenges, this program will investigate the feasibility and needed components
of a CI Practitioner program, which seeks to bridge the applied skills gaps
between training programs currently offered by technical colleges, traditional
university degree programs, and professional certification pathways in order to
begin creating a workforce that possesses the theoretical foundation, hands-on
capabilities, and technical skills needed to engage in and support CI-enabled
science and innovation. The results of this study will be applicable at all
institutions working toward a more relevant and more effective curriculum and
internship program for preparing undergraduate or graduate students to become
innovative and competitive in the technology driven global market. This
project?s discoveries and curriculum model will be applicable within multiple
disciplines, as CI benefit has no boundaries. Beneficiaries of this work will
include traditional CI-enabled sciences primarily, but also the humanities and
economic endeavors. Finally, this program will foster innovation and
independence in CI management and development by providing participating
undergraduate and graduate students with the critical broad perspective of CI
needed to make the best decisions and best use of available resources.