* 1251819
* Stigmatization and Stereotype Threat among Adolescents with Learning Disability: Impacts on Cognition and Performance in Math
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Gabrielle Rappolt-Schlichtmann, CAST, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 367,713.00

The purpose of this empirical study is to explore the prevalence and impact of
stigmatization and stereotype threat on mathematics performance among public
high school students (grades 9-12) with specific learning disabilities. Using a
combination of self-report measures and experimental study, the following
questions will be addressed: 1) To what degree are high school students with
specific learning disabilities conscious of stigma related to their learning
disability in the context of mathematics education?, 2) Is greater stigma
consciousness associated with poorer performance in mathematics among high
school students with specific learning disabilities?, and 3) Do high school
students with specific learning disabilities experience stereotype threat that
interferes with performance in mathematics? The severity of learning disability
will be controlled in all analyses, and tests of moderation will be employed to
explore potentially compounding effects of having a math specific learning
disability, being a girl or minority student, or coming from a school where
stigma levels around learning disability are high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work contributes to Intellectual Merit through advancing potentially
transformative knowledge and understanding about the experiences of students
with learning disabilities in the context of high school mathematics. The
research has the potential to inform and open new avenues of research in the
area of stigmatization and stereotype threat for people with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In regards to Broader Impacts, the findings from this
project will significantly inform understanding of the achievement gaps in math
of underrepresented groups, and specifically students with learning
disabilities, including women and minorities within this population.
Understanding the cognitive and affective experiences of individuals with
learning disabilities may facilitate the future development of interventions to
remedy the current negative outcomes of students with learning disabilities in
mathematics.