* 1251520
* Calibrating Partner Regulation in Marriage
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2017
* James McNulty, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 523,875.00

How should spouses behave while discussing the problems that will inevitably
arise over the course of their marriages? Numerous theoretical perspectives
posit that maintaining satisfaction with an intimate relationship requires
exchanging positive behaviors, such as forgiving, and avoiding negative ones,
such as blaming, commanding, and rejecting. Accordingly, most educational
programs train couples to exchange positive behaviors and avoid more negative
ones. Nevertheless, studies of the efficacy of such programs indicate that
although spouses do learn new skills they do not remain more satisfied over the
long-term. One reason for this lack of success may be that programs are teaching
the wrong skills. Indeed, although some studies indicate that spouses benefit
from avoiding negative behaviors, other studies indicate that spouses benefit
from engaging in negative behaviors. Whether spouses benefit from avoiding or
engaging in negative behaviors while discussing their problems may depend on an
overlooked factor - the nature of the problem being discussed. Prior research
indicates that engaging in negative behaviors can motivate partners to change.
Although such behaviors may be unnecessary during discussions of minor problems
or problems out of the partner's control, they may be necessary to motivate
partners to address serious problems that are under the partner's control.
Accordingly, it may be most adaptive for spouses to be flexible in how they
behave - avoiding or engaging in negative behaviors depending on whether they
are discussing a problem that is controllable and severe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will examine the tendency for spouses
to flexibly calibrate their negative behaviors to both the severity and
controllability of the specific problem they are discussing. At baseline and one
year later, 200 newlywed couples will complete four problem-solving interactions
(two that target a relatively minor problem and two that target a relatively
severe problem) that will be rated by independent judges for negative behavior,
severity, and controllability. Also at baseline, and every three months for two
years, participants will report their marital satisfaction, the severity of
their marital problems, and their motivation to resolve those problems. Analyses
will test the hypothesis that spouses who engage in fewer negative behaviors
while discussing minor and relatively uncontrollable problems but more negative
behaviors while discussing severe and controllable problems remain more
satisfied over time, and that such associations occur because properly
calibrated negative behavior motivates the partner to change and thus help
resolve problems. Not only will this research promote the training of the
numerous graduate and undergraduate students necessary to carry out the
research, support for the predictions would suggest that existing education
programs should not continue teaching spouses to avoid negative behaviors
altogether but should instead teach them to properly calibrate such behaviors to
severe and controllable problems.