* 1251954
* Constraints on Slow Slip Behavior in Cascadia Through the Integration of PBO Borehole Strainmeters, GPS Time Series, and Tremor Locations
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Schmidt, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2017
* USD 279,748.00

Slow slip events and non-volcanic tremor provide new insight into the mode of
strain release along the deep extension of faults. These events are noteworthy
for their long durations (~days) and large magnitudes (~M6). We have yet to
fully understand what properties or conditions on the plate interface act to
prevent the rapid slip that is typically observed with earthquakes. Slow slip
and tremor also constrain the lower edge of the seismogenic zone, a variable
that is useful for seismic hazard studies, and event histories are an input into
studies that explore the time-dependent loading of stress on the seismogenic
zone. Most of the existing geodetic studies of slow slip have focused on
observations made by GPS. In this work, we integrate borehole strainmeters with
GPS data to more fully characterize the spectrum of slow slip behavior on the
Cascadia subduction zone. Time-dependent inversions of GPS and strainmeter time
series are performed using the Extended Network Inversion Filter. By
incorporating the strainmeters into our analysis, we resolve smaller slow slip
events and extract greater information about the propagation characteristics
than by using GPS alone. From our expanded catalog of slow slip events, we are
extracting the source parameters and testing whether the smaller slow slip
events (~M5+) obey the same scaling relationships as has been inferred for the
larger ones (~M6+). The strainmeter data also allow us to better compare the
spatial and temporal correlation of slow slip and the location of tremor. We are
testing the idea of whether tremor marks the leading edge of slow slip or
whether tremor is embedded within the slipping zone. Lastly, we are evaluating
the up-dip taper of slow slip and seeing if the surface observations are
consistent with an abrupt up-dip edge, as suggested by the tremor. Our analysis
of the strainmeter data allows us to better evaluate the calibration and noise
characteristic of the strainmeter time series. We will specifically use the GPS-
derived slip models to independently validate the strainmeter calibrations.