* 1251678
* Collaborative Research:  Morphology and Molecules: Diatom Diversification, Extinction, and Dispersal in an Ancient Tropical Lake System
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Sherilyn Fritz, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 02/28/2017
* USD 149,998.00

Collaborative Research: Morphology and Molecules: Diatom Diversification,
Extinction, and Dispersal in an Ancient Tropical Lake System

Sherilyn Fritz and Paul Baker University of Nebraska-Lincoln and Duke University

The origins of endemic floras and faunas, those that are restricted to a
specific geographic area, have intrigued natural scientists for well over a
century. The evolution of endemic groups has been attributed to habitat
stability through multiple climate cycles, which fostered the build-up of
genetic diversity through long periods of time, or alternatively to colonization
and extensive radiation following episodes of massive disturbance. Thus, very
different trajectories of environmental history (stability versus instability)
have been posited to bring about higher levels of endemism and biodiversity.
This highly interdisciplinary project will integrate fossil data from sediment
cores with molecular phylogeography to test hypotheses about the magnitude and
rate of morphological and genetic variation in a major lineage of planktonic
diatom in the tropical Andes, the Cyclostephanos andinus complex.
Micropaleontological analyses of morphological diversification and extinction in
the C. andinus complex during the last ~0.4 my will be studied using cores
collected previously from Lake Titicaca, Bolivia/Peru and Lago Chungará, Chile
and compared with independent measures of climate variation analyzed in the same
samples to assess the role of environmental drivers in the patterns of
evolutionary change. The project also will sample multiple lakes in the Andean
Altiplano to characterize the genetic composition of modern C. andinus
populations and to assess genetic variation among the populations to infer
intraspecific evolutionary histories (including vicariance, dispersal, and gene
flow). If flow is limited, genetic characterization of populations from Lake
Titicaca and Lago Chungará can be used to inform molecular clock methods to
derive hypotheses about the timing of genetic divergences of multiple
populations. In addition, the history of the C. andinus complex will be placed
within a broader biogeographic framework by establishing the geographic
distribution of all members of the genus Cyclostephanos in tropical South
American lakes.

Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts Direct observation of the fossil record
and molecular genetic characterization of contemporary populations are
complementary approaches for studying the patterns and rates of evolutionary
change. Yet these two approaches have rarely been combined in a single study to
investigate diversification, dispersal and extinction. This project is highly
interdisciplinary and takes advantage of the rich framework generated by a prior
large-lake drilling program to investigate evolutionary biology. The research
presents a creative model for the linkage of new molecular genetic approaches
with traditional paleontological and biogeographic tools to investigate
evolutionary processes in microorganisms and will train a graduate student at
this exciting interdisciplinary frontier. In addition, K-12 students and other
members of the public will be exposed to this interdisciplinary intersection of
geology and molecular genetics by the active engagement of project investigators
in education and outreach activities in Nebraska.