* 1251681
* Collaborative Research: A mechanistic understanding of hydrograph shape influence on temporal variations in bedload transport, grain size distributions, and armor persistence
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sarah Yarnell-Hayes, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2017
* USD 209,378.00

Natural and managed rivers throughout the world display a wide range of
hydrographs, from flashy and abrupt to more gradual changes in flow. Hydrograph
shape (quantified by peak magnitude and rate of discharge change) significantly
influences the volume, timing, and quality of water available for anthropogenic
use and aquatic ecosystems. Uncertainties remain as to how unsteady flows that
characterize hydrographs impact bedload fluxes and hysteresis, grain size
distributions, and the persistence of armor layers. The lack of a mechanistic
and predictive understanding of hydrograph influences may also partially explain
why bedload transport equations in gravel-bed rivers are often inaccurate. The
research team proposes complimentary flume, field, and numerical modeling
experiments to quantify the impact of hydrographs on sediment movement.
Specifically, they hypothesize that hydrograph shape influences the following:
(1) bed load transport rates, hysteresis, and mobile grain sizes for a given
shear stress, and (2) bed grain size distributions and the persistence/degree of
bed armoring. In flume experiments, temporal variability in bedload fluxes,
grain size distributions, and armor persistence will be measured for a range of
hydrograph shapes. Field experiments will further investigate the influence of
hydrograph shape on bedload transport rates, bed grain size changes, and armor
persistence, mobility and removal. The combined flume and field measurements
will be used to test and validate numerical and analytical models for bedload
transport.

Hydrographs represent how water quantities in rivers vary over time and can be
characterized by the timing, magnitude and rates of change of flow. Human
modifications of these hydrograph characteristics have positively influenced
economic development but negatively impacted aquatic species and channel
morphology. This is important because 77% of total water discharge from large
northern hemisphere rivers is moderately to severely impacted by dams and
diversions. Water resource managers commonly seek to assess and mitigate these
impacts through river restoration efforts, hydropower re-regulation, and in some
cases dam removal. For example, gravel augmentation is commonly used to mitigate
for low sediment supplies and improve fish habitat below dams but this often has
mixed results because of a lack of a predictive understanding of sediment
transport caused by variable flows. Managers could use the results of this
research to determine flow hydrograph shapes that potentially mitigate for flow
regulation influence on threatened or endangered aquatic organisms. Further,
this research will result in a predictive and mechanistic understanding of the
interactions between flow hydrographs, sediment transport, and temporal
variations in the size of sediment on the channel bed. Such knowledge is
necessary to properly design river infrastructure and restoration projects, and
predict long-term channel incision rates and landscape changes. Additionally,
the project will contribute towards unique educational opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students and support for a Women Outdoors with
Science Camp will encourage young females to enter STEM fields.