* 1251587
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Understanding Changes in NGO's Action Repertoires:  When &amp; Why Indian NGOs Use Litigation as a Political Strategy
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Vera Heuer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 01/31/2014
* USD 14,097.00

In India, NGOs have emerged as the dominant form of civic association, and they
mediate between social groups and the Indian state by facilitating government
action. This project examines how NGOs partake in the political process more
generally and specifically when and why certain Indian NGOs change their
political strategies to include litigation to demand rights or policy changes.
Resource capacity in conjunction with low levels of political inclusion in the
policy-making and policy-implementing arena within the political process are
shape NGOs' legal activism. To explain variation in NGOs' decision to use
litigation as a political strategy to pursue organizational goals the project
will use cross-sectional survey data collected from NGOs located in New Delhi.
The survey will provide data on the NGOs' resource availability, the tactics
they employ, and the NGOs' relationship with the state and
donors.&lt;br/&gt;Through the examination of NGOs' legal activism in India the
proposed project will contribute to the study of Indian politics and the
workings of democratic institutions in a non-western context. Furthermore, this
project will contribute to ongoing discussions about enhancing different forms
of political participation in India and building viable democratic institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also have a substantial broader impact
by contributing to debates on how emerging democracies with high poverty and
inequality build political institutions committed to enhancing social justice
and democratic governance. It will do so via broad dissemination beyond the
scholarly community. It will also contribute to understanding how to craft
political institutions that allow for adequate and equal access to the state in
order to enhance accountability.