* 1251035
* ABR: Models of natural selection, development, and life history
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Steven Frank, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 274,992.00

This project will develop evolutionary theories about the characteristics of
bacteria and other microbes. Previous work showed the importance of variability
in food and other resources over space and time. For example, continuous and
predictable resource environments favor microbes that grow slowly and use
resources efficiently. By contrast, temporary resource environments favor
microbes that compete strongly among themselves, grow rapidly, and use resources
inefficiently. Those different patterns of competition and resource use have
cascading effects on the surrounding biological communities. In this research,
the investigator will test hypotheses about the primary factors that influence
key microbial traits. The work requires synthesis of diverse studies from other
fields, and the novel theoretical work is expected to create new approaches to
fundamental problems in ecology and evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding bacterial characters is important, because
our bodies carry trillions of bacteria. Recent research shows that those
bacteria influence nearly every aspect of our health. Beyond our bodies, studies
of soil, plant growth, and cycling of nutrients through ecosystems also show
strong influence by numerous and diverse bacteria and other microbes. To
understand those microbial inputs, one must study the ecological and
evolutionary processes that have influenced the characteristics of the microbes.