* 1251700
* Legal change and local norms in federal courts:   A qualitative field study of federal case processing and negotiations, post-Booker
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Mona Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 01/31/2015
* USD 105,093.00

Several recent Supreme Court decisions have rendered the federal sentencing
guidelines advisory (US v. Booker, Gall v. US, 2007; Kimbrough v. US, 2007),
thereby returning discretion to federal judges to impose non-Guidelines
sentences. This research project aims to qualitatively examine the ramifications
of these cases for case adjudication in federal drug trafficking cases. To date,
the research that has examined Booker's impact has primarily relied upon the
Sentencing Commission's outcome data; this project will supplement those
analyses with systematic, qualitative field research which will demonstrate how
local courts have responded to the dramatic policy change brought about by
Booker, et al. The project is comprised of case studies set in Federal
Defender's offices in four distinct districts that differ from each other in
overall size; size of criminal and drug trafficking caseload; demonstrated rate
and type of sentence outcome variations; and geographic location. Direct
observations, in-depth interviews, and case file data will be used to develop a
detailed account of how sentencing is and has been done in each district pre-
and post-Booker, particularly in regard to guilty plea negotiations. Portraits
of the case processing norms in each district will be developed to supplement
what is captured in formal sentence outcome data, and to provide a
contextualized picture of contemporary federal sentencing that accounts for how
localized institutional processes shape case outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to contribute to theoretical debates about the changing nature of
criminal justice administration, and advance understandings of criminal courts
as culturally embedded legal organizations as they juggle the competing demands
of technical rationality and quests for justice their operation. The research
will inform how policy change differentially plays out on the ground, and will
provide insights into how policies can most effectively be implemented in the
diverse locales that comprise the federal district court system.