* 1251342
* Deaf Learners' Lexical Acquisition of English Verbs and Their Component Properties
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Gerald Berent, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2018
* USD 300,502.00

A verb plays a central role in establishing the form and meaning of a sentence
because every verb, along with its meaning, has properties that determine what
other structures can occur with it in a sentence and how the whole sentence
functions in communicating events. For example, specific properties of the
English verbs 'sink' and 'build' determine the acceptability of the sentences
"The enemy sank the ship" and "The enemy built the ship," as well as the
acceptability of "The ship sank" but the unacceptability of "The ship built."
Hearing native speakers naturally acquire the requisite lexical knowledge of
English verbs that determines the admissible forms and functions of sentences.
However, acquisition of spoken-language knowledge under exceptional
circumstances, as with deaf persons, can be compromised because deaf learners
have (variably) restricted auditory access to input from the spoken language.
Under these circumstances, lower levels of proficiency in the spoken language
often result, with potentially serious negative consequences for educational and
career success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To gain a deeper understanding of deaf
learners' lexical acquisition of English verbs, this research project undertakes
a comprehensive investigation of deaf college students' knowledge of isolatable
lexical properties of verbs using sentence acceptability rating scale tasks. It
examines deaf learners' verb knowledge as it pertains to transitivity and
intransitivity, verb-determined sentence structure, the semantic roles of verbs'
subjects and objects, meaning classes of verbs, and the roles verbs play in
communicating events such as actions, activities, and accomplishments. Deaf
learners' English verb knowledge within and across these lexical domains is
compared to the verb knowledge of their hearing college-level peers and hearing
second-language learners of English, whose English acquisition exhibits many
parallels with deaf learners' acquisition. The findings of this research will
also establish an empirical basis on which to develop more effective methods for
teaching English to deaf students.