* 1251807
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:   Coarticulation and the phonetics of fingerspelling
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Jonathan Keane, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2016
* USD 18,946.00

The aim of this project is to study how signers produce American Sign Language
(ASL) fingerspelling. Studying fingerspelling provides opportunities to find
contextual and time conditioned variation in handshape that are relatively
limited in signing. This work builds on phonological systems of sign language
production, but with a detailed focus on the specific aspects that make up
handshapes in ASL. Quantitative measurements of video and motion capture data
will be used to analyze contextually based handshape variation in ASL
fingerspelling. In this process a large fingerspelling corpus will be created.
Such a corpus will be widely available for future research, and will be
particularly useful for automatic sign language recognition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this work will contribute to knowledge of
how human languages are produced. Handshape in ASL has the power to inform our
understanding of articulatory gestures in a way that is difficult to study in
the vocal tract. Specifically, individual articulators have a number of
different configurations that are active and nonactive. This is unlike many
spoken language articulators, which frequently have a single configuration when
active, and another when nonactive. Because sign language articulators are not
inside the body, precise measurements to analyze the differences between the
configurations of articulators when active and nonactive can be obtained more
easily than for speech articulators. These findings will further theories of
variation cross-linguistically, and more importantly, cross-modally; linguists
can better understand what properties in language production are inherent to
language, and what properties are modality specific. Additionally, this research
will further the understanding of handshape in sign phonology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This work has a number of broader impacts. First, automatic
recognition of sign languages requires knowledge of handshape variation. This
work establishes general norms for fingerspelling in native ASL users. Having
quantitative norms of specific features of fingerspelling allows for the
development of metrics and tests for what types of productions fall outside of
the range of typical signers. Second, there has been research showing a
correlation between fingerspelling ability and literacy. Understanding basic
phonetic facts about the production of fingerspelling will allow for more
detailed future work on the perception of fingerspelling. Furthermore,
understanding how fingerspelling is produced and perceived will enable the study
of this correlation in more detail.