* 1251755
* Digital High-Speed Spectroscopic Recordings in the Upward Lightning Triggering Study (UPLIGHTS)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Richard Orville, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 442,903.00

This is a three-year project for field operations divided into two parts. The
first two years, 2013 and 2014, will be a field program in Rapid City, South
Dakota followed by evaluation and analyses. The third year, 2015, will be the
appropriate time to use two high-speed cameras (one for spectra; one for black
and white imagery) at the Camp Blanding, University of Florida experimental
station. Three spectroscopic optical input diffraction grating units, two with
gratings blazed at 560 nm and 600 nm, and one at 750 nm have also be built in
the previous years. The objective of the current research is to obtain spectral
data (380 - 850 nm) from the entire optical channel length with high time
resolution for all visible elements, i.e. return strokes, stepped and dart
leaders, M-strokes, continuing currents, and recoil leaders associated with
positive and negative leader breakdown. These spectral data will provide
estimates of temperature, electron density, and other thermodynamic properties
throughout the channel lengths. In addition, these data will then be matched to
National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) and Lightning Mapping Array (LMA) or
interferometry measurements on the same flashes for which the polarity, peak
current, flash extent, etc. can be derived. This total information will provide
the most complete physical description of natural and triggered lightning
channels to-date.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this research activity is to
provide the most complete physical description of natural and triggered
lightning channels to-date.

Broader Impact: Results from the research will have an immediate impact on the
research programs of cooperating scientists and their students. At the moment,
more than ten cooperating institutions have expressed an interest in the
Lightning Project and the associated information. This research will contribute
to the education of graduate students who will directly participate in the
project. Research results will be incorporated into advanced courses on cloud
physics and mesoscale phenomena.