* 1251991
* Collaborative Research:   Estimating the Tempo of the Cambrian Explosion
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Adam Maloof, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2015
* USD 30,000.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Estimating the Tempo of the Cambrian
Explosion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principle Investigators: Steve Wang, Susannah
Porter, Adam Maloof&lt;br/&gt;Swarthmore College, University of California Santa
Barbara, and Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Due to recent advances in geochronology, stratigraphy, and paleontology, the
broad pattern of the Cambrian explosion is now known, but details of this event
remain unclear, including the rate of diversification, the order of appearances
of major clades, and the number and timing of pulses of origination. The goal of
the work proposed here is to generate a statistically rigorous timeline for the
appearances of skeletal animals during the first ~25 million years of the
Cambrian(Nemakit-Daldynian and Tommotian stages). It will build on earlier work
by PIs Maloof and Porter and their collaborators that used radiometrically
calibrated carbon isotope chemostratigraphy to reconstruct the pattern of
appearances through this interval at two million year resolution. That work
suggested that the diversification of skeletal animals began early and extended
throughout this interval, with pulses of appearances ca. 540-538 Ma, 534-530 Ma,
and 524-522 Ma. However, it is not clear to what extent preservational biases
and uncertainties in correlation and dating have influenced these patterns. The
research proposed here will use recently developed statistical methods to
address these concerns. In particular, it will (1) use a new method developed by
PI Wang and colleagues to estimate a confidence&lt;br/&gt;interval for the
duration of the diversification (and thus provide an estimate of its rate), and
(2) use both a randomization procedure and a new method developed by Wang and an
undergraduate student to identify the most likely number of pulses of
origination and their timing. As a side benefit, this work will also provide
estimates of the time of origination for the skeletal genera in the database, as
well as estimates of recovery potential and diversity curves. Finally, this work
will fund ongoing efforts by PIs Maloof and Porter and graduate student Moore to
augment the dataset, currently composed of 150 skeletal genera from 24 sections
in China, Mongolia, and Siberia, with the eventual goal of extending coverage to
later Cambrian time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical explanation: The
Cambrian Explosion has long been regarded as one of the most important but most
perplexing events in Earth history. It puzzled Darwin, who thought it a serious
challenge to his ideas. We now know that there is a Precambrian fossil record,
of which Darwin was unaware, but the significance of the Cambrian Explosion is
still unparalleled: after approximately 3 billion years of mostly unicellular
existence, multicellular life suddenly (on geological timescales) diversified,
as nearly all of the major 'types' of animals (phyla or body plans) appeared
during the early Cambrian. Furthermore, after approximately 3 billion years of
soft-bodied existence, life suddenly evolved mineralized skeletons in many
different lineages independently. We still do not know what drove this event:
ecology (predator-prey interactions), biology (changes in the developmental tool
kit), environment (changes in oxygen levels) or some combination of all three.
In this project, we attempt for the first time to combine all available
stratigraphic data (isotopic, biostratigraphic, geochronologic) to piece
together a detailed record of biological and environmental change in the
Cambrian.