* 1251621
* Rheology of the Lithospheric Mantle Beneath the Mojave Region from Naturally Deformed Peridotite Xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Whitney Behr, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2019
* USD 277,951.00

The aim of this project is to characterize the rheological properties of a
lithospheric mantle section using a suite of naturally deformed peridotite
xenoliths erupted from the dominantly Pleistocene Cima volcanic field in the
tectonically active Mojave desert of California. The part of the Mojave from
which the Cima xenoliths are derived is a region in which several models of both
the transient and steady-state rheology structure of the lithosphere have been
made from surface velocity measurements following the Landers (1992) and Hector
Mine (1999) earthquakes. It is also a region where geophysical observations
(including seismic velocity and attenuation, and receiver function studies)
highlight a drop in shear velocity that is rapid in depth, interpreted to be the
seismological lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary; the magnitude of the shear
velocity drop is too abrupt to be explained by temperature contrasts alone. The
compositional and rheological properties of the mantle lithosphere here are
therefore critical to understanding what influences both the large-wavelength
post-seismic signal, and the abrupt transition from lithospheric lid to low
viscosity, low velocity asthenospheric mantle. The study will document how
stress, temperature, water content, deformation mechanism, lattice preferred
orientation and style of localization vary with increasing depth (down to at
least 45 km and as much as 70 km) in the lithospheric mantle from which the Cima
xenoliths are derived. These natural measurements of rheological parameters will
be used to a) test the applicability of experimentally derived flow laws and
predictions of LPO development to mantle rocks, b) develop a naturally
constrained stress profile of the upper mantle in the Mojave region and c)
examine how the rheological parameters measured might influence a range of
larger-scale geophysical models for the region. Some of the critical questions
to be addressed include: is the mantle lithosphere beneath this region wet or
dry? Does deformation in the mantle occur in narrow zones, or is it widely
distributed? Is the mantle lithosphere the strongest ?load-bearing? part of the
continental lithosphere, the weakest, or perhaps somewhere in
between?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will shed new light on
how Earth?s rigid outer shell, the lithosphere, behaves in response to
deformation along an active continental plate boundary. The PI and students will
examine samples of the mantle section of the lithosphere entrained and brought
to the surface by rapidly ascending magmas beneath young volcanoes. These
entrained rocks, known as xenoliths, provide a unique perspective on the
structure and physical properties of the lithosphere beneath some of the major
earthquake-producing strike-slip faults in eastern California, including the
faults that generated the Landers (1992, M=7.3) and Hector Mine (1999, M=7.1)
earthquakes.