* 1251576
* RAPID: The Critical Ninth Grade Transition: Opportunities and Risks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Sandra Graham, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 142,137.00

The purpose of this research is to follow a large and ethnically diverse sample
of middle school students across the critical middle school to high school
transition. Because ninth grade achievement is often critical in predicting
whether youth stay in or drop out of high school, the overarching goal of the
project is to capture students' experiences at this significant juncture. The
large sample (n = 1900) is comprised of Latino, African American, Asian/Pacific
Islander, White, and multi-racial youth who will transition to high school in
Fall of 2012. These high schools are expected to range in racial/ethnic
diversity, allowing for tests of the social and academic benefits and challenges
of racial/ethnic diversity during the high school transition. Data will be
gathered on three achievement-related processes. The first process is academic
course-taking patterns in ninth grade, including grades and credits earned.
Because high school math largely functions as the gateway to high school
completion and college readiness, there will be a particular focus on math
course-taking in 9th grade (e.g., whether students are enrolled in Algebra I,
and thus "on time" for college and whether they pass that course in 9th grade).
The second process is the degree to which academic experiences become
racialized, particularly the ways in which course-taking might segregate
students along racial/ethnic lines. New measures have been developed that allow
precise estimates of the degree to which individual students are teamed or
clustered with the same peers for academic instruction and the degree to which
their academic courses are representative of the racial/ethnic diversity of the
high school. The third process is the social capital provided by exposure to
cross-race/ethnic peers. It is hypothesized that African American and Latino
students may fare better in diverse high schools because they gain access to
important knowledge about academic opportunities (e.g., what courses to take,
SAT preparation) through their cross-race ties. Thus cross-race ties can
function as peer social capital, facilitating the flow of important educational
information across racial/ethnic boundaries. By studying these three
achievement-related processes (course-taking patterns, whether course-taking
segregates students along racial/ethnic lines, and peers as social capital) the
research can provide new insights into the challenges that adolescents of color
face as they negotiate the high school transition as well as conditions under
which greater school ethnic diversity can buffer some of those challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses NSF criteria for broader impact in
three ways. First, the research seeks to understand the ways in which large,
urban multi-ethnic public high schools are organized to increase or hinder the
opportunities of racial and ethnic minority adolescents to acquire competence
and develop interest in STEM-related subject matter. If students do not have
adequate preparation and confidence during high school, their likelihood of
pursuing STEM fields in college is greatly compromised. Second, the project will
have a particular focus on resilient youth and the precursors of successful
pathways to high school completion even among those at high risk of dropping
out. Such results can have useful implications for developing practices that
promote academic engagement and college readiness for all students. Third, the
research can offer transformative ways to think about the meaning and
measurement of racial/ethnic diversity and opportunities to interact with peers
of different racial/ethnic backgrounds even in diverse settings. This
perspective can be useful for research in other social settings where the
implications of increasing ethnic diversity are a primary concern and for new
thinking about a science of diversity.