* 1251645
* Reducing Intergroup Conflict Using a Belief Manipulation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Carol Dweck, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 03/31/2017
* USD 426,098.00

Ending long-standing conflicts is an urgent global challenge. Although
intractable conflicts develop an air of inevitability over time, these conflicts
are initiated and maintained by people; therefore, changing people's hearts and
minds is a critical step for resolving such conflicts. The present research
evaluates a new theory-based intervention designed to promote more productive
emotions and attitudes in the context of an ongoing intractable conflict. The
proposed project extends preliminary work by this research team, which showed
that teaching in-group members that groups do not have a fixed nature (an
incremental belief about groups) increased favorable attitudes toward the
opposing group and, in turn, fostered greater willingness to engage in major
compromises that could lead to peace. In the current project, the researchers
will for the first time examine the longer term effects of this belief-based
intervention in a societal context in which in-group participants are routinely
exposed to negative information about the out-group. The researchers will
compare this belief-based intervention to both a Perspective Taking Intervention
(a common conflict resolution strategy) and a Coping Control Intervention.
Before participants are randomly assigned to one of the three interventions (and
then again immediately after and six months later), attitudes and emotions
toward the out-group will be assessed, along with favorability toward
conciliatory actions. The study design will allow an examination of the
durability of the effects of each of these three intervention conditions, as
well as their influence across ideological sub-groups as they confront real
world conflict-related events. Importantly, the focal intervention introduces a
novel way of promoting conflict resolution, in that there is no attempt to
create interactions, familiarity, empathy or perspective-taking between members
of conflicting groups. Instead, the focus is on promoting a change in mindset.
This research will have a broader impact on society by testing a novel approach
to conflict resolution that does not involve the logistical problems associated
with other interventions, such as bringing parties in conflict together or
running the risk of engendering resistance by explicitly trying to teach hostile
groups in intractable conflicts to empathize with each other. If successful,
this new belief-based approach can be disseminated easily and broadly, and can
work for people with a variety of ideological stances and cultural
characteristics. This approach has relevance to a large number of intra-national
and international conflicts, and to efforts aimed at preventing future
conflicts.