* 1251425
* EAGER: Initiation of a US-New Zealand Human Factors in Disaster Management Research Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Pamela McCauley, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 35,884.00

In a large-scale destructive event one of the great challenges for public health
workers and rescue teams is to have stable and accessible emergency
communication systems that are compatible with the needs of the users. Mobile
technology is rapidly being integrated into the to first responder environment,
yet little research currently exists regarding the use of communication
platforms and Internet social networks for emergency response; as a consequence,
there exists a gap in the body of knowledge regarding the most effective and
efficient use of mobile communication platforms in disaster response. The PI's
objective in this exploratory research is to lay the foundation for a human-
centered methodology to evaluate critical human factors and ergonomic issues
that can be addressed through the use of mobile technology in the preparation
and response phases of emergency management. Because similarities exist between
the 2011 earthquake in the Northern Virginia region of the United States and the
Christchurch, New Zealand earthquake of 2010, her approach is to initiate an
international research collaboration between the US and NZ to address research
questions such as: What are the current and emerging technologies used by
emergency management personnel (including first responders and volunteers) in
the preparation and response phases of disaster management? What are the human
factors and ergonomics challenges to emergency management personnel that can be
addressed through the use of mobile technology? How does the use of emerging
technology and social networking impact the performance of emergency management
personnel from a human factors perspective? Can a mathematical model be
developed to measure the usability, relative importance and reliability of
essential technology in the preparation and response phases of disaster
management? The work will include review of data from the Christ Church
earthquakes and on-site data collection in New Zealand using mock scenarios and
observation analysis of emergency managers during training exercises in the
Emergency Operations Center Lab at Massey
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Technology can be rendered
useless in extreme situations absent appropriate communication and task
performance protocols. So establishing guidelines and communication protocols
for ergonomically sound task performance in emergency management has the
potential to transform the response to human needs in catastrophic events.
Project outcomes will lay the foundation for maximizing communication resources
for first responders during relief efforts while significantly impacting the
quality of aid rendered.