* 1251129
* CSR: EAGER: An Integrated Framework for Performance and Reliability in Large-scaled Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Ningfang Mi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 272,351.00

Large-scale computing environments such as data centers and cloud computing are
becoming the core computing infrastructure, making the availability of such
services extremely critical. However, these environments are increasingly
vulnerable to both hardware and software failures. This project designs failure-
aware techniques for modeling, prediction, and resource management in large-
scale computing environments with the presence of hardware and software failures
at various levels. Intellectually, this project develops fundamental
understanding of workload and reliability characteristics, and investigates how
improved capacity planning models and prediction techniques can obtain useful
information for system design and maintenance. This project further provides
insights of the impact of software/hardware component failures in the area of
resource management.

The results of this project will include new capacity planning models that
evaluate both reliability and performance of a given system and new prediction
techniques that forecast the future failure occurrences by taking advantage of
temporal dependence in failure events. Based on the modeling and prediction
techniques, this project will develop new failure-aware runtime strategies for
job scheduling, node allocation, and system maintenance, aiming to achieve high
system performance and reliability in complex large scale systems.