* 1251824
* Incorporation and elimination of molecular oxygen signal in sulfate: Experiments and modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Huiming Bao, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2016
* USD 340,001.00

The stable isotope composition of atmospheric Oxygen in the geological past
conveys rich information on the history of Earth system. Few compounds, however,
are known to record oxygen isotope composition directly and reliably. Sulfate,
being a non-labile oxyanion and capable of forming weakly soluble minerals, is
thus far the only viable carrier from which direct atmospheric oxygen signals in
the distant past can be retrieved. Nonetheless, how the oxygen signal is
initially incorporated, later removed, or finally retained in sulfate is not
clear. Earlier studies and the investigator?s initial results indicate that both
water and oxygen contribute to the oxygen in intermediate and final
sulfoxyanions generated during pyrite oxidation to sulfate. These earlier
results also revealed that the current mechanistic understanding of the sulfide
oxidation process is evidently inadequate. The full potential of this oxygen
archive can only be attained through a study focusing on the kinetics of sulfur
redox cycling. In this project, the investigator sets to develop and test, both
theoretically and experimentally, a set of non-equilibrium, dynamic models for
the oxygen signal incorporation during sulfide oxidation and for the oxygen
signal elimination during dissimilatory sulfate reduction. It is expected that
the study will 1) present a new mechanistic interpretation of sulfide to sulfate
oxidation on mineral surface and in solution; 2) account for the intrinsic
dynamics of competing oxidation and exchange pathways; and 3) unify the many
chemical variables that appear to be responsible for the final oxygen
apportionment in sulfate. At least five model predictions will be tested by
quantifying rates of oxidation and exchange reactions as reflected in the oxygen
isotope composition of sulfoxyanions. The experiments will utilize three-oxygen-
isotope labeled water by which subtle changes in apportionment and in the
magnitude of fractionation can both be measured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
this study is initially driven by an interest in understanding a mysterious non-
mass-dependent sulfate oxygen-17 depletion found in world-wide post-glacial
deposits at about 635 million years ago, the result will offer an exemplary
solution to a class of science problems that involve a set of dynamic isotope
fractionation processes that rarely reach equilibrium. The project will be led
by a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student along with assisting
undergraduate and high-school students of diverse ethnic and cultural
backgrounds. Research results will be disseminated in introductory and upper-
level undergraduate classes and in two local high schools. Two teaching modules
will be developed to convey scientists? efforts in exploring mineral archives
for ancient atmospheric signatures.