* 1251324
* English Dialect Features of Indigenous People in North America: A Cross-Continental Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,03/31/2017
* James Stanford, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 03/31/2017
* USD 87,679.00

This project will examine whether indigenous communities across North America
have a shared set of English dialect features. Despite the long history of
linguistic research on Native American and Canadian First Nations languages, the
English dialect features of such communities are noticeably understudied.
English plays an important role in indigenous identity across Native America,
even though it is not as well known as some other minority dialects. Moreover,
most prior research on Native American English features has lacked a continent-
wide perspective or lacked quantitative analysis and insiders' perspectives,
thus making it difficult to uncover shared patterns. Dr. Stanford's study helps
fill these gaps in knowledge about language behavior in North America, while
also empowering Native people as sociolinguistic researchers in their own
communities. Specifically, it is hypothesized that many Native American and
First Nations people across the continent are linguistically constructing a
shared indigenous ethnic identity through a set of contemporary English
features, including pitch, rhythm, and grammatical features; these features are
most prevalent when Native speakers are interacting with other Native
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This two-year study engages three field sites:
(1) Standing Rock Sioux Reservation in North/South Dakota, (2) a Sahtu Dene
community in Northwest Territories, Canada, and (3) the diverse Native community
at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire. Recorded interviews include
directed conversation activities and free speech. Pitch and rhythm features are
then analyzed with acoustic phonetic methods, and grammatical forms are analyzed
quantitatively. Two Native American participants who recently graduated from
Dartmouth will conduct field research in their own communities and play key
roles in distribution of the new knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Results will
be distributed for both Native and non-Native audiences. Linguists have long
promoted the fact that ethnic minority dialects are logical, orderly, linguistic
systems, and such information has been valuable for inter-ethnic relations and
community self-esteem. But for Native American English, distribution of these
socially important perspectives has been much more limited. Dr. Stanford will
provide presentations and community discussions, printed materials, and a public
interactive website for U.S. reservations and Canadian First Nations
communities. In all of these activities, he will coordinate closely with local
Native Elders and tribal councils to ensure that the project is beneficial on
all sides.