* 1251599
* CIF: EAGER: Modeling and Querying of Probabilistic Biological Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Alin Dobra, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 174,925.00

Many critical functions performed by organisms are governed by a complex network
of interactions among various biochemical molecules. Understanding how different
functions are served through these interactions is of utmost importance. Like
many processes in the biological realm, interactions are probabilistic events.
An interaction may or may not happen with some probability, depending on a
variety of factors such as the size, abundance or proximity of the interacting
molecules. The probabilistic nature of the interactions introduces significant
computational challenges in studying biological
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops novel computational techniques that characterize and compare
probabilistic networks. More specifically, this proposal addresses the following
problems.&lt;br/&gt; - (Modeling) It will develop novel mathematical models that
characterize topological properties of probabilistic networks precisely and
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;- (Comparative analysis) It will develop a framework that
allows comparing biological networks when at least one of them is
probabilistic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing the implications of
uncertainties in interactions of biological networks is a computationally
interesting and challenging problem. The main difficulty is that probabilistic
interactions yield an exponential number of alternative network topologies. At
the heart of this project lies a novel mathematical technique based on
probability generating functions. This technique reduces a broad set of
questions on the network structure to operations on polynomials resulting in
very efficient algorithms. This project will use this technique to address the
problem of aligning probabilistic biological networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Numerous applications follow an
interaction pattern that resembles biological networks. Wireless networks,
sensor networks, social networks and homeland security are just a few examples.
A critical common property of these applications is that the interactions that
define them are probabilistic events. This project will enable studying such
networks and thus will help answering fundamental queries such as: What are the
similar patterns between two social networks?, How fast do we expect a virus
spread through a given wireless network? precisely and efficiently even when
interactions are probabilistic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also have
educational impact. The PIs will recruit and train a graduate student as a part
of this project. Finally, the code developed in this project will serve as an
excellent educational tool to analyze and query data for a broad spectrum of
applications, where the database consists of a set of interacting entities.