* 1251703
* EPSCoR Planning Grant
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Jason Biggs, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 403,557.00

The University of Guam (UOG) will coordinate a Region-wide planning effort that
will include members of the U.S. Affiliated Pacific-territories of Guam,
American Samoa, Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. freely associated states
of Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of the Marshall Islands, and
Republic of Palau. By developing a science and technology (S&amp;T)
infrastructure, Guam and other U.S. Pacific Islands, will be able to address
current economic and environmental challenges. The UOG is developing a plan to
address education reform and research infrastructure improvement, both of which
will impact and improve the Islands' S&amp;T workforce. Within that plan, this
project will support a regional planning effort to: (i) develop a priority list
of coastal and marine research issues to be addressed through a Guam led EPSCoR
RII Track I proposal; (ii) develop a second level list of scientific issues to
be vetted by the Pacific Region Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(PacSTEM) Coalition for inclusion in the long-term PacSTEM S&amp;T Plan; and
(iii) partner with regional STEM education and outreach initiatives to add
contemporary sustainability content and workforce development strategies to
existing programs, and establish new certificates and AAS programs in coastal
and marine sciences. The PacSTEM S&amp;T Plan will determine the future science
and engineering thrusts for Guam and the region in the years ahead and will play
a critical role in establishing and implementing a long-term S&amp;T
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The U.S. island associated
states and territories of the Western Pacific are challenged by the extreme
effects of climate change, population growth on Guam, and bio-security risks
occasioned by these significant changes. Island sustainability is therefore a
major regional and economic issue. UOG has scientific focus on marine resources,
from ridges to reefs, and is an emerging university in the field for
interdisciplinary, collaborative scientific research. By organizing S&amp;T
capacity-building around the coastal and marine research theme, popular and
economic support will be generated within the community. It will also create
lasting STEM career opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project has a high potential for broader impacts in the Western Pacific U.S.
territories and affiliated states. This region is isolated, the infrastructure
is underdeveloped, and the population is largely underrepresented and
underserved in STEM. This project will allow UOG to lead the development of a
regional S&amp;T plan and develop a full proposal to improve the research
infrastructure. These efforts will have significant impacts on Under Represented
Minority (URM) groups, including Pacific Islanders. The proposal includes
coordination between UOG and community colleges and other educational
institutions on Guam and the partner islands.