* 1251131
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Big Multilinguality for Data-Driven Lexical Semantics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Chris Dyer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2015
* USD 249,994.00

A key challenge in natural language processing is defining the computational
representation of words. Data-driven distributional approaches use corpora to
induce vector-space representations for words, based on the contexts they occur
in. This project goes beyond traditional approaches (e.g., latent semantic
analysis; Deerwester et al., 1990), which use words that tend to occur near a
word in corpora to define the context, by extending the types of contexts used
in constructing semantic vectors. First, this project incorporates translation
contexts, i.e., words readily available in multilingual parallel corpora,
alongside traditional monolingual corpora. This allows evidence-sharing across
languages, most importantly from resource-rich languages with large corpora to
more resource-poor languages. Second, this project incorporates social context
inferable from social network platforms, captured through author, time,
geographic, and social connection metadata. Taken together, these additional
features give a broader definition of a word's context and lead to a more
unified approach to the distributional approach to modeling human language,
moving in the direction of a language-independent semantics. The project focuses
on ten typologically diverse languages representing several major language
families (English, Arabic, Chinese, Spanish, Russian, German, Portuguese,
Swahili, Malagasy, and Farsi). A key emphasis is scaling up algorithms for
inferring distributional representations to web-scale corpora and dealing with
much larger contextual vectors representing the expanded notion of context. The
approach also leverages noisy syntactic processing to enable syntactic
information, rather than just information about neighboring words, to be
considered when defining context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to improving
the quality of the learned lexico-semantic representations by including richer
contextual information, this project creates lexical semantic representations
that link word types across languages. These have direct use in text processing
applications such as text categorization, machine translation, information
extraction, and semantic analysis of text, and they will enable the construction
of robust lexical semantic resources in lower-resource languages that benefit
from the richness of resources in languages they are paired with. The
multilingual vector representations produced will be released to the research
community and will be used in undergraduate class projects. The project provides
integrated educational and research experience for two graduate students in a
dynamic research environment. The project website
(http://www.ark.cs.cmu.edu/BigMultilinguality) will be used for dissemination of
results.