* 1251952
* Collaborative research:   Quantifying weathering rind formation rates using U-series isotopes along steep gradients of precipitation, bedrock ages and topography in Guadeloupe
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lin Ma, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,442.00

The process of mechanical and chemical decomposition of volcanic rocks at the
Earth's surface (i.e., weathering) regulates the global carbon cycle, releases
nutrients to ecosystems, and sculpts landscapes. Despite its fundamental
importance, we still lack effective tools and key observations to quantify the
weathering rates of volcanic rocks and to understand how they respond to changes
in climate and tectonic regime. During weathering, rock fragments in soils
commonly form weathering rinds. These rinds can provide an ideal long-term
record to help understand the controls of chemical weathering. Investigators
propose to combine a novel U-series isotopic technique with bulk chemical,
petrographic, and electron microprobe analyses to quantify formation rates of
weathering rinds on the tropical volcanic Basse-Terre Island of French
Guadeloupe. By comparing weathering rinds from a single watershed, they will
understand the controls on weathering rind formation at the micro-scale through
processes including dissolution, formation of new phases, and development of
porosity. In addition, the field setting at Basse-Terre Island provides a superb
natural laboratory with large environmental variables, allowing them to study
rind formation along steep gradients of precipitation, bedrock ages and relief
at large watershed scale. The combined analysis of weathering rinds will provide
a novel and fundamental method to directly determine chemical weathering rates.
This will be of broad interests to scientists worldwide studying the Critical
Zone or Earth's surface layer extending from the top of the vegetative canopy to
the base of groundwater. For example, such an approach provides a direct means
to understand the controls on chemical weathering across different spatial
scales. The gained insights will also help to understand how changes in
precipitation affect mineral dissolution and reaction surfaces in rinds and
soils, and how these processes control river chemistry over long time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together resources and
expertise from the U.S., France, and UK. Graduate and undergraduate students at
Univ. of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), one of the largest Ph.D.-granting Hispanic
Serving Institutes in the U.S., and Dickinson College, an undergraduate-only
liberal arts college in Pennsylvania will conduct research at an international
Critical Zone research site (Guadeloupe, France) and in research facilities at
Pennsylvania State University, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, Univ. of
Strasbourg, and Univ. of Bristol. This importance is highlighted for UTEP and
Dickinson College where the students are rarely exposed to such opportunities at
international levels. This project will also support one early career faculty
(PI Ma) at UTEP. Educational and outreach activities at UTEP and Dickson
College, in collaboration with the NSF funded Pathways and STEP Scholars, as
well as Earth Science Day at UTEP, will expose local high school students and
general public in the rapidly growing and diverse El Paso region to cutting edge
Critical Zone research topics (water, soils, and environments). The project will
attract future STEM students who wish to study and solve emerging environmental
problems facing the local community.