* 1251711
* RUI: Information Avoidance and the Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Kenneth Savitsky, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 187,725.00

Individuals often avoid information that may be negative or unpleasant. For
example, they may avoid getting tested for a disease or avoid obtaining
information related to their disease risk despite the fact that early knowledge
can often increase the efficacy of treatment. What leads individuals to avoid
information, and are there factors that can reduce this resistance? Much of the
research on information avoidance has been conducted in the context of health,
examining how individuals manage potentially negative health-related
information. Building on these theoretical and empirical findings, this research
project will extend into the environmental domain and examine the psychology of
"environmental information avoidance," or people's failure to seek out or even
actively avoid information about climate change and other environmental threats.
Individuals may engage in environmental information avoidance (a) to minimize
unpleasant emotions, such as dread, worry, or hopelessness; (b) to avoid
feelings of personal responsibility and guilt that might compel them to take
undesired environmental actions (or refrain from desired actions); or (c) to
avoid pressure to abandon or revise cherished personal beliefs that
environmental information might call into question. In addition, people may
avoid information about environmental threats as part of a strategic strategy
designed to persuade themselves that such threats are in fact not worrisome.
Eleven studies will experimentally test factors that contribute to information
avoidance as well as those that decrease this effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project responds to recent calls for behavioral scientists to address
the "human" side of climate change. Its results are expected to be useful for
advancing basic psychological theory. It may also assist in the development of
theoretically grounded, evidence-based approaches to better understand why
different people react in markedly different ways to information about possible
threats in environmental and other domains. Better knowledge regarding how
individuals seek and respond to information about the environment may help in
the formulation of educational plans and policies. Because human choice and
behavior play an important role in environmental problems, a consideration of
human psychology can be an important part of the solution. Because this project
will be conducted at a predominantly undergraduate institution, it will provide
opportunities to involve many undergraduate students meaningfully in
psychological research, preparing them for graduate study in psychology and
other behavioral sciences.