* 1251672
* Strategies for Navigating Uncertainty
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Kate Sweeny, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2017
* USD 383,213.00

People frequently face difficult waiting periods when they anticipate uncertain
news regarding their or their loved ones' health, relationships, professional
prospects, and academic outcomes. Such experiences are sufficiently significant
and common as to inspire the familiar expression, "the waiting is the hardest
part," yet very little research has examined the strategies people use to
navigate the difficult and often painful periods when they are waiting to learn
something. The primary goals of the proposed research are to better understand
the experience of waiting, to identify the processes by which people manage
uncertainty, and to reveal the strategies that are most effective, both for
managing anxiety during a waiting period and for maximizing benefit and
minimizing harm upon learning the uncertain news. Two longitudinal studies will
test the Uncertainty Navigation Model, which outlines a set of common strategies
for navigating uncertainty and makes predictions about the characteristics of
the person and the situation that influence use of these strategies. Study 1
will examine the experiences of people taking the California bar exam during the
several months while they await their exam results, and Study 2 will examine the
experiences of students in an upper-division psychology course over the several
days while they await their midterm exam grades. Participants in both studies
will repeatedly report their anxiety, rumination, and strategy use over the
course of the waiting period, and they will also report their reactions to the
news once they receive it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification of the strategies
people naturally use to navigate uncertainty could help dispel harmful myths
about how people should react in the face of uncertain outcomes. Research on
coping finds that myths about the "right" ways to cope can be damaging to people
who choose to cope in different ways, and it seems likely that myths about
coping with uncertainty would have similar consequences. For example, patients
who are encouraged to "think positively" as they await news about their health
might have trouble managing their expectations toward pessimism in an effort to
brace for bad news. Conversely, patients who are encouraged to "face the harsh
reality" as they await health news might have difficulty managing their anxiety
by reevaluating their priorities or embracing a hopeful outlook. The Uncertainty
Navigation Model includes an array of potentially effective strategies for
minimizing the anxiety of uncertainty, any of which might be more effective
under some circumstances or for some people than others, and one contribution of
the model and the proposed research is that they can reveal the diversity of
reasonable responses to uncertainty. In addition, the proposed research has the
potential to reveal key and novel insights into the best ways of navigating
uncertainty. Finally, the proposed research ensures broad participation of
underrepresented groups. Typically at least three-quarters of the research team
are racial or ethnic minorities, and between 60% and 75% are women. In addition,
women represent approximately 48% and minorities approximately 35% of the study
population.