* 1251946
* Tracing Aridity: Sedimentary Preservation of Scytonemin from Microbiotic Desert Soil Crusts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2013
* Benjamin Van Mooy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Aruguete
* 09/30/2013
* USD 251,000.00

(1) Technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deserts are a critical end-member
in biome reconstructions used to help constrain our understanding of
paleoclimatology. Yet given the lower fossilization potential for desert plants
and animals, direct paleontological evidence of climate change is much less
abundant from arid environments than from other terrestrial ecosystems. However,
following the model of wind-blown pollen, potentially continuous sedimentary
records can be derived from small eolian particles carrying molecular
biomarkers. We posit that one such molecule is scytonemin, a pigment that is
produced by cyanobacteria in desert microbiotic soil crusts to protect against
UV exposure. We have recently published a mid-Holocene record of sedimentary
scytonemin from the Black Sea, and stable isotope analysis supports a desert
microbiotic soil source for these molecules. Furthermore, the Black Sea record
coincided with 7-methylheptadecane, which is also enriched in desert microbiotic
soil cyanobacteria. In a pilot study, we showed that scytonemin is preserved in
Great Salt Lake sediments as old as 11,000 years, and its highest concentrations
appear to be associated with other sedimentary signs of arid conditions,
suggesting that scytonemin may be a representative tracer of cyanobacteria in
desert microbiotic soil crusts. Thus, we hypothesize that scytonemin is a
biomarker of aridity, with increased accumulation when deserts expanded and
cyanobacteria-dominated microbiotic soil crusts became more
prevalent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose developing scytonemin and
7-methylheptadecane as molecular biomarkers to reconstruct records of past
aridity in the late Quaternary and deeper into the Phanerozoic by addressing
four overarching questions: (1) Does scytonemin degradation yield molecular
fragments that are chemically recognizable and analytically tractable in ancient
geological samples? (2) What is the physiological relationship between
scytonemin and 7-methylheptadecane production in desert microbiotic soil
cyanobacteria? (3) Do scytonemin and 7-methylheptadecane distributions in the
Great Salt Lake and the Gulf of California reflect changes in aridity since the
Last Glacial Maximum? (4) Were the Late Permian and Early Triassic characterized
by increased aridity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research incorporates
biochemical, microbial physiological, organic geochemical, paleoclimatological,
and geological components. We anticipate showing that two types of compounds,
one a pigment associated with exposure to ultraviolet radiation and the other a
lipid associated with desiccation, produced by photosynthetic cyanobacteria in
desert soils can be used to trace the spread of arid conditions in the recent
(Holocene; the last 12,000 years) and distant (Permian-Triassic; ca. 252 Ma).
This work requires a combination of liquid and gas phase chromatography to
separate the target compounds from other organic molecules that are also found
in modern and ancient sediments. A variety of mass spectrometric techniques,
including high resolution mass spectrometry and stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometry, will help identify the target compounds and determine their
ecological source, for example if they were derived from desert soils or other
potential sources such as microbial mats. Ultimately, development of these
biomarkers should help us decipher past climate change using a new organic
geochemical approach that may modify or enhance our current understanding of
aridity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the past climate record
(paleoclimate) is arguably of great utility in enabling us to predict future
climate scenarios. Often, we can look to the fossil record to find information
about past climates. However, this leaves a gap in our knowledge about arid
environments, where it is less likely for a strong fossil record to exist. The
purpose of this project is to develop a method to inform us about past
conditions in dry places. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyanobacteria, which are
microorganisms found in desert soil crusts, produce molecules in response to
climactic conditions--one is a pigment, scytonemin, that acts as a "sunscreen"
to protect the cyanobacteria from UV radiation, and the other is
7-methylheptadecane, a lipid associated with dessication. In this study, the
research team will examine the production of these molecules by cyanobacteria in
response to environmental conditions, examine their breakdown products, and
determine the utility of these molecules as markers of aridity in past
environments. This work has implications for enabling us to build a more
complete understanding of the past behavior of dry environments, which could
help us to better model future climate in the arid environments of today.