* 1251187
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Collaborative Research: Real Time Observation Analysis for Healthcare Applications via Automatic Adaptation to Hardware Limitations
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Alexander Hauptmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 459,901.00

This research seeks to develop novel machine learning algorithms that enable
real-time video and sensor data analysis on large data streams given limited
computational resources. The work focuses on healthcare as an application domain
where real-time video analysis can prevent user-errors in operating medical
devices or provide immediate alerts to caregivers about dangerous situations.
The research will develop algorithms to automatically adapt data analysis
approaches to maximize accuracy of analysis within a short time period despite
limited available computing resources. Today's healthcare environment is
significantly more technologically sophisticated than ever before. Many medical
devices are now frequently used in patient's homes, ranging from simple
equipment such as canes and wheelchairs to sophisticated items such as glucose
meters, ambulatory infusion pumps and laptop-sized ventilators. The rapidly
growing home health industry raises new safety concerns about devices being used
inappropriately in the home setting. The proposed research is designed to reduce
medical device related use-errors by developing computational algorithms that
perform real-time video analysis and alert the patient or caregiver when medical
devices are not used appropriately. The real-time video and sensor data analysis
is also critical to the healthcare systems that monitor the activities of the
elderly or those with disabilities in order to allow a caregiver to react
immediately to an incident. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New machine learning theories
and algorithms will automatically adapt to hardware limitations, with the aim to
learn from a large number of training examples, a prediction function that (i)
is sufficiently accurate in making effective predictions and (ii) can be run
efficiently on a specified computer system to deliver time critical results.
Three types of prediction models are studied to address the problem of automatic
hardware adaptation, including a vector-based model, a matrix-based model, and a
prediction model based on a function from a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS). A general framework and multiple optimization techniques are being
developed to learn accurate prediction models that match limited memory and
computational capacity. The new learning algorithms will be evaluated in several
medical scenarios through real-time prediction of a patient's activities from
observations in the large video archives collected by several healthcare related
projects. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is in bridging the gap
between the high complexity of a prediction model and limited computational
resources, a scenario that is encountered in many application domains besides
healthcare. The proposed research in machine learning algorithms and theories
will make it possible to run complicated prediction algorithms on big data
within the limitation of a given computing infrastructure. The developed
techniques for automatic hardware adaptation will be applied to a large dataset
of continuous video and sensor recordings for medically-critical activity
recognition. The project's broader impacts include providing medical experts
with algorithms and tools supporting novel approaches to analyzing observational
data in their quest to recognize and characterize human behavior. Surveillance
systems with continuous observations will be able to categorize salient events
with co-located, limited hardware. Researchers with complex data from continuous
streams will be able to explore their domains with greater accuracy within
constrained time using their available computing resources. Similarly, large
archives can be exploited as rapidly as possible with limited hardware.