* 1251932
* Self-Regulated Forest Sustainability: A Simulation and Sociological Analysis of Voluntary Incentive Programs
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Audrey Mayer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 04/30/2015
* USD 89,705.00

How do new norms concerning resource management spread? Norm entrepreneurs are
people who are well-positioned and active in advocating for new norms. The role
of norm entrpereneurs has not been considered in voluntary resource management
practices; instead, current research indicates that these decisions are driven
primarily by economic and personal considerations. However, social influence
theory suggests that social influence plays an important but overlooked role in
spreading norms. Neighbors, private associations, and public management
officials are some of the significant norm entrepreneurs in resource management.
Interviews with private resource owners will be conducted to ask how decisions
are made, who influences these decisions, and where owners obtain information
about strategies. Interviews with select officials will also be conducted to ask
about interactions within the community, advice provided, and outreach methods
employed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit rests in its
development of the concept of norm entrepreneurs in a setting with many
individual decisionmakers, and in a natural resource context. This project will
explain how such social influence impacts individual resource owners' decision-
making. Using incentives to encourage voluntary adoption of practices has been
shown to be a socially acceptable alternative to state or federally mandates
implemented through regulations. This research will explore the likelihood of
enrolling in voluntary incentive programs, the level and type of incentive
required to elicit enrollment, and the degree to which social influence can
encourage greater levels of enrollment. The project's broader impacts are
substantial; the results will be applicable to a wide range of regions with an
interest in implementing alternative regulation methods for natural resource
management. Effective natural resource management on private lands is a question
of great economic importance.