* 1251151
* BIGDATA: Small: DA: Patient-level predictive modeling from massive longitudinal databases
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Marc Suchard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 688,969.00

Massive longitudinal healthcare data, such as administrative claims and
electronic health records, provide an opportunity to greatly enhance the
accuracy and clinical impact of patient-level predictions across a wide range of
outcomes. This research targets the national priority domain of healthcare IT
and showcases the advances that Big Data afford in helping patients make
informed healthcare decisions leading to improved outcomes. Other involved
stakeholders include healthcare providers, insurers and governmental agencies,
and the databases this proposed grant employs encompass diverse and vulnerable
patient populations, including the young, the poor and the elderly. Within this
context, this grant is seeking to predict patient-level health events based upon
personal characteristics and conditions. Accurate and well-calibrated
predictions could significantly improve the wellbeing of patients and
populations. This grant proposes to derive predictive models from massive
observational data and then, for example, predict that a particular patient has
an 18% chance of experiencing a stroke in the next 12 months. With this
prediction in hand, caregivers and patients can optimize medical interventions
and implement behavioral changes to hopefully prevent the predicted event.
Further, this grant integrates two graduate student researchers, whose mentored
experiences begin to rectify the shortage of data scientists trained at the
intersection of statistics and medicine, and provides general statistical
software tools for building large-scale predictive models from massive data
across scientific domains.

From a technical perspective, the proposed grant aims to first evaluate
performance and applicability of an existing predictive model across five
administrative claims and electronic health record databases covering over 80
million lives, using CHADS2 stroke risk as a motivating example. Then the grant
will develop an innovative data-driven process for building patient-level
predictive models from longitudinal observational data, and initially apply the
process to predicting stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation for comparison
of performance against CHADS2, Finally, the grant aims to explore
characteristics of the process and resulting models, such as: evaluation of out-
of-sample predictive performance in different databases; consideration of how
models change over time; and assessment of which clinical variables most
substantially contribute to patient-level predictions. Together, this research
will focus on identifying heuristics to extract clinically relevant predictors
from longitudinal electronic healthcare data, developing algorithms to use this
information in multivariate modeling through massive parallelization using
graphics processing units, optimized for data sparsity, and evaluating
performance based on accuracy in predicting outcomes at the patient level. As a
proof-of-concept, the grant will develop an approach to predict stroke risk and
apply this approach across five disparate data sources (80+ million patients,
including drugs, lab values, procedures, emergency room visits, primary care
visits, inpatient encounters, etc) that reflect diverse patient populations
across the US, including the privately insured, Medicare-eligible, and Medicaid
beneficiaries. The underlying goal of the grant is to apply innovative
statistical and machine learning techniques using advancing computer technology
to large-scale observational data to develop accurate and well-calibrated
patient-level predictive models enabling the prediction of future medical events
for individual patients.