* 1251516
* Collaborative Research to Understand the Role of Culture, Identity, Epistemology and Bi-Cultural Efficacy in American Indian Educational and Professional Success in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Douglas Medin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 311,981.00

This project is an empirical research study using a resiliency-based framework
to investigate the factors that contribute to American Indian and Alaska Native
(AI-AN) success and achievement in STEM education and careers. The focus is on
what makes people successful rather than what makes them fail. It was developed
through a partnership between the American Indian Science and Engineering
Society (AISES), the Office for Community Health (OCH) at the University of New
Mexico (UNM), and Northwestern University. The project is also
interdisciplinary, partnering researchers from Anthropology, Psychology and
Economics/Public Health with AISES to contribute a unique perspective on Native
participation in STEM. The aim of this research is to identify the role of
culture, individual identity, epistemology and bi-cultural efficacy in this
process. The guiding hypothesis is that AI-AN success in STEM is influenced by
dynamics of culture, epistemology and individual identity, with the role of bi-
cultural efficacy being particularly significant. The researchers are interested
in knowing: (a) What factors positively influence AI-AN success in STEM?; (b)
What role do the dynamics of culture, epistemology and individual identity play
in AI-AN success in STEM and how are these dynamics played-out in individual
experience?; and (c) Does bi-cultural efficacy play a role in this process, and
if so, what is that role?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The proposed collaboration uses
a mixed methods design, beginning with an ethnographic approach that will build
on advances in knowledge from the extensive literature on deficits and barriers,
and nascent research on epistemology, adding new empirical data. The research
consciously privileges voices of Native scholars whose experience is not well
represented in mainstream perspectives or taken into consideration by policy
makers. Adaptive project design through iterative data collection and analysis
with synthesis and incorporation of findings from different components ongoing
throughout the study will allow for dynamic inclusion of participant input. The
study includes four separate but integrated research components: (1) 75 in-depth
ethnographic interviews with 25 AI-AN STEM professionals and AISES members,
conducted in three iterative sets of 25 each; (2) Three AI-AN undergraduate
Student Research Scientists (SRS) from UNM will be mentored in the conduct of 36
peer interviews (12 each) with other AI-AN students; (3) Secondary analysis of
unique AISES organizational archive with 35 years of information on more than
6000+ AI-AN involved in STEM; and (4) a preliminary survey will be conducted in
year three of the project with 25 AISES members to validate measures of bi-
cultural efficacy that contribute to AI-AN success in STEM. The Principal
Investigators will mentor Native scholars to develop protocols, collect and
analyze data, present findings, and participate as members of the Research Team.
A Project Summit in Year Three will disseminate project findings to a broad
group of AISES stakeholders. This project will also structure a new role for
AISES to play in the STEM community by leveraging the unique position of AISES
as a national AI-AN STEM organization and developing data collection protocols
and data collection tools the organization can continue to use for research in
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Results of this research will increase
understanding of how AI-AN individuals leverage personal and cultural assets in
a way that embraces a congruency between Indigenous culture (Native science) and
Western science as they achieve success in STEM. This information will
contribute to the literature analyzing issues in AI-AN education and under-
representation in STEM and indicate directions for future research. Most
importantly, this research may lay the foundation for increasing the proportion
of AI-AN scientists. Factors that contribute to success and achievement of AI-AN
in STEM are often unrecognized, underappreciated or poorly understood. The
improved coherence of interventions that will result from better
conceptualization of the strengths and needs of AI-AN students will provide a
roadmap for developing best-practice and model-driven programming within
universities, improve AI-AN educational outcomes in STEM, and in turn,
contribute to improvements in AI-AN individual and community well-being.