* 1251916
* Inspection Group Dynamics and Deterrence
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Mark Cohen, Resources For the Future Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 04/30/2015
* USD 77,994.00

This study aims to determine whether the efficiency of inspections can be
improved by changing the number of inspectors sent to conduct an inspection.
Individuals behave differently in group settings and therefore inspections
conducted by a group, as opposed to a sole-inspector, may result in different
outcomes (such as in the severity of sanctions or the ability to deter future
violations). This study will also investigate several explanations for why an
additional inspector might matter, including collusion, social pressure or the
ability to share work. Concern has been expressed that inspectors might become
'captured' by the regulated party or that social pressure might dissuade
inspectors from issuing citations for violations. This project will add to the
small but growing literature on the behavior of enforcement agents as well as
identify the role of group effects in the inspector-inspected relationship as an
important area of scientific inquiry. This study will examine data from
government inspections of offshore oil and gas platforms in the Gulf of Mexico
to determine whether increasing the number of inspectors sent to a platform
influences the severity of penalties issued as well as the deterrence of future
oil spills, injuries, and fatalities. Two natural experiments (specifically,
daily variation in helicopter flying conditions and a permanent closure of an
inspections office) will be used to estimate the effect of inspection group size
and the number of prior visits of the same platform by the same inspector.

This project also has substantial broader impacts. Current budgetary pressures
on regulatory agencies underscore the importance of designing optimal
inspections. This project will provide new insights to regulators on the
effectiveness of increasing enforcement as well as how to properly deploy scarce
inspector resources. Concerns about inspection in the nuclear, coal mining, and
oil industries highlights the importance of understanding the role that
inspector intensity plays in ensuring compliance.