* 1251479
* Mineral Surface-Mediated Processes in Protocell Evolution: Membrane Self-Assembly and Emergence of Energy Transduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Nita Sahai, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 134,925.00

(1) Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose that geochemical aqueous
environment chemistry played an important role in selecting lipid membrane
compositions that were stable (survival of the fittest protocells). We will use
model "protocells" consisting of single-chain, multi-component amphiphile
vesicles as a prebiotic analog to biological membrane-forming lipids. We will
determine which mixed amphiphile compositions are stable under changing
environmental solution conditions. Surviving vesicle populations will be
quantitatively identified by fluorometry and UV-Vis spectroscopy and fittest
amphiphile concentrations will be determined by high-pressure liquid
chromatography. These vesicle compositions will be considered as the "fittest."
Vesicle stability will be examined for a wide range of solution pHs and in the
absence or presence of dissolved salts (NaCl, KCl, NaBr, CaCl2, MgCl2, MgSO4,
each at 0.01 and 0.1M concentrations). For a smaller number of samples, we will
also examine the temperature-dependence of vesicle stability. These conditions
will represent a wide range of geochemical environments, such as freshwater,
alkaline or acidic lake water, intertidal zone water and seawater. Results will
have implications for determining which geochemical environments would have
provided a selection pressure for survival of the fittest
protocells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Broader significance
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand a critical aspect of the
evolution of life, namely in figuring out how cells, the building blocks of
life, came to exist. An essential and critical component of cells is their
membranes, which encase all of their contents. These membranes are made of
lipids. In the history of the Earth, it is unknown what led to the formation of
stable lipid membranes. This research seeks to address this mystery by examining
the behavior of analogs to biological membrane-forming lipids under conditions
that represent different natural environments. In particular, this study will
examine the role that mineral surfaces can play in the formation of "protocells"
from lipids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to this project's implications for
the origin of life, increasing our fundamental understanding of the interaction
between minerals and lipid membranes has implications for medical geology,
nanomedicine, and the health/safety of nanotechnology.