* 1251563
* Meeting of US-EU Animal Biotechnology Working Group at Hinxton September 12 -13, 2012 for Strategic Planning on Cyber Infrastructure and Trans-Atlantic Sharing of "Omics" Datasets
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* John Liu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 31,049.00

This award provides support for travel to the Livestock Genomics meeting and
associated workshops at Hinxton, UK. The workshop will focus on developing a
strategic plan for "omics" data sharing and innovative analysis using trans-
Atlantic cyber infrastructure (CI) collaborations and also provide training of
young investigators on the latest bioinformatics and CI tools. An additional
novel aspect of this proposal is to bring together researchers from a number of
non-model species communities, to discuss sustainable cyber infrastructure
development. Technological breakthroughs have commoditized and democratized
production of "omics" datasets (such as genomics, proteomics, metabolomics).
Analyses of these large datasets are helping in enhancing our understanding of
basic biological mechanisms, species evolution, and a full range of other
related topics. US and EU researchers are playing the major role in developing
these resources and it will be useful to explore mechanisms for improved data
sharing. The meeting at Hinxton, UK will focus on the issues related to sharing
and analysis of large datasets by fostering collaborations between major cyber
infrastructure initiatives in biological sciences from US (iPlant) and EU,(EBI,
ELIXIR and allbio). The working group meeting will develop guidelines and
explore CI connectivity specifically for data sharing in animals. These
activities can be considered synergistic as they are applicable to other US-EU
biotechnology working groups dealing with plants, microbes, insects, and marine
species. The US-EU ABWG members will help develop a strategic plan whereas the
training component of CI and bioinformatics tools will help develop
computational strengths among graduate students, post docs, and young
investigators especially those from minorities and women. To extend the outcomes
and discussion from the meeting, travel support recipients will present a plan
for dissemination following the meeting. The invitees include both established
and emerging leaders in animal genomics that are both scientifically and
culturally diverse. A significant portion of the award funds will be used to
support travel for meritorious graduate students and post-docs. Participation in
the workshop will help expand diversity and encourage young scientists to stay
in science careers and begin to integrate cyber infrastructure, data sharing and
bioinformatic paradigms into biology laboratories.