* 1251337
* Gesture as a forerunner of linguistic change:  insights from autism
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Seyda Ozcaliskan, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 03/31/2018
* USD 385,000.00

Gesture acts as a forerunner of language development in typically developing
children. Children take their initial steps into sentences, and later, into
extended speech (narratives, explanations) using gesture-speech combinations
before expressing the same meanings entirely in speech. This project aims to
determine whether gesture also serves as a reliable index of burgeoning spoken
language abilities of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), who exhibit
delays and/or deviations in attaining similar milestones. This project
approaches this question by studying gesture and speech use at two crucial
milestones of language development, namely onset of sentences to request and
comment (study 1) and onset of extended speech in narratives and explanations
(study 2) using longitudinal observations. Study 1, focusing on first sentences,
examines changes in gestures and speech of 18 children with ASD and 18 typically
developing children, as they transition from producing single words to simple
sentences in two language contexts: commenting on objects and requesting
objects. Study 2, focusing on extended speech, examines changes in gestures and
speech of 25 children with ASD and 25 typically developing children in two
language contexts: producing narratives and providing explanations. Given the
reported difficulties children with ASD exhibit in gesture production at the
early ages--followed by delays in later speech production--the project asks
whether the pattern of gesture-speech combinations leading the way to early
sentences and later narratives/explanations is disrupted, or whether this
language-learning process is so robust that children with ASD, like typically
developing children, initially rely on gesture and speech together to convey
their emerging spoken language abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will make an important contribution in two major respects: First, the findings
will inform theories of language development about the robustness of the
gesture-speech system across different learners. Compared to typically
developing children, the language-learning trajectory of children with ASD shows
variability, with weaknesses in early commenting and later narrative contexts,
accompanied by relative strengths in early requesting and later explanation
contexts. Children with ASD also show unique deficits in early pointing
gestures, but relative strengths in later iconic gestures, making them an ideal
group to understand whether and how gesture is part of the developmental process
that supports language-learning across stages and contexts of language
acquisition. Second, the findings have potential clinical implications. Gesture,
when considered in relation to the accompanying speech, can be used to identify
when a child is in a transitional state with respect to a language milestone.
More specifically, children whose gestures convey different information from
their speech show more readiness to learn, and in turn, are also more likely to
benefit from instruction. As such, gestures might serve as a good index of
emerging language abilities, which, in turn, may help educators and clinicians
to identify the best time to introduce task-specific strategies for language
learning for children whose development is delayed or deviant. These strategies
could range from providing more targeted spoken language input to explicitly
encouraging children to use particular gestures when talking about the concepts
that they are at the cusp of learning--both of which have been shown to be
effective strategies in teaching new concepts to typically developing children.