* 1251345
* Collaborative Research:  Media Characters: The Unhidden  Persuaders in Food Marketing to Children
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Ellen Wartella, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 05/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Children's television viewing often involves extended experiences with familiar
characters. Unlike any previous technological age, these characters are now
present in many different kinds of media, including television programs and
advertisements, computer games, and mobile Apps. In addition to entertaining and
teaching viewers, these characters also sell to children, including unhealthy
foods that have been linked to the childhood obesity crisis that plagues our
nation. While characters such as these have been used as marketing tools for
many years, little is known about the extent to which this marketing is
effective, or the specific conditions under which children are susceptible to
its influence. The investigators will test their theory that the existence of
one-sided, emotionally-tinged friendships that children form with media
characters--known as parasocial relationships--are central to their influence.
The researchers will develop and validate an assessment scale for measuring the
strength of parasocial relationships and use it to determine what factors
influence relationship magnitude and predict the likelihood of media character
influences on children's preferences. The investigators will use an experimental
method in which children interact with a novel media character to explore the
dynamics of how parasocial relationships form and under what circumstances they
lead to strong influence. They will characterize the extent to which this
process varies between 3 and 8 years of age. Structural equation modeling will
be used to calculate the effect magnitude of different factors on parasocial
relationships and character motivation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Without research
about the underlying reasons for the obesity crisis, the future of our children
is in peril. US children are now expected to have shorter life spans than their
parents. Media characters may be playing an unhidden role in this epidemic.
However, these same characters may also be able to change children's food
choices and eating patterns by promoting healthier foods. The knowledge that
will be gained from this project can help scientists understand the important
role that media characters are playing in the childhood obesity crisis. This
information can then be used to help parents make healthy decisions for their
children in supermarkets and restaurants, to help businesses use their media
characters more wisely, and to inform legislators about the kinds of policies
that can improve the health and well being of future generations.