* 1251354
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Impacts of Climate Change on Homo Sapiens Diet and Technology in Coastal Morocco
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Emily Hallett, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2013
* USD 20,916.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Curtis Marean, Emily Hallett will analyze fossil
mammal remains from the archaeological site Contrebandiers Cave. Contrebandiers
Cave is located near the town of TÃ©mara, in the Atlantic Coast of Morocco. With
deposits dated to between 130,000 and 20,000 years ago, the site provides one of
the longest sequences of human occupation in North Africa during a critical time
period for early modern human origins and their diaspora out of Africa. Africa
is recognized within the scientific community as the continent where the
evolution of our species took place, yet the reasons for why we evolved in
Africa are still being explored. The ancient capacity for rich biodiversity in
Africa is likely to play a role in our discovery of why Africa was the location
for all major phases in human evolution. In addition, the evolution of our
species primarily took place when the earth was in a glacial phase. At the
continent scale, it has been demonstrated that Africa became arid during glacial
phases. Recent research has identified humid refugia in Africa during these arid
glacial phases. One of these refugia is the Maghreb, which has a poorly
documented Pleistocene fossil mammal and vegetation record.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to provide the first
chronology of terrestrial ancient environments and human diet in North Africa,
which will (1) answer questions of how early humans and terrestrial mammals
responded to the predicted desertification of the Sahara during glacial cycles,
(2) provide the environmental context for early advanced stone tools (called
"Aterian"), which possibly represent the first projectile technology, and (3)
describe how changes in climate, human population size, and animal exploitation
in Morocco contributed to local mammalian and avian extinctions. Fossil mammal
remains from Contrebandiers Cave will be used to test hypotheses on the impact
of glacial cycles on human diet, population size, technology, and dispersal.
Species level identification of roughly 20,000 bones will allow for the first
detailed reconstructions of ancient environment and vegetation in Morocco, while
ultimately adding a comparative sample to the more completely understood past
environments of East Africa and South Africa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has implications for human origins studies, and it also addresses how
our species and terrestrial mammals have responded to climate change in the
past. It will be of interest to scientists in the life sciences researching the
distribution of plants and animals in Africa and the Mediterranean basin. Recent
evidence for the earliest humans in Africa has begun to accumulate, debates
about human modernity have also escalated, and North Africa has gained
recognition as a largely unexplored area dense with Late Pleistocene human
artifacts and remains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
communication and collaborations between scholars and institutions in the USA
with colleagues in Morocco, France, Germany, Portugal, Spain, Canada, and
Australia as the Co-PI, Ms. Hallett, is part of a larger team of scientists
researching archaeological sites in Morocco. This research will be disseminated
to an international audience through scholarly articles and conference
presentations as well as public lectures to a general audience. Results from
this research will continue to be published in English and French journals in
order to reach scientists in French-speaking North African countries. The most
far-reaching impact of this study will be to broaden our understanding of the
Maghreb's ancient capacity for rich biodiversity, as it represents a coastal
refugium from what is today the largest desert in the world - the Sahara.