* 1251092
* Role of the Stratosphere in 11-Yr Solar Forcing of Surface Climate:  Diagnostic Comparisons of Observations With Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Lon Hood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2015
* USD 229,861.00

This project considers the response of lower stratospheric and surface climate
to the changes in insolation accompanying the 11-year sunspot cycle. Insolation
changes are hypothesized to affect stratospheric temperature as increases in
solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation cause increases in stratospheric ozone which in
turn lead to increases in stratospheric temperature (maximizing over the
tropics) and midlatitude zonal winds. The increased stratospheric zonal winds
then affect circulation at lower levels through the wave-mean flow interactions
associated with the "downward control" mechanism, producing a pattern of sea
level pressure anomalies including low pressure over the poles and high pressure
over the northern North Pacific. Work conducted under this award would examine
this "top down" mechanism for the influence of solar variability on surface
climate in simulations from two climate models, one in which the solar-induced
ozone anomalies are specified from satellite observations, and another (the
Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model, or WACCM) in which the ozone changes
are generated internally by the model in response to the insolation change. In
the WACCM simulations, the insolation change will be prescribed according to
several estimates of its spectral distribution, to determine the sensitivity of
the response to uncertainty in the UV component of the 11-year solar forcing.
WACCM simulations will also be used explore the sensitivity of the response to
additional factors including the phase of the stratospheric quasi-biennial
oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will have broader impacts through the
support and training of a graduate student, which will develop the scientific
workforce in this scientific area. In addition, a better understanding of the
impact of solar variability on climate may prove useful for understanding the
sensitivity of climate to external forcing, and the mechanisms which determine
the climatic response. Such information may benefit decision makers engaged in
policy decisions regarding climate change.