* 1251480
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the consumption response to fiscal stimulus payments: A Structural Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Greg Kaplan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,040.00

Collaborative Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the Consumption
Response to Fiscal Stimulus Payments:&lt;br/&gt;A Structural
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fiscal
stimulus payments (e.g., tax rebates and other forms of cash transfers to
families) are a very common policy instrument used by governments in the US and
other countries to stabilize aggregate economic activity and moderate the
effects of recessions on household welfare. Fiscal interventions of this type
have been authorized by Congress during the economic downturns of 1975, 2001,
2008, and 2009. Families have received payments of between $300 and $1,000,
depending on the specific episode and on household size. In the aggregate, these
fiscal outlays have been remarkably large: around $38B in 2001, $79B in 2008,
and $60B in 2009.&lt;br/&gt;There already exists a wide body of empirical
evidence, based on the spending patterns of a sample of US households around the
time of these policy episodes, which examines how household expenditures are
affected by fiscal stimulus payments. This collective body of empirical evidence
concludes that nondurable household consumption (i.e., spending on food,
utilities, personal services, transportation, gas, etc...) rises by around 30
percent in the quarter in which stimulus payments are received, and that this
estimate almost doubles when durable goods (e.g., small household durables and
cars) are included. These findings are somewhat puzzling since existing economic
theories predict that households will only spend a much smaller fraction of the
payment, and will either save the majority (or use it to pay down
debt).&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to develop an economic
model that both provides a coherent explanation for the large observed response
of household consumption expenditures to fiscal stimulus payments, and can be
used to predict the spending patterns of households in response to future
episodes of stimulus payments under different macroeconomic conditions. The
proposed research relies on the central insight that households spend a
substantial part of their payments because a large fraction of households are
liquidity constrained. In particular, survey evidence on household portfolios
suggests that even households who own substantial wealth in the form of cars,
home equity, or retirement accounts can be constrained because such assets are
illiquid, i.e., it is costly to convert these assets into the cash needed to
sustain consumption expenditures in a recession. For this reason, a significant
fraction of fiscal stimulus payments -which are instead liquid- is spent very
rapidly.&lt;br/&gt;As learned painfully from the last downturn, recessions are
not all alike. This means that despite the existing empirical evidence, one
cannot assume that future stimulus payments of different amounts in different
economic conditions will have the same effects on spending. The propsed economic
model will be useful to evaluate what the aggregate effects of fiscal stimulus
payments would be under different macroeconomic and liquidity conditions. The
model will also provide a framework for running 'counterfactual' policy
experiments in order to gauge the benefits of fiscal stimulus payments relative
to alternative fiscal policy options that are also aimed at providing temporary
relief to US households during economic recessions. This is important because
the money that is spent on fiscal stimulus payments could arguably be spent on
other policies that may also increase household expenditure, such as, increasing
the generosity of unemployment benefits, or reducing indirect taxes on
consumption spending.