* 1251201
* BIGDATA: Small: DCM: Open Flow Enabled Hadoop over Local and Wide  Area Clusters
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Robert Grossman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 05/31/2017
* USD 749,806.00

BigData: Small: DCM: Open Flow Enabled Hadoop over Local and Wide Area
Clusters&lt;br/&gt;Robert L. Grossman&lt;br/&gt;University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the recent years, data intensive programming
using Hadoop and MapReduce has become more and more important. As normally
deployed, Hadoop's implementation of MapReduce in a multi-rack cluster is
dependent upon the top of the rack switches and of the aggregator switches
connecting multiple racks. To use Hadoop effectively at scale across many racks
requires expensive network switches and routers that are complex to configure
and to maintain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software defined networks using OpenFlow
have proven in many cases to offer good performance at lower cost and to be
simpler to manage. The first goal of this proposal is to contribute to the
development of a new version of Hadoop called Hadoop-OFP. The basic idea of
Hadoop-OFP is to integrate OpenFlow enabled switches with Hadoop: to i) improve
performance; ii) lower the cost of the hardware required; and iii) simplify the
management of the cluster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large data flows are also a
critical component of data intensive computing. Unfortunately, setting up
networks to manage large data flows can be challenging. A second goal of this
proposal is to develop a tool that can configure OpenFlow enabled networks to
handle more efficiently the large data flows that arise with data intensive
computing.