* 1251258
* BIGDATA: Small: DCM: DA: Collaborative Research: SMASH -- Scalable Multimedia content AnalysiS in a High-level language
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Kurt Keutzer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2016
* USD 346,017.00

This big data project develops tools to support researchers and developers in
the task of prototyping multimedia content analysis algorithms in a large scale.
Typically, scientists and engineers prefer to use high-level programming
languages such as Python or MATLAB to conduct experiments, as they allow for a
quick implementation of a novel idea. Experiments on big data, however, are
often computationally-intensive and therefore must eventually be recoded into a
low-level language by expert programmers in order to achieve sufficient
performance, creating a gap between productivity and performance. In addition,
multiple strategies may exist for mapping a problem onto parallel hardware
depending on the input data size and the hardware parameters, further
exacerbating the problem. Using the application area of multimedia content
analysis as an example (an area with one of the largest and the fastest growing
amounts of data due to the steady upload of consumer produced videos), this
project performs research on a pattern-oriented, application-specific
specialization framework that uses a tiered approach to parallel programming.
The ultimate aim is to provide the scalability of diverse parallel processing at
the productivity level of high-level languages.

Social media videos are increasingly being used for scientific research, as they
allow us to observe and model many phenomena studied, for example, in social
sciences, economics, meteorology and medicine. More scalable content analysis
impacts any field that uses social media videos. Moreover, social media videos
are an everyday part of many people's lives. Making multimedia content analysis
more scalable allows for better algorithms to be developed by more students and
researchers, and therefore impacts many people's lives. The framework is made
available on the project website (http://smash.icsi.berkeley.edu).