* 1251590
* Broadening Women's Participation in STEM: The Critical Role of Belonging
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Steven Pollock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,030,439.00

This research seeks to understand the causes of women's lower rates of
participation and achievement in STEM compared to men. The focus is specifically
on the role of belonging in STEM defined as feeling a sense of fit, personal
acceptance, respect, and inclusion as a member of an academic discipline. The
study builds on two key prior observations: (1) belonging is well documented to
facilitate a range of positive academic outcomes such as achievement and
motivation, but (2) women report feeling a lower sense of belonging in STEM than
do men. Recent research, including preliminary work by the research team,
indicates that such gender differences in belonging underlie gender differences
in STEM representation and achievement, but key questions remain. First, why do
women experience a lower sense of belonging in STEM than men? The research
addresses this by investigating theoretically-derived antecedents of belonging
and how they may produce differences in belonging between men and women in STEM.
Second, how does a thwarted sense of belonging in STEM translate into lower
performance and motivation? The proposed research specifically tests whether
questioning one's sense of fit in a domain consumes cognitive resources that
would otherwise be used for learning and performance, producing reductions in
working memory capacity that underlie the negative effects of low belonging on
academic outcomes. The particular focus in this research, to be conducted at the
University of Colorado, will be women?s achievement and retention within the
physical sciences, technology engineering, and math (pSTEM), where gender
disparities have been particularly large and
persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research questions will be addressed with
a large prospective field study and several experimental lab studies. The field
study assesses both the antecedents of belonging, and the impact of belonging on
short-term and long-term academic outcomes. This will be accomplished by
surveying men and women enrolled in gateway pSTEM classes several times during
the semester, then tracking their academic performance throughout their college
career. Factors identified in past research as possible antecedents of belonging
(instructor support, general social support, compatibility of life goals with
pSTEM careers, and salience of gender stereotypes in pSTEM) will be measured
earlier in the semester, and their impact of end-of-semester belonging will be
assessed. We will also assess how belonging in turn influences course outcomes
(e.g., course grade), as well as longer-term outcomes such as grades in
subsequent pSTEM classes and retention in a pSTEM major. The field study will be
complemented by controlled lab studies that test the direct effect of belonging
on performance and learning, and whether any decreases in belonging are driven
by reduced working memory capacity. These studies will take the form of varying
situational cues that should impact belonging among women, then measuring
working memory capacity and either performance on tests of already learned pSTEM
material or learning of new pSTEM content. Analyses will assess whether
decrements in women's performance and learning are mediated by decreases in
working memory capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite meaningful increases in
the number of women pursing STEM disciplines in college, women's pursuit of and
achievement within pSTEM disciplines still lags behind that of men. The main
goal of this research is to understand the role that a sense of fit and
acceptance within STEM plays in this gender gap. The ultimate goal is to inform
empirically-rooted interventions that foster a secure sense of belonging among
all students pursing pSTEM. For example, knowledge of factors that influence
belonging, and how such factors may operate within actual pSTEM classes to
produce lower belonging almng women, could be used to shape educational
practices to minimize such gender differences. Similarly, knowledge of how
threats to belonging impair performance and learning could lead to strategies
that minimize these effects in authentic learning contexts. Moreover, while the
proposed work is focused on understanding gender disparities in belonging and
how these produce gender disparities in pSTEM achievement and representation, a
fuller understanding of how belonging translates into positive academic outcomes
should serve the broader goal of increasing participation among other
underrepresented groups, as well as facilitating achievement and retention of
all students in STEM.