* 1251859
* Efficient, accurate and rapidly convergent algorithms for solutions of wave propagation problems in configurations complex material and geometrical features
* MPS,DMS
* 06/30/2012,06/30/2013
* Catalin Turc, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Curry
* 06/30/2013
* USD 43,492.00

Turc&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1008076&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops
efficient, accurate and rapidly&lt;br/&gt;convergent algorithms for evaluation
of the interaction between&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic fields and complex
structures. Specifically, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator and his collaborators
develop a family of algorithms&lt;br/&gt;that focus mainly on (1) Fast, high-
order numerical solutions for&lt;br/&gt;wave-propagation problems in domains
that contain geometric&lt;br/&gt;singularities, and (2) Scattering problems from
penetrable&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic periodic structures, with a particular
emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on resonant problems relevant to the design of photonic
crystals&lt;br/&gt;and Negative Index Materials (NIM). The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;concentrates on development and implementation of a
massively&lt;br/&gt;parallel computational framework based on integral
equation&lt;br/&gt;formulations capable of producing fast and high-order
solutions&lt;br/&gt;of wave scattering problems of realistic complexity.
The&lt;br/&gt;approach consists of the following main elements: (a) High-
order&lt;br/&gt;resolution of the singularities of the solutions of the
boundary&lt;br/&gt;integral equations in non-smooth domains;
(b)&lt;br/&gt;Pseudodifferential-calculus-based design and analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;well-conditioned integral equation formulations leading to
small&lt;br/&gt;numbers of Krylov-subspace iterations for a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic transmission problems; and (c) Use of
equivalent&lt;br/&gt;sources, FFT-based acceleration algorithms, and
implementations&lt;br/&gt;that take advantage of the newly available Graphic
Processing&lt;br/&gt;Units (GPUs) computational platforms to dramatically
enhance&lt;br/&gt;computational times and capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The algorithms that are developed as part of this project&lt;br/&gt;are of
fundamental significance to diverse applications such
as&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic interference and compatibility
(electronic&lt;br/&gt;circuits), dielectric/magnetic coated conductors, and
composite&lt;br/&gt;meta-materials (photonic crystals and Negative Index
Materials). &lt;br/&gt;The simulation of electromagnetic wave propagation in
complex&lt;br/&gt;structures gives rise to a host of significant
computational&lt;br/&gt;challenges that result from non-coercive
formulations,&lt;br/&gt;oscillatory solutions, geometric singularities,
resonances, and&lt;br/&gt;ill-conditioning in the high-frequency regime. The
recent&lt;br/&gt;efforts of the investigator and his collaborators resulted in
the&lt;br/&gt;development of a highly efficient computational methodology
that&lt;br/&gt;resolved several of these difficulties and whose
extension&lt;br/&gt;enables the fulfillment of an ambitious plan: to simulate
with&lt;br/&gt;high fidelity realistic scattering environments with a
high&lt;br/&gt;dynamic range.