* 1251869
* Collaborative Research:   The provenance of "Grenville" age detrital zircon in western North America and the  Neoproterozoic to early Paleozoic evolution of southwestern Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Christopher Fedo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 02/29/2016
* USD 40,007.00

Collaborative Research: The provenance of "Grenville" age detrital zircon in
western North America and the Neoproterozoic to early Paleozoic evolution of
southwestern Laurentia

R. Lang Farmer, University of Colorado, EAR-1251851 Christopher Fedo, University
of Tennessee, EAR-1251869

ABSTRACT Detrital zircon U-Pb age determinations have become a primary tool in
siliciclastic sedimentary provenance studies due in part to the advent of rapid,
in situ methods of obtaining isotopic data from individual zircon grains.
However, the ability to collect such data is outstripping our understanding of
the limitations of using U-Pb age spectra in interpreting continental tectonics
and paleogeography. In this study, PIs are interested in assessing the
significance, in terms of the sediment provenance, of variations in the age
spread and relative peak height of specific detrital zircon age populations in
siliciclastic sedimentary successions. Their approach is through combined in
situ zircon U-Pb and Hf isotope analyses, data to be obtained using the laser
ablation-multicollector ICPMS technique. PIs will target Mesoproterozoic to
Cambrian sedimentary successions in the SW United States and northern Mexico,
rocks that have been extensively used for U-Pb detrital zircon studies, but for
which there is little detrital zircon Hf isotope data. Existing U-Pb age spectra
reveal that a significant fraction of the detrital zircons in these rocks were
derived from 1.0 Ga to 1.3 Ga ("Grenville") basement sources. The width and
relative peak heights described by detrital zircon in this age range vary
considerably both temporally and spatially within these sedimentary successions.
Many samples are dominated by ~1.1 Ga detrital zircon, which on the basis of
their U-Pb ages alone implies that these zircon were all derived from the same
Mesoproterozoic basement source. However, PIs pilot Hf isotopic studies of
"Grenville" detrital zircon show that the ~1.1 Ga grains vary by over 15
epsilonHf(0) units and reveal that these zircons do not all share the same
provenance. This fact is not recognizable from the U-Pb age spectra alone. Based
on this observation, it is suggested that combined U-Pb and Hf isotopic data can
be used to explore how changes in the characteristics of the "Grenville" peaks
in detrital zircon age spectra reflect changes in the ultimate bedrock source of
these detrital grains. A better understanding of the basement provenance for
Mesoproterozoic detrital zircons can, in turn, be used terms to refine models
for the Precambrian to early Paleozoic tectonic and paleogeographic evolution of
North America. PIs will conduct a broad survey of the U-Pb and Hf isotopic
compositions of potential sources of "Grenville" zircon amongst 1.0 Ga to 1.3 Ga
igneous rocks within the Grenville Orogen in the central and southern
Appalachians, in the Llano Uplift in Texas, and among the ~1.1 Ga igneous rocks
distributed throughout Paleoproterozoic crust of the SW U.S. and northern
Mexico. They will apply this information, along with whole-rock Nd isotopic
analyses on samples for which such data not already available, to assess the
provenance of "Grenville" detrital zircon in siliciclastic sedimentary rocks in
the Death Valley region and in the Caborca area of central Sonora (MX).