* 1251510
* WORKSHOP:  Workshop on Ethical Challenges of Experiments in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Scott Desposato, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 12/31/2015
* USD 49,909.00

This workshop at the University of California San Diego brings together an
international group of scholars from several social science disciplines,
representatives of institutional review boards, and professionals from the
research support and publication communities to address ethical issues emerging
in the design and implementation of experimental research. The workshop focuses
on identifying the central ethical issues, establishing clear guidelines, and
working toward a consensus in the field to protect the integrity of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is associated with
its attention to a growing approach to scientific inquiry across the social
sciences. Scholars have increasingly employed field, laboratory, and survey
experiments both inside and outside the United States to evaluate a range of
theoretically-driven questions. While obtaining clearance from US-based IRBs is
a regular requirement, standards do not exist for obtaining similar approvals
from the countries hosting the research activities. The workshop will address
the ethical, intellectual, and scholarly issues in conducting experimental work
outside the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop's broader impacts
are connected with its goal of developing recommendations for researchers across
the social sciences. The workshop will involve a range of experts who will
publish the findings and recommendations, making them available to the scholarly
community, professional associations, and the public.