* 1252874
* EAGER: Documenting the Spatial Pattern of Drought in Western North America During the Holocene
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 54,126.00

Drought in western North America impacts the environment and economy by limiting
water for municipalities, agriculture, forestry, hydropower, fisheries and
recreational uses. The problem of limited water resources will be compounded by
rapid population growth in the western U.S. and the loss of alpine snowpack and
glaciers. This problem will be especially difficult in the southern reaches of
this region, where alpine snowpack currently buffers stream flow during the
summer dry season. Documenting the timing, magnitude, duration and geographic
pattern of past wet and dry cycles is an important step toward understanding the
causes of droughts. This research will help scientists understand the frequency,
duration and magnitude of wet and dry cycles, help place the current drought
impacting the region in perspective, and aid policy makers so that they can make
better-informed plans regarding water resources. &lt;br/&gt; This EAGER grant
will use Holocene lake sediment records from British Columbia to reconstruct the
spatial and temporal patterns of drought and pluvial cycles along the cordillera
of western North America and help identify the underlying causes of these
events. The goal is to reconstruct two quantitative Holocene paleoprecipitation
records using consistent multiproxy methods, and to compare the results to
ongoing work on similar lakes in the western cordillera of North America. The
proposed locations in central and northern British Columbia contain numerous
lakes with geological and limnological characteristics similar to lakes
previously studied in Washington, Oregon, Montana, and the Yukon Territory.
&lt;br/&gt; The scientists will develop well-dated stable isotope data series
from lakes that produce and preserve authigenic calcium carbonate. This
carbonate records the oxygen isotope signal of lake water over time, which
reflects the frequency and duration of droughts. This data will then be used in
climate models to: (i) quantitatively interpret existing proxy data, (ii)
identify and rank the factors that influence the frequency and intensity of
aridity patterns such as synoptic teleconnections involving both El Ni√±o
Southern Oscillation-tropical Pacific climate dynamics and the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation, and most importantly, (iii) reduce the
uncertainty in probabilistic forecasts of future drought pattern responses to
anthropogenic forcing.