* 1252306
* CSR: EAGER: Exploratory Research on Scalable Resiliency Through Shadow Computing and Differential Data Replication
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Rami Melhem, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2015
* USD 299,800.00

As our reliance on IT continues to increase, future applications will involve
the processing of massive amounts of data and will require an exascale computing
infrastructure in which the number of computing, communications and storage
elements will increase by several orders of magnitude. Such an infrastructure
will inevitably incorporate new classes of high density, low latency and low
power non-volatile memory. This, in turn, will increase by orders of magnitude
the rate of failures making resiliency a major concern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses this resiliency challenge by taking
a radical approach to fault-tolerance, which goes beyond the current approach of
checkpointing and rollback recover. It introduces innovative and scalable fault-
tolerance mechanisms, namely shadow-computing and quality-of-data (QoD) aware
replication, as building blocks for a ?tunable? resiliency framework that
leverage the new and emerging memory technology and takes into consideration the
nature of the data and the requirements of the underlying application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the project will lead to new insights
into the multi-faceted and challenging resiliency problem in exascale computing
platforms. The expected outcomes of the project are a new fault-tolerance
computational model and a suite of QoD-aware replication methods that, when
combined with storage level resiliency, will lead to high availability with
minimized access delay in exascale computing environments.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to involve graduate and undergraduate students in
all its research thrusts. In addition to their contributions in the research
activities, involved students also participate fully in outreach, dissemination
and community efforts activities. The project also seeks to leverage existing
collaboration with industrial partners to involve students in summer internships
and provide them with first hand exposure to research and development in an
industrial setting. A main objective of the recruiting effort is to seek the
involvement of students from minorities and under-represented groups in the
project.