* 1252725
* CAREER: Efficient Statistical Inference using Neuroimaging data for Sample Enrichment and Optimizing Power
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2013,02/28/2021
* Vikas Singh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2021
* USD 493,976.00

Hypothesis testing on neuroimaging data traditionally has made use of classical
statistical tests (on uni-variate response variables). This makes sub-optimal
use of the structure of images, particularly problematic if the two groups being
tested have weak differences to begin with. Failure to detect statistically
significant differences may imply failure of the experiment itself. Acquiring
more images is expensive but also occasionally infeasible. This project develops
technologies to address these problems (particularly those dealing with
differential analysis of brain images) via the lens of computer vision and
machine learning. The algorithmic component of this project is (1) a suite of
convex optimization based multi-modal learning schemes to seamlessly leverage a
spectrum of brain imaging data, (2) new multi-resolution representations for
inference with surface/network based signals (data derived from
structural/functional brain images), and (3) using these mechanisms for boosting
statistical power even in experiments with small sample sizes.

The project has broad scientific impact. Extending the operating range of
statistical image analysis methods for neuroimaging will foster a new inter-
disciplinary area at the interface of computer vision, biostatistics, and
machine learning, which is highly intellectually stimulating. The research team
brings real neuroimaging research data for undergraduate/graduate students to
explore and study. The project goals also include training and mentoring of
students, increased involvement of under-represented groups, seminars, and an
extensive set of outreach activities. In addition, the resultant software tools
drive the analysis of neuroscience studies, which has clear broad societal
impact.