* 1252473
* M-LEAP 2: Continuing to Follow the STEM Trajectory of Students into High School
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Irene Goodman, Goodman Research Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 03/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The Massachusetts Linking Experiences and Pathways Follow-on (M-LEAP 2) is a
three-year longitudinal empirical research study that will continue examining
prospectively how early formal and informal STEM education experiences are
related to gender-based differences in STEM achievement-related choices in
middle and high school. M-LEAP 2 will serve as a complement to and extension of
the current NSF-funded M-LEAP, a primarily quantitative research study that has
followed overlapping cohorts of 3rd - 6th grade female and male students for
three years. M-LEAP surveyed over 1,600 students, 627 student-parent pairs, and
134 second parents in 8 diverse public schools across Massachusetts. In
contrast, M-LEAP 2 is a heavily qualitative three-year study using in-depth
interviews with 84 of the current students and their families.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is that it will
add to the explanatory model of STEM-related achievement choices, including
prospective career selection, and the gender disparities in STEM fields,
specifically by examining students at an earlier time point than has heretofore
been studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regarding broader impacts, study results
should build awareness among both informal and formal STEM educators regarding
gender differences in early STEM experiences and their relationship to future
choices. The knowledge gained should help stakeholders conduct activities that
will narrow gender gaps, take an informed approach to engaging both girls and
boys in STEM, and work with parents to understand various sources of influence
on their child's achievement-related choices.