* 1252346
* Empirical Research - Fostering Representational Competence with Virtual Models in Chemistry
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mary Hegarty, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 656,432.00

Many strong claims have been made about the benefit of learning with physical
and virtual (computer-based) models, especially in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Chemistry is an ideal domain to
investigate these issues because it is a spatially-rich domain that relies
heavily on a variety of 2D (diagrams) and 3D (models) representations, and
mastering these representations (i.e., developing representational competence)
is challenging for students, but essential for their growth as chemists or
scientists in other domains. A team of investigators from the University of
California, Santa Barbara, will investigate (1) whether models might serve as a
crutch or a scaffold for learning, (2) the extent to which interacting with
models affects representational competence, (3) whether the ?medium? of the
model (physical or virtual) is important in model-based learning, (4) which
perceptual (i.e., visual and haptic) cues and cognitive factors contribute to
meaningful learning, and (5) how gender and differences in spatial ability
affect model-based learning. This project will yield research-based (a)
practices for the development of curricula that integrate concrete and virtual
models as effective learning aids and (b) principles for the design of
meaningful model-based instruction.

The proposed project has the potential to inform teachers and curriculum
designers about how better to use models and other representations in chemistry
and other highly spatial STEM domains (e.g., geology, astronomy, anatomy, and
mechanical engineering), by contributing to our basic understanding of what
cognitive and perceptual factors affect learning. The knowledge gained from this
project will inform the effective design and delivery of new media made possible
by the explosive growth in availability of smart-phones and tablets in the
classroom. Finally, results of this project will inform our understanding of how
gender and differences in spatial ability contributes to learning with models in
STEM disciplines.