* 1252191
* Understanding and Performing High-Resolution Surface-Wave Attenuation Measurements with USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Victor Tsai, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 03/31/2017
* USD 281,159.00

"Understanding and Performing High-Resolution Surface-Wave Attenuation
Measurements with USArray"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on making
use of seismic wave amplitudes to achieve high-resolution images of the Earth's
crust and upper mantle. Velocity imaging using the travel times of surface waves
has been extremely successful, but interpretations of these velocity images are
non-unique. The amplitude analysis performed here constrains not only velocity
structure, but also density and attenuation structure. This extra knowledge
helps solve the non-uniqueness problem, allowing better constraints on key
features of the North American continent's deformation history, evolution, and
geochemical and tectonic structure. In particular, the high-resolution
attenuation measurements are potentially sensitive to features such as magma and
partial melt, water and other volatiles, as well as fault structures through the
differing dependencies of these features on intrinsic attenuation as compared
with seismic velocities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work provides higher
resolution images compared to previous attenuation and density imaging due to
the confluence of vastly improved station coverage by USArray with new data
processing techniques. On one hand, developments in theoretical and empirical
techniques allow for utilization of ambient noise attenuation tomography, even
when the noise sources are non-uniformly distributed. These ambient noise
methods promise to allow for improved spatial resolution compared to earthquake-
based studies due partly to the increased frequency band over which measurements
are successful. On the other hand, developments in array-based phase-front
tracking and amplitude mapping make it possible to use the dense station
coverage of USArray to account for focusing and defocusing effects and to reduce
the influence of source uncertainty. The convergence of this theoretical,
numerical and empirical work allows for accurate measurements of surface-wave
amplitudes, both for ambient noise and earthquakes, and allows for the density
and attenuation imaging considered here.