* 1252921
* EAGER: Data Association and Exploitation for Large Scale 3D Modeling from Visual Imagery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jan-Michael Frahm, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 296,480.00

This project addresses three main challenges in large scale 3D modeling from
photocollections: 1) efficient and complete data linkage, 2) Inference and
modeling of scene and user dynamics, and 3) development of data adaptive
algorithms. These challenges are tackled within the framework of data
association and exploitation. The benefits of such an approach are two fold.
First, through enhanced data association, the approach increases the scope of 3D
models due to more complete data linkage. Second, through the development of
algorithms that are not only robust against (and mitigate) input data
variability, but also explicitly designed to exploit this diversity and data
richness, the approach increases fidelity of 3D models. The specific data
association tasks of this project include: location recognition, view planning
for 3D reconstruction, online learning for feature matching, and modeling under
scene symmetries. The specific data exploitation tasks of this project include:
model update and archiving, native resolution modeling, high resolution dynamic
texture estimation, and exploring and leveraging user behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work enables the broad deployment of applications
where fully automated scene modeling expands from determining structure
properties to encompass the modeling of observable behavioral patterns both in
the scene and in the user controlled image capture process. The developed
technologies have a wide range of applications, from virtual tourism, to
cultural heritage preservation, to disaster response.