* 1252232
* CAREER: Examining xylem vessel network structure and function in woody plants using developmental and intra-organismal systems
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Anna Jacobsen, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2019
* USD 739,824.00

Water is transported in plants through vascular tissue called xylem. Within the
xylem of flowering plants, water is transported through multi-celled hollow
tubes called vessels. Most vessels are quite short and water must move from one
vessel to another, through microscopic pits in the walls of vessels, to travel
long distances within a plant. The many interconnected xylem vessels within the
vascular tissue combine to form the xylem vessel network. Although knowledge of
xylem vessel structure and function is important in understanding plant water
use and water transport, the structure of vessel networks remains little
studied. This study will examine xylem vessel network structural traits as they
relate to the xylem's ability to efficiently and safely transport water. The
overarching hypothesis to be tested is that vessel structure determines xylem
hydraulic function; however, the focus of the research will be on three specific
structural traits that have been little studied: vessel length, connectivity,
and network pit area. Importantly, all three of these traits represent xylem
structural features at the tissue level and all are features of the three-
dimensional xylem vessel network. This represents an important step beyond
traditional xylem structure-function studies that often rely on two-dimensional
cross-sectional analyses. The information generated by completion of the
proposed study will provide integral knowledge of the links between plant
hydraulic structure and function, and, specifically, the influence of vessel
network structure on hydraulic function in woody plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research on xylem structure and
function with community outreach and educational programs designed to involve
students from diverse backgrounds and scholastic levels in the scientific
process. Research and educational activities will be combined through
involvement in a K-12 outreach program, participation in a program for students
and teachers from regional high schools and the regional community college, and
through involvement of undergraduate and graduate students from the PI's home
institution, which is a minority serving institution. Undergraduate and graduate
students will participate in data collection, analysis, and the dissemination of
results, including presentation of results at national conferences.
Additionally, the PI, who is an early career female investigator at a
predominantly undergraduate institution, and her students will benefit from
active integration of research and teaching.