* 1252074
* Children's Recantation of Adult Wrongdoing: In the Field and In the Lab
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Lindsay Malloy, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 170,909.00

Child maltreatment is a significant public health concern. Children must be able
to disclose abuse to allow officials to identify victims, prosecute
perpetrators, and protect children. Children's ability to maintain consistent
abuse reports influences perceptions of their credibility. Recantation, which
means that children disclose but then retract allegations, is an inconsistency
in a story that raises problems for effective and fair protection of children.
The reasons why children recant have been hotly debated in recent years. Are
children who are more vulnerable to influence from adult family members at
greater risk for recanting? This question guides the proposed research.

First, the project examines the dependency court case files of child sexual
abuse victims. The main objectives are: (1) to identify variables that predict
recantation among actual cases of abuse, and (2) to investigate children's
patterns of disclosure after having recanted their report. Next, the researcher
will conduct an experiment, with the the primary objectives of: (1)investigating
the frequency with which children recant a report of a minor act of wrongdoing
in the laboratory; and (2) examining how children's age and supportive (or
unsupportive) comments from parents influence children's decisions to recant
their disclosure about the broken toy. The proposed studies will contribute to
understanding the processes by which children reveal the wrongdoing of others.
Results will shed light on children's developmental vulnerabilities and the
social influences on their reports of events.

Practically, results from the proposed studies have implications for
investigators, attorneys, fact finders, and expert witnesses. The proposed
studies will also offer training opportunities, allowing many students to become
involved in socially-relevant scientific research. The students are likely to be
members of underrepresented groups because many of the students at the
university are.