* 1252293
* Conference:   How Microbes Can Help Feed the World - American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC - December 7-9, 2012
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Ann Reid, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 38,219.00

Intellectual Merit By conservative UN estimates, the world's human population is
expected to surpass 9 billion by 2050. At the same time, arable land, clean
water and phosphate fertilizers are increasingly limited resources. At the same
time, the productivity gains of the Green Revolution are leveling off; the costs
of using fossil fuels to transport fertilizer and food around the world are
becoming prohibitive; and climate change will affect crop range and productivity
in ways that are not yet predictable.

To meet this new challenge, inexpensive and sustainable approaches will be
necessary not only to improve food production of major commodity crops like
wheat and rice, but also local crops and vegetables, especially in areas of
massive global population expansion. The field of plant-microbe interactions has
entered an era of particular promise and has the potential to provide innovative
and highly adaptable approaches to increase plant productivity. Beneficial
plant-Microbe interactions are known to improve plant resilience to many kinds
of stresses, including disease, drought, salinity, nutrient limitation, and
extreme temperature. Advances in the fundamental understanding of the natural
relationships between plants and the microbial world can be put to immediate use
to ensure sustainable food production worldwide.

The time is especially ripe for an in-depth examination of the current state of
the art in the study of microbe-plant interactions because scientific,
technological, and computational advances of the last decade have opened avenues
to address the complexity and dynamics of these interactions. The proposed
colloquium is devoted specifically to develop novel integrated mechanisms that
can lead to meaningful measures to enhance crop productivity and food security
for the future.

Broader impact The connection between greater fundamental understanding of
plant-microbe interactions and the practical solution of enhanced crop
productivity is compelling. Historically, the field has been hampered by the
complexity and intractability of the biological system. The colloquium will
bring together a diverse group of experts in the field who can identify the
needs and challenges and develop a road map for rapid scientific progress and
strategies to exploit the beneficial plant-microbe interactions, while
curtailing those that are detrimental. Raising awareness of the potential of
this field is likely to inspire young scientists to choose careers in basic
science knowing that their contributions have positive impact on a number of
societal grand challenges. Discussions at the colloquium will be captured in a
report that will be freely available to the public. Also, a proposal has already
been submitted for a session featuring colloquium participants at the 2013 AAAS
meeting in Boston. The American Academy of Microbiology is committed to
identifying opportunities like the AAAS meeting to disseminate the results of
its colloquia to audiences beyond those of the participants and sponsors.