* 1252385
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Mind-Wandering on the Learning and Retention of STEM Content: Experimental and Individual Differences Investigations
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Akira Miyake, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2017
* USD 917,600.00

Abstract

The current project examines an important yet neglected factor in the learning
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) materials, namely,
involuntary mind-wandering, or momentary attention lapses from external stimuli
or events, such as texts or lectures. Although mind-wandering is highly
prevalent during attempts at learning (as high as 40% of the time during typical
classroom lectures), little research has been done to shed light on the
potential influences of mind-wandering on STEM learning. To fill this gap in
knowledge, the research team from two institutions (University of Colorado
Boulder and University of North Carolina Greensboro) examines: (a) how mind-
wandering affects learning and retention of STEM concepts; (b) how typical
classroom behaviors (e.g., note-taking, media multitasking) influence mind-
wandering during lectures, thereby affecting learning and retention; (c) whether
interventions designed to decrease mind-wandering ultimately improve learning
and retention; and (d) how individual differences in both cognitive and
noncognitive variables influence mind-wandering and what sort of individuals are
affected most (either positively or negatively) by typical classroom behaviors
or designed interventions. Although this primarily laboratory research will
focus on basic statistics learning among college students, the prevalence of
mind-wandering across contexts makes this work relevant to other STEM
disciplines as well, because STEM learning often builds directly on previously
learned concepts and, hence, early learning failures may have a particularly
severe negative cascading effect on subsequent learning.

The project takes a converging-operations approach, through a systematic series
of laboratory-based experimental and individual-differences studies as well as a
large-scale classroom observational study. Laboratory studies will assess STEM
learning from realistic video lectures, during which students? in-the-moment
thoughts are occasionally probed; moreover, rigorous individual-differences
measurement of cognitive ability (i.e., executive functions), prior STEM
knowledge, and STEM motivation, enables the assessment of their influences on
mind-wandering and on learning. Lab-study manipulations will test the extent to
which note-taking and multitasking affect students? attention to lectures and
thereby influence learning. Laboratory interventions will attempt to decrease
mind-wandering (and increase learning) by scaffolding attention or by increasing
personal relevance of STEM material. The classroom-observation study will assess
the extent to which personal relevance and attention-enhancing (or disrupting)
classroom behaviors predict STEM course grades. Together, these studies will
provide the first systematic and rigorous investigations into the effects of
mind-wandering on STEM learning and retention.

Understanding the mechanisms and consequences of student mind-wandering in
classrooms is crucial to developing interventions that maximize STEM learning.
The proposed research will enable subsequent scaled-up, theoretically motivated
interventions for not only STEM classrooms but also for on-line multimedia
learning environments. Moreover, the focus on typical classroom behaviors (e.g.,
note-taking and media multitasking) and general underlying cognitive and
motivational factors (e.g., executive functions, prior knowledge, and personal
relevance) makes the findings and insights from the proposed research broadly
relevant to many STEM (and non-STEM) disciplines. The proposed project will also
provide unique training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate research
assistants and a postdoctoral associate by teaching them to integrate
experimental and psychometric methods and applying them to both laboratory and
authentic classroom settings.