* 1252161
* A Dual Isotope Conundrum:  Unraveling a Cryptic Subsurface N Cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Scott Wankel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Nitrogen is an essential macronutrient that largely regulates primary
productivity across a host of global ecosystems. Through human activities,
global turnover of N has more than doubled, resulting in massive and widespread
alteration of fundamental ecosystem dynamics leading to pronounced impacts on
both human and ecological health. An accurate understanding of the
(bio)geochemical cycling of N is, therefore, of central importance to enabling
the prediction of its fate in the environment. This project aims to quantify
linkages between the N and Fe cycles in the subsurface terrestrial biosphere,
through a comprehensive examination of the biotic and abiotic interactions
between NO3- (and NO2-) and Fe and their influence on the dual isotopic
composition (e.g., delta 15N and delta 18O) of NO3- in the environment.
Specifically, there exists a fundamental discrepancy of coupled N and O isotope
effects between microbial culture-based isotopic studies of denitrification and
field-based isotopic measurements of groundwater NO3- loss under anaerobic
conditions (in which denitrification is widely implicated). We suggest that this
discrepancy is the result of a ubiquitous, yet largely unrecognized, coupling of
abiotic and/or biotic Fe cycling with both reductive and anaerobic oxidative N
cycling pathways and have preliminary data supporting this hypothesis. Testing
of this hypothesis will help reveal the underlying causes of this apparent
isotope conundrum and will have important implications for improving our
understanding of the coupling of subsurface N, C and Fe cycling in the
terrestrial subsurface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also support the
development of an annual 2-day teacher-training workshop in support of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math education in Massachusetts. We will partner
with the Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve (WBNERR) to conduct a
workshop (about 15 high school teachers) focused on wastewater issues in
watersheds and nitrogen cycling in coastal ecosystems. The workshop will provide
participants with an understanding of the natural nitrogen cycle, human impacts
and environmental effects and approaches for minimizing the impact of
anthropogenic N loading in local watersheds and fragile coastal ecosystems.