* 1252815
* CAREER:  Maass Forms, Modular Forms, and Applications in Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Amanda Folsom, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2014
* USD 157,199.00

This award supports research at the intersection of number theory,
combinatorics, and Lie theory. In particular, the P.I. seeks to determine more
precise relationships and interplay between weak Maass forms and their
generalizations, (non-holomorphic) Jacobi forms, and combinatorial
q-hypergeometric series. The major project objectives include a study of quantum
modular forms, vertex operator algebra trace functions and graded dimensions,
and the automorphic properties of combinatorial q-series. The P.I. will
additionally integrate a number of educational and outreach programs at all
levels into the award objectives. Namely, the P.I. has begun a collaboration
with the New Haven Public Schools, and will continue to develop a mathematics
enrichment program for elementary and middle school students. The P.I. will also
act as faculty advisor to the Yale University-New Haven chapter of MATHCOUNTS
Outreach, an undergraduate arm of the national organization which promotes
mathematics in New Haven Public Schools. The P.I. also seeks to enhance research
and educational opportunities for graduate students, undergraduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows, including women and girls in mathematics at all levels,
through research collaboration, mentoring, and outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Number theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics, and
continues to be a field of extensive and active research today. Modular forms
have played many fundamental roles; they are central to the proof of Fermat's
Last Theorem, the Langlands program, the Riemann hypothesis, and the Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, for example, and yield applications in
combinatorics, cryptography, mathematical physics, and many other areas. The
P.I. will study natural relatives of modular forms, namely weak Maass forms and
their generalizations. While recent developments have been made, a comprehensive
theory is lacking. The proposed research seeks to contribute to the
understanding of the roles of these functions not only within number theory and
modular forms, but also combinatorics and Lie theory.