* 1252664
* CAREER:The emergence of novel regeneration niches- Forecasting tree species recruitment dynamics in a time of change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Ines Ibanez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 749,994.00

Forests are the natural vegetation of about half of the U.S., and an important,
current goal in ecology is to understand how changes in climate affect the
structure and composition of forests. This project will approach this goal by
focusing on a critical aspect of forest dynamics -- the recruitment of new trees
into the forest as seedlings. To make the research most relevant to current
conditions, the project will consider not just effects of climate, but how these
may interact with effects from the fragmentation of forests and from the
presence of introduced, invasive species. Research will combine field-based,
observational, and experimental work with statistical analyses and modeling of
the recruitment dynamics of several dominant tree species in the temperate
deciduous forests of eastern North America, using sites from northern to
southern Michigan. The results will lay a foundation for forecasting the future
structure and composition of these forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forests are a
major natural resource for the nation. To manage them sustainably, policy makers
and land users need to be able to plan for the likely complicating effects of
climate change. The results from this project will give managers information
about the potential of important forest trees to maintain stable populations
under a range of management regimes. The project also includes an educational
component. Methods and outcomes of the research will be disseminated in
educational materials for university and K-12 students to foster scientific
literacy about scientific models that describe and predict the impacts of
climate change on forests.