* 1252788
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Spatially Coupled Sparse Codes on Graphs - Theory, Practice, and Extensions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Roxana Smarandache, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 04/30/2016
* USD 153,961.00

This research investigates a new approach to protecting the reliability of
digital communication and digital storage systems. This approach takes advantage
of recent work (by the research team and others) that formulates the "encoding"
and "decoding" of data in terms of a novel graphical representation; this
formulation has several advantages over existing techniques for insuring data
integrity, including better performance at very low power and the absence of an
'error floor', i.e., the ability to consistently (and significantly) lower the
decoded error probability with incremental expenditures of power. The ultimate
goal of the research is more reliable delivery of digital data, text, computer
files, speech and audio signals, video, etc. - using devices that require less
power (and thus have longer battery life) and shorter processing delay.

More specifically, the research investigates the use of spatially coupled sparse
codes - channel (error control) codes with a sparse parity check representation
formed by coupling together a chain of small "protographs". This approach, which
was pioneered by the research team in the context of terminated low-density
parity check convolutional codes, has recently been shown to possess a unique
combination of properties - iterative decoding performance that approaches
channel capacity and minimum distance that grows linearly with block length - as
the code size gets large. The research follows four tracks: (1) the design and
analysis of low latency/memory decoding strategies; (2) decoded error
probability performance guarantees; (3) the development and analysis of
spatially coupled sparse codes with algebraic structure; and (4) the application
of spatial coupling outside the immediate domain of channel coding, including
cooperative diversity, compressed sensing, and multi-terminal source/channel
coding.