* 1252297
* Making Math Tutors More Engaging and Effective through Interaction Design Patterns and Educational Data Mining
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Neil Heffernan, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,480,949.00

This project develops and validates interaction design patterns, structured
definitions of high-quality design solutions that can be applied at scale, that
can be used to design more effective and engaging online mathematics problems.
This research is conducted in the context of ASSISTments, free online
mathematics software used by middle school students nationwide. The patterns are
designed using data from 20,000 mathematics problems previously used by
thousands of students (generating millions of data points), and validated
through a set of forty small-scale randomized controlled trials conducted via
automated experimentation, conducted online in American classrooms nationwide.
The project is a partnership among Teachers College, Columbia University,
Carnegie Mellon University, and Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The project
makes two types of contributions. The first is are basic discoveries as to which
types of content lead to the best learning and engagement in online problem-
solving. The second is a set of guidelines for the design of online learning
that can be applied by teachers and other content creators to produce
educationally effective and engaging online mathematics problems.

The project is accomplishing these goals using the following procedure. First,
they are studying the design features present in existing ASSISTments
mathematics problems, by hand-labeling design features on a small sub-set of
problems and then using educational data mining to replicate the hand-labels at
scale. These design features include features relevant to interface design,
domain content, and pedagogical strategies. They then apply previously developed
and validated automated detectors of student learning, engagement, and affect to
log files of students solving mathematics problems in ASSISTments. They use
association rule mining to determine which combinations of design features lead
to better learning, engagement, and affect, and build on these findings to
develop interaction design patterns that communicate effective solutions which
combine these data features. The design patterns are validated through a set of
forty small-scale randomized controlled trials conducted via automated
experimentation, where forty mathematics problems are improved using the design
patterns. Each improved problem is studied in a random sample of 200 students
(drawn from the full population of students currently using ASSISTments as part
of their regular curriculum), who receive the problem as part of their regular
classroom activities. They statistically assess the impact of these modified
problems on learning and engagement using the outputs of automated detectors as
dependent measures.

This project results in increasing the effectiveness and engagingness of the
mathematics problems in the ASSISTments system, and identifies design patterns
that can be applied to improve all of the content in ASSISTments. 50,000
students a year use the ASSISTments system, including large numbers of students
from traditionally under-represented populations. More broadly, the proposed
project is producin a generalizable and precise approach for the creation of
more effective and engaging online learning. The design patterns developed are
likely to be useful for improving the design of the range of online problem-
solving systems used increasingly in American mathematics education.