* 1252085
* The Seismic Structure, Thermal State, and Anisotropy of the Crust and Uppermost Mantle Beneath the Contiguous US
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 12/31/2016
* USD 263,625.00

Previous investments in surface wave data processing and inversion methodologies
together with the growth of the USArray Transportable Array (TA) provide the
unprecedented opportunity to obtain an observationally constrained, uniformly
processed view of the crust and uppermost mantle across the entire US. By the
end of the grant period, the TA will extend across the entire US and the
proposed research will produce a synoptic view of the seismic and thermal
structure of the North American continent. The primary focus is to construct 3D
models of radial and azimuthal anisotropy in the crust and uppermost mantle
across the contiguous United States using surface waves extracted from ambient
noise and earthquake data as well as receiver functions. Thermal modeling of
isotropic velocities via thermodynamically constrained inversions will allow
estimates of uppermost mantle temperature, mantle heat flux, and the thickness
of the thermal lithosphere across the continent. All inversions leverage recent
advances in surface wave tomography methods (e.g., eikonal and Helmholtz
tomography) to improve the fidelity of estimated wave speeds. A key component of
this work is the estimation of uncertainties using Monte Carlo and related
Bayesian statistics from primary measurements to the final seismological models.
The proposed research possesses a substantial technical component, involving the
application of recently developed methods of seismic data processing and
tomography to USArray TA data observed between 2011 and 2015. The scientific
motivations, however, are (1) to improve understanding of crustal and uppermost
mantle anisotropy, which holds the key to knowledge of the deformation undergone
by the continent and the vertical distribution of mechanical coupling in the
crust and uppermost mantle, and (2) to illuminate the thermal state of the
uppermost mantle. Ambient noise provides unique sensitivity to crustal structure
and the ability to separate crustal from mantle anisotropy. The introduction of
receiver function data further improves the vertical resolution of the model.
Thermodynamically constrained inversions promise new information on the thermal
state of the uppermost mantle across the entire contiguous US.

The seismological models and the data used to construct them will be archived
and shared with the broader geoscience community. A collaboration with the IRIS-
DMS has allowed the DMC to archive and distribute ambient noise cross-
correlations and continued development of similar products is envisioned. Higher
level data products such as dispersion maps, 3-D models, receiver functions, and
research codes are delivered to the general public through dynamically updated,
internet-accessible databases at CU-Boulder:
http://ciei.colorado.edu/ritzwoller_m. The proposal will support two PhD
graduate students. Finally, the PI is collaborating with the USGS to use the 3-D
models from CU-Boulder to improve location capabilities for small earthquakes
across the US. The proposed research will allow these improvements to extend
into the central and eastern US where the proposed research will construct a
high resolution 3-D model of the crust and uppermost mantle, providing a lasting
element to the legacy of the USArray TA.