* 1252679
* Plasticity of the echinoderm nervous system: cellular and molecular mechanisms of central nervous system regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jose Garcia-Arraras, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2017
* USD 475,000.00

Following injury to the nervous system, the damaged tissue must be replenished
with new cells, and the damaged neuronal connections must be re-wired properly
for the original function to be restored. Most adult vertebrates show little if
any regeneration after damage to the central nervous system. However, other
animal groups, specifically echinoderms, provide excellent examples of fast and
complete nervous system regeneration. This research makes use of a novel
echinoderm model organism, the sea cucumber Holothuria glaberrima that can
regenerate their central nervous components following transection. This project
studies the cellular and molecular events that take place in order to undergo
successful neural repair. Specifically the contributions of cell death and cell
proliferation to central nervous system regeneration and the possible role of
several genes that are highly expressed during neural regeneration will be
analyzed. The results will correlate the expression of regeneration-associated
genes to the cells and/or processes where they are involved and will help
elucidate their possible function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
"hands-on" research training to underrepresented Hispanic students at various
levels, from high-school to doctoral. Students will be exposed to competitive
research in the field of neural plasticity, an area of research that has an
increasingly high profile and that serves to attract students with various
interests. Moreover, the research outreach will extend to science teachers and
the general public via web page information, press releases and interviews.
Finally, the findings from these experiments explore basic components of
regenerative processes that can be used to understand the regenerative
limitations in other animal groups, including humans, and that in the future
could constitute the basis for applications in biotechnology and medicine.