* 1252372
* Learning Ethnographies of New Engineers: A New Approach to Understanding the Transition from School to Work
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Kevin O'Connor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,499,871.00

This collaborative research study seeks to develop a detailed, empirically
grounded understanding of new engineers'transitions from schools to workplaces,
and thereby to identify continuities and discontinuities between undergraduate
education and professional practice in engineering. The study builds upon NSF-
funded research by two of the investigators that followed engineering students
through their undergraduate engineering experiences; this project represents a
next step towards improving engineering education and furthering learning
sciences research in neglected areas like STEM workplace learning. The engineers
studied in this project will be recent graduates, taking positions typical of
students from their institutions, and in economically important or expanding
engineering sectors. The central methodology will be learning ethnographies, an
innovative approach using ethnographic fieldwork to discover what these new
engineers need to learn, how they learn it, what they appear to adapt or use
readily from their prior educational experience, and the consequences of these
for their workplace participation and developing identities as engineers. The
learning ethnographies will ground two further aspects of the study: a
comparison of workplace practices with those of these engineers' undergraduate
programs, and a survey generalizing ethnographic findings to a broader
population. Women and members of underrepresented minority groups will be
oversampled to provide a basis for comparative analysis intended to understand
distinctive experiences and challenges that members of these groups may face as
they move into the workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lack of continuity between
school and work in engineering is often noted, but details of mismatches are
insufficiently understood to effectively inform practice; this research
addresses this gap in understanding. For industry, it can inform reorganization
of workplace practices to better facilitate transitions from school to work. For
undergraduate programs, the research can provide a basis for educational
practices to be adopted or deemphasized, allowing schools of engineering to
better prepare students to be creative and successful engineers. For students,
this research may lead to the development of more relevant and practically
useful engineering knowledge and more accurate understandings of their possible
future careers. It is also expected that this research will inform attempts at
recruitment and retention of members of underrepresented groups.