* 1252905
* OPUS:   A synthetic Systematic and Phylogenetic Study of the Mustard Family (Brassicaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Ihsan Al-Shehbaz, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2018
* USD 152,564.00

The mustard family (Brassicaceae) includes over 3660 species, of which many are
important vegetables (cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, turnip,
radish, watercress, arugula) and sources of industrial and vegetable oils
(canola) and condiments (table mustard, horseradish, wasabi). One species, thale
cress, is the model organism in experimental plant biology. The family is quite
complex, and there are very few young scientists with expertise in this
important family. This two-year grant will support the synthesis of the
extensive taxonomic/evolutionary literature and vastly unpublished, though
nearly complete, work the PI assembled during his 45-year research on the
family. All findings, regardless to their stage of completion, will be
downloadable from the project website at the Missouri Botanical Garden (MBG).
The website will also include plant digital images, comprehensive literature,
and simplified electronic keys to assist professionals and students with the
easy identification of mustards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will train 28
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral botanists through four
workshops at MBG to enable them to understand the taxonomic complexity of the
family. The Project website will be a major resource and will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education by covering all aspects of mustards on
a worldwide basis. The information will be used by researchers and students in
taxonomy, conservation, education, horticulture, and crop sciences.