* 1252962
* CAREER: Are Majorana Bound States Non-Abelian Particles?
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Sergey Frolov, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate non-abelian
quantum statistics using Majorana particles in low-dimensional systems. In
contrast with bosons and fermions, when two Majoranas exchange positions their
final quantum state is not identical to the starting state. Experiments on
nanoscale devices will combine low-temperature mesoscopic transport
measurements, microwave quantum bit manipulation techniques and the development
of new materials. The goal of the proposal will be reached by putting together
three building blocks of a Majorana quantum bit. Specifically, the project will
investigate (1) ways to suppress decoherence of Majoranas due to non-equilibrium
quasiparticles in superconductors; (2) whether the quantum state of two
Majoranas can be measured; (3) how to perform the exchange, or "braiding", of
Majoranas in space. The success of this proposal will lay the foundation for
future topological quantum computation. The demonstration of non-abelian
statistics will have an impact on science education at the basic textbook level
and bring deeper awareness by the society at large of the fundamental laws
governing the quantum world. The project will train a graduate student, which
develop fundamental and practical skills such as nanofabrication and laboratory
techniques at low temperatures. A new course on Quantum Transport aimed at
graduate students and senior undergraduates will be developed with a special
emphasis on topological effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Particles that comprise our world at the microscopic
scale are divided in two classes: fermions and bosons. They obey strange rules
of quantum mechanics. For example, two electrons, which are fermions, cannot be
at the same place at the same time, while for photons, which are bosons, this is
perfectly allowed. This project will attempt to demonstrate a new, third class
of particles called the non-abelian anyons. All electrons are indistinguishable,
which means that our world looks exactly the same if two of them change their
places. But if two non-abelian particles are interchanged the Universe
transitions into a different state dictated by the laws of topology. The
particular class of anyons that will be studied here are Majorana
quasiparticles, which are their own antiparticles and can be created in
nanoscale devices similar to transistors. The success of this proposal will lay
a foundation for future topological quantum computation which relies on
interchanging, or "braiding" of non-Abelian particles. The demonstration of non-
Abelian particles will have an impact on science education at the basic textbook
level and bring deeper awareness by the society at large of the fundamental laws
governing the quantum world. The project will train a graduate student, which
develop fundamental and practical skills such as nanofabrication and laboratory
techniques at low temperatures. A new course on Quantum Transport aimed at
graduate students and senior undergraduates will be developed with a special
emphasis on topological effects. To aid in broad dissemination and sharing of
scientific knowledge, websites for rapid discussions of new results, as well as
for access to raw data and talks will be developed.