* 1252324
* Calling All Experimentalists: EarthCube domain end-user workshop to address community needs for sharing and managing experimental data and techniques: Year 1 Experimental stratigr
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Wonsuck Kim, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 35,470.00

CALLING ALL EXPERIMENTALISTS &lt;br/&gt;A WORKSHOP TO BUILD A COMMUNITY NETWORK
FOR SHARING AND MANAGING EXPERIMENTAL &lt;br/&gt;DATA AND TECHNIQUES - YEAR 1:
EXPERIMENTAL STRATIGRAPHY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wonsuck
Kim, Leslie Hsu, Raleigh Martin, and Brandon McElroy
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1250525, University of Texas, Austin
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;Research in experimental Earth surface
processes and subsurface stratal development is in a data-rich era with rapid
expansion of high-resolution, digitally based data sets that were not available
even a few years ago. Multiple millions of dollars have been invested into
recent updates in flume laboratories for the science of surface processes and
subsurface architecture. These facilities are evolving along with advanced
technology and methodology to allow a greater number of more sophisticated
experiments at larger scales and finer resolutions than those that could ever be
achieved before. In anticipation of the need for storing vast amounts of raw and
analyzed data, a coherent effort is required at the community level. PIs
envision guiding development of resources to increase the utility of laboratory
data beyond its original study, adding an efficient channel for collecting and
sharing experimental data, and fostering greater connectivity between the
experimentalist community, computer modelers, and field geologists in the
context of experimental data. They intend to provide two-way communication
between EarthCube and workshop participants. First, the results of this workshop
will feed into the EarthCube effort by providing detailed information from
disciplinary scientists. PIs will solicit data and informatics needs from the
community and contribute these requirements to the EarthCube effort in the
relevant discussions and groups (e.g. Data Discovery, Interop, and Semantics
groups) on the EarthCube website. Second, they will serve as spokespersons for
the EarthCube effort by informing their community of the current developments
and needs that have been learned from attending EarthCube events (Hsu has
attended the November charrette and has applied to attend the June charrette).