* 1252163
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   The morphosyntax of motion in Hiaki
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Alexandra Trueman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2015
* USD 8,948.00

Hiaki (often written Yaqui) is an endangered Native American language spoken in
Sonora, Mexico, and in Arizona. University of Arizona graduate student Alexandra
Trueman, under the supervision of Dr. Heidi Harley, will be conducting an
investigation into the way that Hiaki expresses motion, particularly in complex
multi-verb constructions in which a verb of motion or stance is modified by
compounding it with another lexical verb.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variation in the
expression of motion has been fertile soil for cross-linguistic comparison and
controversy for decades. Talmy proposed a highly influential two-way language
typology that has nevertheless come under review, in particular with regard to
languages that employ multi-verb constructions. The degree of variability in
language in this respect gives rise to an interesting question about language
universality. This project will provide the first in-depth documentation and
analysis of this structure in Hiaki, and explore the extent to which distinct
word-formation processes can be said to map to identical underlying syntactic
structures by comparing Hiaki with genetically and typologically distinct
languages such as Korean and English.&lt;br/&gt;The study asks:&lt;br/&gt;1)
What is the underlying structure of a Hiaki compound verb, particularly when the
"head" verb is intransitive (and thus cannot take the second verb or verb phrase
as its complement)?&lt;br/&gt;2) If we compare these constructions in Hiaki with
languages with different surface morphosyntactic realizations, how do the
allowable surface forms constrain the possible underlying
structures?&lt;br/&gt;3) Is there evidence to suggest a cline or typology of
complex motion constructions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through close collaboration
with native speakers the investigators will produce detailed documentation,
description and analysis of complex motion constructions in Hiaki and a
crosslinguistic comparison of these constructions. An existing database of
transcribed and interlinearized Hiaki texts will be expanded, and pedagogical
materials will be developed to promote Hiaki language learning and teaching.