* 1252793
* Ocean 2YC: Building a Community of Oceanography Two-Year College Instructors
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Allison Beauregard Schwartz, Northwest Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2013
* USD 39,456.00

This award will support 18 community college oceanography faculty to attend a
workshop and the 2013 national conference of the American Society of Limnology
and Oceanography. This assembly will be an important first step in building a
community of Ocean 2YC faculty, a group with no previous assemblage or identity.
A session on ?Opportunities and challenges of teaching introductory oceanography
to undergraduates? will be co-chaired by Jan Hodder (COSSEE-Pacific) and PI
Beauregard. It will focus on effective ways to teach and assess student learning
in these classes. The session is not geared specifically for two-year college
faculty but would also be of interest to four-year college faculty. This may
provide a nice mechanism for interaction between these groups. Additionally, Jan
Hodder, Heather Macdonald, Eric Baer (Highline Community College), and Bob
Blodgett (Austin Community College) will host a workshop on successful ways to
prepare community college students for geoscience careers as part of their NSF-
funded ?Supporting and Advancing Geoscience Education (SAGE) at Community
Colleges (2YC)? project. Finally, COSEE Pacific will support an evening
reception for Ocean 2YC participants. The reception could include a discussion
of opportunities and resources for 2YC geoscientist faculty, as well as
challenges and needs specific to the Ocean 2YC community.

Travel assistance will be limited to faculty who either present at the meeting
or who attend the SAGE-2YC workshop. Participants in this project will receive
airfare, subsistence, and registration to attend the ASLO meeting in February
2013 in New Orleans, LA.

Community colleges are a critical part of our educational system, and serve
almost half (or approximately 7 million) of all U.S. undergraduate students, 32%
whom are under-represented minorities (National Science Foundation, 2008). Yet,
community college faculties rarely have access to professional development funds
that allow for national conference attendance and the critical interactions that
lead to higher quality instruction (Geo2YC Workshop, 2010). Community college
oceanography faculty face some startling challenges in their classrooms,
including lack of access to current scientific research, lack of expensive
equipment, and an extremely large range in student interest and abilities in one
course section. Intellectual Merit: This project is a crucial first step, toward
building an Ocean2YC community. Such a community will provide a forum for
sharing ideas and strategies for teaching oceanography at two year colleges,
such as innovative ideas for incorporating research into two year classrooms,
teaching non-majors, and transfer issues with four year colleges.

Broader Impacts: Half of all students receiving baccalaureate degrees in the
U.S. attend a community college at some point in their educational career (AACC,
2012). A strong community of community college oceanography instructors to share
effective teaching strategies will lead to better instruction and increased
participation in the ocean sciences. Because these institutions serve a
disproportionate number of minority and first generation college students,
effective teaching at community colleges will have the additional benefit of
increasing diversity in the ocean sciences.