* 1252878
* CAREER: Stochastic Processes in High Dimensions: from Asymptotic Analysis to Algorithms
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Antonius Dieker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 10/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to devise and study algorithms for large-scale random systems where direct
computation is infeasible despite today's ever-increasing availability and
affordability of computing resources. This project focuses on three stylized
settings: (1) The project aims to introduce new Monte Carlo algorithms for rare
event simulation and to show how these are widely applicable, including in cases
where no efficient algorithms have currently been found. (2) The project aims to
devise and assess the performance of resource allocation algorithms in large-
scale stochastic networks such as computer clouds, specifically to increase the
understanding of how allocation algorithms affect quality of service. This
requires developing a novel methodology for stochastic networks and their
scaling properties. (3) The project aims to study a class of algorithms for
sampling from high-dimensional sets, where the specific focus lies on algorithms
that exploit boundaries.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to effective algorithms
for large-scale random systems, along with accompanying qualitative insights and
mathematical performance analysis. The results will for instance help in
computing probabilities of rare but significant events. They will also help in
understanding and managing large-scale service systems. Furthermore, they will
aid in improving internal efficiencies in large-scale computer systems, which
becomes ever more important in the face of rising energy costs and associated
environmental impact.