* 1252798
* Networking STEP Projects in Texas- Phase II: Use of Data
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Judy Kelley, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 03/31/2015
* USD 49,964.00

This project is conducting a series of workshops to further strengthen the
community of NSF STEP project PIs in Texas, by developing their knowledge and
skills related to the use of academic and administrative data to inform project
management and strategic decision-making. Three themes provide a framework for
the overall set of activities of the series:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ Analyzing
data to make evidence-based decisions for the funded STEP 1A and 1B projects in
Texas (formative evaluation);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ Developing rigorous
research questions and designs that inform data collection;
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ Building a community of scholars into critical
colleagues to offer scholarly review and suggestions related to data analysis
issues and manuscripts for publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an active
peer-learning process in Workshop I, small teams are working to create or refine
research questions and develop a research design and data collection related to
an assessment of each PI's project. In Workshop II PIs are defining the types of
data needed for collection and how data analysis should proceed in order to
address the research questions developed in Workshop I. A third workshop is
expected to move PIs beyond conference presentations to the submission of
manuscripts for publication in peer-review journals. This set of workshops
builds naturally on an earlier set of meetings designed to bring together STEP
projects in the state to share best practices, and in so doing, to create a
community of scholars among project personnel from these projects. A
particularly important area of focus for workshop participants was on
recruitment and retention activities targeting the large Hispanic population of
the state and the seamless transition of community college students to four-year
STEM majors. Through this proposed follow-on set of workshops the focus on
research design, data collection, and data analysis is expected to lead to
improved recruitment and retention of students and institutionalization of these
efforts as well as increased dissemination of STEP project efforts. Three of the
participating STEP projects are Hispanic Serving Institutions, and one is a
Minority Serving Institution.