* 1252638
* CAREER: Research on Real-time Robust and Secure Communications for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Chunxiao Chigan, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2013
* USD 128,960.00

CAREER: Research on Real-time Robust and Secure Communications for Vehicular Ad
Hoc Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is motivated by the belief
that Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) based inter-vehicle communications could
enhance traffic safety and traffic operation. VANET networks differ from general
mobile ad hoc networks (MANET) because of the stringent requirements on real-
time, robust, and secure communications and coordination in a critical highly
dynamic environment. Building on research concerning run-time static relative-
position relation among neighboring vehicles, this project addresses the major
challenges in access technology, dynamic power control, robust multi-hop
communication, and security and privacy provisioning. In particular, this
project will develop new approaches to access technology enabling high channel
availability over dynamic multi-path wireless channels, delay-bounded dynamic
power control augmenting real-time communications over high mobility, robust
multi-hop message disseminations in the presence of frequent fragmentations, and
security implementation promoting cooperative communication and balancing
privacy and security. It is envisioned that VANET communications will open the
door for many new applications such as traffic safety, vehicular mobility,
traffic operation, information sharing, vehicle data acquisition, and
opportunistic pervasive communications.&lt;br/&gt;