* 1252210
* Revealing the Nature of Contemporary Uplift and Collapse in the Sierra Nevada - Great Basin System (II)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* William Hammond, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2017
* USD 361,665.00

This project uses the familiar GPS satellites together with scientific InSAR
satellites to measure with millimeter precision the vertical movement of the
Sierra Nevada mountain range and Great Basin in the region spanning the border
between California and Nevada. Initial results from the first funded phase of
the project show that the Sierra Nevada are moving upward at a surprisingly fast
rate of about 1 millimeter per year relative to the Great Basin. The upward
movement appears to be that of a solid block with little internal deformation,
though this requires testing with more detailed measurements and modeling. In
contrast, the Great Basin itself is known to be very geologically active, with
frequent earthquakes up to large magnitudes, and with measurable east-west
extension. Yet, after accounting for models of earthquakes over the last
century, the Great Basin does not appear to move up or down relative to the
center of the Earth to within the margins of error. Therefore the project's
initial results indicate that the Sierra Nevada are actually uplifting relative
to the center of the Earth. It would therefore appear that the Sierra Nevada are
undergoing a modern spurt of geological activity, and have grown to their
present height relatively quickly in the last few million years. The goal of
this project is to shed more light as to whether this is indeed the case, and if
so, how can it be explained.

Now that these initial results are published, the objective of this project now
is to refine the precision and coverage of these satellite-based measurements to
get a more accurate and detailed map of how fast the Earth's surface is moving
up and down in the study region. Enhanced precision and detail are allowing for
more advanced modeling of the various processes that may be associated with
vertical movement, that should lead to a stronger understanding of what may be
driving contemporary uplift in the Sierra Nevada. The measurements are being
enhanced by extending the observational period by another 4 years, by adding
more GPS coverage to the analysis, including new stations recently installed by
this project, and by extending the coverage of scenes from InSAR satellite data.
The reference system that enables us to locate the center of mass of the Earth
continues to be improved. This development continues to reduce the error in
determining the absolute uplift rate of the Sierra Nevada. Moreover, together
with improved models of how the Earth deforms following large earthquakes in the
Great Basin, this may allow us to detect whether the Great Basin is moving up or
down with respect to the Earth's gravity field, which has implications as to the
Great Basin's history and how it is evolving today, and therefore how this might
influence the evolution of the Sierra Nevada.

This project has the broader goal of addressing a long-standing controversy
about the history and mechanisms behind uplift of the Sierra Nevada, with the
age of modern topography estimated (prior to this project) between 3 to 60
million years old, with our project favoring the earlier scenario. If the
results hold up, they will help to constrain models the evolution of the Great
Basin, as it is known from geological analysis of ancient canyons that the
western flank must at some point have gravitationally collapsed to become the
modern Great Basin. Understanding uplift and collapse of this system is thus
important from many perspectives, including the past and future evolution of the
plate boundary between North America and the Pacific, the stresses on active
faults today (including the San Andreas Fault), and explaining the variation in
style of strain and faulting across this seismically active region. Thus the
project feeds into a broader program of understanding when and where earthquakes
are likely to occur, and help inform prepare citizens on seismic hazards.
Another broader benefit of this project is that the Earth's surface also moves
up and down from the presence of water in the ground. Thus data from this
project is also being used to explore its utility in improving large-scale
models of hydrology in this largely arid region, to help address challenges in
managing and sustaining water resources.