* 1252995
* CAREER: Expanding Developers' Usage of Software Tools by Enabling Social Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Emerson Murphy-Hill, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 495,721.00

Creating and maintaining software is an increasing challenge for software
developers. Software development tools can help meet this challenge, but most
developers use only a small subset of the available tools because they are
unaware of the existence of relevant tools. To learn about relevant tools, prior
work suggests that most effective approach is social learning, where a developer
learns about a tool from a peer, yet research also suggests that social tool
learning is rare. The aim of this research is to increase the frequency and
effectiveness of social tool learning, and in turn, fundamentally advance our
understanding of how technology can mediate tool learning in software
development and beyond. In reaching this aim, we will help improve the software
on which people increasingly rely.

The researchers will create a testbed system that will record a continuous
screencast of the developer's work, indexed with time-stamped data on tool
usage. By comparing the developer's tool usage data with her peers', the system
selects a list of candidate tools that the developer does not use, but that her
peers do use. The system then encourages peers to teach and learn from one
another by sharing tool-usage clips chosen from each others' screencasts. The
approach aims to enable distributed and asynchronous developers to share tool
knowledge efficiently, effectively, and frequently. The testbed will allow the
researchers to experiment with various types of tool learning to determine how,
why, and when different types of tool learning are effective or ineffective.