* 1252736
* CAREER: Offshore Wind Turbines Subjected to Hurricanes: Simulation of Wind-Wave-Structure Interaction and Aerodynamic Load Reduction
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sungmoon Jung, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project are to investigate the behavior of offshore wind turbines subjected to
hurricane loads and to develop novel approaches that can reduce the damage.
Specific research activities include: (1) to establish a time-domain analysis
procedure that considers interactions of wave, wind, soil, and structure; (2) to
study the behavior of wind turbine using the loading consistent with the field
observations of hurricanes; (3) to devise a piezoelectric surface actuation
mechanism to aerodynamically reduce the wind forces; and (4) to explore the
reconfiguration of the structure to reduce the drag forces. The new time-domain
formulation of the wind turbine tower will be integrated with the turbine
analysis program FAST developed and maintained by the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory. Recent field observations of hurricane characteristics will be
utilized to define the loading. Wind tunnel testing of scaled models will also
be conducted to obtain necessary parameters for numerical simulation, and to
quantify the effects of the piezoelectric surface actuation in reducing the drag
forces.&lt;br/&gt;Offshore wind farms have enormous energy potential, yet one of
the major concerns is vulnerability of wind turbines in hurricanes. The results
of this project can reduce risk to wind turbine structures in hurricanes and can
contribute to wider adoption of the offshore wind energy. The Principal
Investigator will collaborate with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory so
that the research outcome is accessible to a wider audience. The research
project is integrated with education through involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students as well as involvement of underrepresented students through
the college's partnership with a minority-serving institution. In order to
increase the number of engineers who can work in renewable energy field,
college-wide collaboration in renewable energy and the Florida State University
(FSU) Office of Distance Learning will be utilized. The outreach of this project
will involve high school students in research through the FSU Young Scholars
Program. Annual workshops for K-12 teachers will be offered with the help of
KidWind. Through these workshops, the teachers will develop teaching modules on
wind energy to enhance their science curricula.