* 1252318
* CAREER: Annotating the Microbiome using Machine Learning Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Huzefa Rangwala, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 550,000.00

This project addresses an important challenge of developing sophisticated and
novel machine learning techniques for complex real-world problems. New
technologies allow us to determine the genomes of organisms co-existing within
various ecosystems ranging from ocean, soil and human-body. Several researchers
have embarked on studying the pathogenic role played by the microbiome, defined
as the collection of microbial organisms within the human body, with respect to
human health and disease conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
activities in this CAREER project will develop approaches for the identification
of taxonomy, function and metabolic potential from the collective genomes
samples. A key contribution will be the development of multi-task learning
approaches that combine information across multiple hierarchical databases
associated with the annotation problems. During research, the PI will
investigate the best ways to capture the underlying hierarchical structure,
prevalent within different annotation databases. The rationale underlying this
proposed research is that there is a wealth of complementary information that
exists across several manually curated biological databases. Associating
microbiome with phenotype requires integration of various high-throughput omic
data sources (genomic, metabolic, proteomic) that may not be uniformly available
across all samples. The PI will develop data fusion classifiers within the
multi-task learning paradigm to integrate heterogeneous, incomplete data sources
for predicting phenotypes. This project will lead to the following key
contributions: (i) Improved metagenome annotation models by integration of
multiple prediction tasks and associated databases. (ii) Incorporation of
hierarchical information within regularized multi-task learning. (iii)
Integration of diverse and incomplete information sources. (iv) Scalable
algorithms that use hash based feature representations and improve the learning
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is interdisciplinary and spans the
fields of machine learning, bioinformatics, metagenomics, microbiology and
environmental ecology. This project will foster the the synergy between teaching
and research by providing an environment for all students to develop
intellectually and professionally. The project integrates the research with an
education plan focused on mentoring of high school, undergraduate and graduate
students, curriculum development and laboratory visits. Planned activities
include training of inter-disciplinary researchers, integration of microbiome
analysis related projects within the classes, curriculum enhancement and
implementation of new learning strategies. Open source software and tools will
be developed as part of this project, that will enhance scientific understanding
and discovery amongst a broad and diverse group of researchers.