* 1252322
* CAREER: Increasing the power of single-molecule bio-imaging with plasmon-enhanced fluorescence
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Julie Biteen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 04/30/2019
* USD 513,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Julie Biteen and her group at the University of Michigan
are improving the power of microscopes in order to look inside live cells at the
1-2 nanometer scale of proteins themselves. This project is based on coupling
single-molecule fluorescence microscopy and metal nanoparticle plasmonics to
produce a non-perturbative method for looking at protein position and dynamics
in the natural cellular environment with unprecedented resolution and
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary approach aims (1) to
understand the mechanism of plasmon-enhanced single-molecule fluorescence, (2)
to characterize plasmonic surfaces based on this insight, (3) to localize and
track membrane proteins in live bacteria cells coupled to metal nanoparticles,
and (4) to expose students to modern science through demos, mentoring, teaching
and laboratory research, with a particular eye toward increasing the
participation of women in STEM fields. The proposed research promises to enable
non-invasive, nanometer-scale microscopy with applications ranging from live-
cell imaging to in situ device characterization. The mechanistic understanding
of nanoscopic details derived from plasmon-enhanced single-molecule fluorescence
will have enormous implications for cell biology, hydrogen storage, chemical
separation and energy production.