* 1252551
* EAGER: An Evolutionary-Inspired Approach for Moving Target Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* David John, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2015
* USD 197,420.00

Computers are often deployed in a deterministic fashion, even across unrelated
infrastructures, in order to simplify their life-cycle management. Unfortunately
a predictable environment also aids attackers since a small set of exploits can
be applied across a large number of similarly configured computers. A Moving
Target (MT) strategy can be used to address this problem by deploying less
deterministic and homogenous systems. For example intermittently changing a
system's configuration (operating systems and/or applications) can create a MT
defense that limits the usefulness of an attacker's knowledge; however, these
alternative configurations must be functional and secure, while
diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores a new Moving Target (MT)
defense strategy that leverages Genetic Algorithms (GAs) to manage computer
configurations. The technique discovers better solutions (configurations) by
mimicking processes found in nature. Computer configurations are modeled as
chromosomes, where configuration parameters, or settings, are individual
chromosome traits. The GA proceeds by applying a series of selection, crossover,
and mutation processes to discover new chromosomes from a pool. Since the system
constantly evolves, it is designed to cope with new vulnerabilities or
functionalities that can be potentially introduced over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important objective is the development a prototype
MT system that can provide a better understanding of the performance of
evolutionary-based configuration management. Results will be of interest to
researchers and practitioners since the approach is applicable to a variety of
configurations. Furthermore this project will also introduce undergraduates to
academic research in the area of computer security and system management.