* 1252209
* EAGER: The Ethical Games Project: Measuring Empathy and Ethical Action, Detecting Empathy's Impact on Ethics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Kristen Monroe, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,999.00

What drives ethical treatment of others? Do we learn ethical values/behavior
only as children or can ethics be taught effectively later and, if so, how can
ethics best be taught in the high-tech age? Can computer games successfully pose
moral dilemmas ranging from personal choices to ones specific to certain
professions such as medicine, law, computer science, and engineering? Can we
develop games that are culturally and contextually-rich yet universal enough to
have broad appeal while not privileging one set of values or ethical system? The
PI's goal in this exploratory research is to tackle questions such as these, as
Stage 1 of the Ethical Games Project to include a summer internship program, an
undergraduate class, and a graduate seminar testing the importance of an
empathy-inducing intervention on students' ethical action and ethical self-
examination, as measured by a variety of psychometric and ethnographic tests.
Pre- and post-tests of ethics will be administered to 40-50 students
participating in journal writing and conducting/analyzing narrative interviews
with someone "different" (an elder) as well as with a moral exemplar (a
philanthropist or someone who has saved another person's life). The
"intervention" will consist of the students putting themselves in the place of
another via the narrative interviews, and will ask about the impact of such
empathetic intervention on students' ethical action and ethical self-
examination. The project thus will focus on two foundational conceptualizations
of ethics: ethics as behavior that furthers human well-being, and ethics as
thinking reflectively about the consequences of one's action. The project will
ask about both the reliability of such tests and the relationship between
empathy and ethics, by comparing results of different measures on subject and
control groups. By these means the PI hopes to understand how best to
conceptualize, operationalize and measure ethical self-reflection, ethical
action and empathy, and also the possible relationships existing among empathic
involvement and the diverse measures of these ethical phenomena. In particular,
she will attempt to determine how the different measurements relate to each
other, whether and how the substantive relationship detected between empathy and
ethics is affected by the different measures employed, and whether certain
measures privilege particular values (justice vs. compassion, deliberative vs.
non-reasoning) or groups&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful,
project outcomes will lay the groundwork for future work on socio-cultural
variations and will elucidate the value-structures latent in psychometric and
ethnographic tests and ethical games, which in turn will form the basis for a
larger project that will develop a game for computers, tablets, and mobile
phones, thus utilizing 21st century technology to test one of the oldest ideas
in ethics, namely that empathic involvement with another fosters and encourages
more compassionate and ethical treatment of that person or group. Such a game
could provide a cost-effective way to teach ethics and reach audiences now left
untouched by traditional teaching methods.