* 1252625
* Advancing an Online Project in the Assessment and Effective Teaching of Calculus
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Peter Barcher, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 227,213.00

Researchers from the U.S. and from Finland are collaborating on developing
solutions to the challenges facing the implementation of an e-learning portal
that provides global free instruction in calculus. The World Education Portals
(WEPS) has been developed to provide free resources and services for education
globally to students, tutors and instructors. The researchers are utilizing the
calculus course developed for WEPS by one of the principal investigators of this
project as a virtual research environment in which the U. S. scholars from
George Mason University and Florida State University collaborate with
researchers from the University of Helsinki and an international community of
experts. The large scale teaching and learning data that are generated as
students in multiple countries engage in the virtual course is being examined to
address questions about how to teach calculus that support rapid prototyping and
testing of specific instructional interventions. This project is examining the
cognitive base of calculus, developing items that have diagnostic power to
provide information about how students are learning calculus through their
engagement in the WEPS course and identifying appropriate instructional
strategies that can be rapidly prototyped to examine effectiveness. The project
involves two intensive three day workshops, one in Finland and one in the U.S.
to bring together a team of experts to assist in the development and critical
analysis of data-gathering, analysis, and instructional aspects of the WEPS
calculus course. The grant will support an edited volume of papers from
researchers and the expert panel reports on the best practices, advice and
current research on the challenges of how to best engineer an e-learning course
to support student learning in calculus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages an existing online learning environment as a natural laboratory in
which to study the how students learn calculus. The project is addressing the
seminal issues of how to assess calculus knowledge, how to use data from those
assessments for diagnostic purposes, and how those decisions about what students
know and can do should guide instructional interventions. The project is an
example of cutting edge research and development in online courses. The use of
large-scale data by a collaborative that includes mathematics educators,
mathematicians, statisticians, psychometricians, educational psychologists,
computer programmers who study data structures and human computer interface
design, educational data miners and research methodologists has the specific
purpose of optimizing the design of an online calculus course that is already in
global use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online learning is of growing importance. The
WEPS courses have the potential to reach a global audience who may not have
access to such advanced courses or who have not been successful in more
traditional learning settings. This project contributes to the knowledge about
how to use large-scale data collected from a global pool of course participants
to redesign the online learning environment. It will also support cross-national
collaboration and learning.