* 1252439
* Improving Science Teaching & Learning:   Studying How Beginning Elementary Teachers Notice and Respond to Students' Scientific Sense-making
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Melissa Braaten, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,997.00

Understanding how teachers learn to notice and respond to students? scientific
sense-making is necessary to improve beginning teacher practice and support
student science learning. Without this understanding, effective science
instruction called for by the Next Generation Science Standards may rarely
occur, and we will not be able to meet the challenge of improving STEM education
for all students. Our objective for this research is to document and define a
range of beginning elementary teacher practices for noticing and responding to
students? scientific sense-making and the contextual factors that impact their
practice over a range of several years to determine how these practices develop
over time. Contextual factors include aspects such as curriculum materials,
professional community, prior experiences, and professional vision. Knowing more
about how and why teachers learn to notice and respond to students? science
sense-making can enable more effective design of educational programs,
instructional supports, and tools helping teachers ensure that all of their
students have opportunities to learn meaningful science.

Researchers from Michigan State University and the University of Wisconsin-
Madison will use longitudinal comparative case-study methodology to analyze and
describe how beginning elementary teachers notice and respond to students?
scientific sense-making in multiple science topic areas across several years in
urban school settings. Data will be collected from 32 beginning 3rd, 4th, and
5th grade elementary science teachers and six expert teachers across the upper
Midwest (e.g., Chicago, IL, Lansing, MI, and Madison, WI). Data includes two
teacher-generated sense-making portfolios a year containing: classroom video of
science teaching, teacher analysis of student work, and teacher interviews about
noticing and responding. Data analysis will be based on 4 dimensions of teacher
performance and reflection: the nature and type of opportunities for student
sense-making, noticing, interpreting/reasoning, and responding to students?
scientific sense-making. We will use a constant comparative approach to analyze
data ? examining and sorting case study data against aspects of teaching
contexts and personal resources to look for patterns over time. Advisory board
members will evaluate this project with respect to research design, tools, and
outcomes. The final products of our study will include (1) empirically-based
descriptions of 32 beginning teacher practices across several years and six
expert teachers to illustrate different types of teacher noticing and responding
as well as different pathways, trajectories, and approaches of beginning teacher
noticing and responding (2) a set of tested and revised data collection measures
and analytical tools for documenting and describing teacher noticing, and (3) a
model of beginning teacher noticing that can explain how noticing and responding
to students? sense-making is mediated by personal resources and professional
contexts. This research will positively affect participating teachers and their
students, as well as the larger teacher education research community by
transforming theories of elementary science teacher education and beginning
teacher practice. The research will contribute knowledge about the influences of
contexts on teacher practice and outline potential pathways for teacher
development. Research products promise to contribute to the development of a
highly qualified science teachers using high-leverage practices in diverse urban
contexts.