* 1252350
* Microgenetic Learning Analytics
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,08/31/2017
* W Richards Adrion, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 361,017.00

Research activities that will be undertaken in this project are:(1) the
development of theoretically-based, microgenetic learning analytic protocols
aimed at understanding middle school student learning in a robotics setting as
well as the development of theoretically-based, sentiment analysis protocols
aimed at understanding the salience of stereotype threat for underrepresented
students studying in a robotics context; (2) pilot testing these protocols on an
existing data set; (3) refining and improving the protocols based on the results
of the pilot test; and (4) conducting original research on the development of
computational thinking in underrepresented middle school students studying in a
robotics context, including examining the salience of stereotype threat on
student activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microgenetic analysis refers to the
study of learning changes where:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Observations span the
period of rapidly changing competency&lt;br/&gt;2. Within the this period the
density of observations is high relative to the rate of change&lt;br/&gt;3.
Observations are analyzed intensively&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
combines microgenetic analysis with computer science based learning analytics.
The computer science based learning analytics take computer captured data and
analyzes and mines that data for understanding of student learning. It is
frequently used in intelligent tutoring systems and Massive Open Online Courses.
In such cases, every keystroke is captured and the learning analytics is about
making sense of those captured keystrokes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
FIRE proposal is to increase the diversity of individuals who enter the field of
computing by engaging in research on the development of computational thinking
in underrepresented middle school students as they interact in a robotics
environment. This research will include an examination of the salience of
stereotype threat in an all girl robotics study setting. The PIs will achieve
this project goal through the creation of a new research method that combines
microgenetic analysis techniques derived from the field of developmental
psychology with learning analytic techniques, derived from the field of computer
science. The PIs term this new method Microgenetic Learning Analytics.