* 1252831
* CAREER: Development of metal-organic nanotubes with unique water transport and storage properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Tori Forbes, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 509,244.00

TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;Nanotubular materials can have unique water transport and
storage properties that have the potential to lead to technological advances in
separations, catalysis, drug delivery, and environmental remediation.
Development of novel hybrid materials, such as metal-organic nanotubes (MONs)
are of particular interest as they are amenable to structural engineering
strategies and may exhibit unique properties based upon the presence of
inorganic components. The objective of this program is to determine the
structural characteristics of the U(VI) MON that has recently been shown to
promote the formation of structural water and promising exchange properties. The
unique properties of the U(VI) MON are hypothesized to occur from a combination
of: (1) the zwitterionic nature of the organic linker, (2) the overall diameter
of the tube, and (3) the presence of uranyl (UO2) cation. The hypothesis will be
tested by the synthesis of MONs with different structural features,
characterization of water configuration, and examination the exchange properties
of the resulting material by a combination of diffraction and spectroscopic
techniques. Materials that contain organic linkers lacking amino groups will be
initially targeted (Objective 1) to investigate the importance of the
zwitterionic molecules for the attraction of H2O into the interior of the
nanotube. Next, the importance of the internal diameter of the tube will be
investigated by varying the chain length of the zwitterionic linker and the
choice of organic chelator (Objective 2). Lastly, the importance of the uranyl
ion will be examined by designing MONs containing other metals linked through
zwitterionic molecules (Objective 3). The studies are significant because they
will allow the determination of the structural component that exerts the
greatest control over these enhanced exchange properties and develop novel
nanomolecular materials for potential application in separations and storage
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;The planned studies
are potentially transformative because fundamental information gained from the
experimental results could lead to a greater understanding of nanoconfinement of
water, which influences a wide variety of biological, geological, and physical
systems. Experiments on the mobility of confined water within the MONs will
support the NMR user facility that will enable the facility to update the
current instruments that are widely available to all research groups. The work
also has more general benefits to society through the development of novel
materials for advanced applications in separations and storage media and the
enhancement of undergraduate and graduate education in structural and
nanomolecular chemistry. Educational contributions include mentoring of a
graduate student on research related to the synthesis of MON materials and the
development of initiatives aimed at promoting STEM education for undergraduate
students. The initiatives include efforts to: (1) create an engaging curriculum
on the structural nature of nanomaterials for undergraduate students in a 2nd-
year inorganic chemistry course; (2) recruit underrepresented minority students
into the research group to participate in the synthesis of nanotubular materials
through the McNair Scholar program; and (3) integrate undergraduate students in
informal science education efforts regarding the role of nanomaterials in water
purification.