* 1252951
* CAREER: Computational mechanisms of rapid visual categorization: Models and psychophysics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Thomas Serre, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,001.00

Primates can recognize objects embedded in complex natural visual scenes at a
glance. Despite the ease with which we see, visual recognition -- one of the key
issues addressed in computer vision -- is quite difficult for machines.
Understanding which computations are performed by the visual cortex would give
scientists a powerful tool to uncover key mechanisms of human perception and
cognition as well as to create a new generation of 'seeing' machines.

The PI's central research goal is to identify the perceptual principles and
model the neural mechanisms underlying rapid visual categorization. By forcing
processing to be fast, rapid visual categorization paradigms help isolate the
very first pass of visual information before more complex visual routines take
place. Hence, understanding 'vision at a glance' is arguably a necessary first
step before studying natural everyday vision where eye movements and attentional
shifts are known to play a key role.

Specifically, this proposal will lead to the development of a computational
neuroscience model of rapid visual recognition in the primate visual system,
which is both consistent with physiological properties of cells in the visual
cortex and able to predict behavioral responses (both correct and incorrect
responses as well as reaction times) from human participants across a range of
conditions. The proposed model will integrate recent developments in
computational models of vision and decision making with large-scale machine
learning techniques. New stimulus sets will be generated, which are optimally
tailored for testing among alternative visual representations and computations
against human psychophysics data. These experiments will, in turn, enable the
refinement of computational models.

The computational models developed as part of this proposal will be integrated
in courses and disseminated broadly via a web graphical interface. Overall the
interdisciplinary nature of the proposal will give students the opportunity to
experience a research environment that crosses traditional boundaries across
disciplines and departments. Increased undergraduate participation in
computational neuroscience will help integrate this area into the mainstream
computer science and neuroscience curricula.