* 1252125
* Race, Place & Discretion in the Handling of Drug-Free Zone Charges
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Volkan Topalli, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 03/31/2019
* USD 367,749.00

Since the 1980s, all states have passed "drug-free zone" laws providing added
penalties for offenders charged with distributing, or possessing with the intent
to distribute, any controlled substance in public locations surrounding schools,
parks, and public housing. These laws are intended to keep illicit substances
out of areas where children congregate, protect children from exposure to drug
use, and foster safe public environments. Yet little is known about whether
these laws have accomplished their intended objectives, under what conditions
legal decision-makers patrol these zones and apply these charges, how the
criminalization of public spaces may disparately affect minorities and the urban
poor, and whether offenders consider the prohibitive "costs" of offending in
drug-free zones.

Employing a sample of 19,063 felony drug cases closed between 2001 and 2009 in
Fulton County (Atlanta), Georgia, this research evaluates the conditions under
which drug-free zone charges are included in felony drug case processing.
Quantitative spatial analyses (using mapping software) will determine whether
the proportion of hyper-criminalized space is greater in inner-city communities
than in more suburban locales, and will explore sentencing outcomes by defendant
race and racial composition of the offense neighborhoods. Additionally,
interviews with police officers and prosecutors will examine whether drug-free
zone charges are used conscientiously to incapacitate the most dangerous
dealers, provide leverage in plea negotiations, and/or make communities and
schools safer. Finally, interviews with active dealers will probe the extent to
which the perceived costs of selling in a drug-free zone may be offset by
apparent benefits, such as improved foot traffic or access to prospective
customers.

This interdisciplinary, mixed methods study will extend our understanding of the
collateral consequences of potentially discriminatory drug enforcement policy,
thereby providing policymakers with insights regarding the efficacy of drug-free
zone penalties and related place-based crime prevention policies.