* 1252611
* CAREER: Renewable Polymers and Composites Derived from Hydrocarbon-Rich Natural Rosin
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Chuanbing Tang, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research program seeks to explore
potentially transformative concepts to lessen the dependence on petroleum by
seeking novel monomers and polymers from natural sources. One of the major
hurdles to increasing the share of renewable polymers in the commercial market
is their high cost and inferior performance compared with synthetic polymers
produced from petroleum chemicals. This CAREER project at the University of
South Carolina is focused on the use of low cost hydrocarbon-rich natural
resources as a building block of polymeric materials with tailored properties
and controlled structures. The overall goal of the proposed research is to
integrate bulky hydrophenanthrene-based rosin into polymeric framework to
increase glass transition temperature and hydrophobicity in thermoplastics,
biodegradable resins and biocomposites. This program includes the development of
new synthetic protocols for making rosin-derived monomers and polymers through
highly efficient click chemistry and a variety of controlled polymerization
techniques, and through parallel efforts to combine rosin-based feedstock with
(1) biodegradable polylactide, (2) polymers based on renewable fatty acids, and
(3) biocomposites based on lignin and cellulose nanowhiskers. This project also
aims to investigate how macromolecular compositions and architecture dictate
thermal, surface and mechanical properties of these materials and to establish a
clear structure-property relationship. The proposed efforts may ultimately lead
the PI to achieve macroscopic processability and physical properties resembling
those polymers made from petroleum chemicals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic plastics account for consumption of ~7% of fossil fuels
worldwide. Energy shortage and environmental concerns prompt opportunities to
seek developing renewable resources for manufacturing of "green" plastics.
Molecularly engineered rosin-derived polymers and composites are viable
alternative materials to broaden value-added renewable plastics, which will
result in a decrease in demand of petroleum chemicals. This program will provide
training opportunities to graduate students and undergraduate students in
polymer synthesis and characterization. An important component of this program
involves several integrated educational activities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students to stimulate their interest in science and
technology with enhanced global research and education training opportunities.
All students will be trained on a number of facilities, participate in local and
national meetings, and interact closely with collaborators in the process of
performing the research. An International Outreach Program for the Education in
Sustainable Materials and Nanotechnologies will be developed to facilitate
global cooperation/network in addressing renewable materials and environmental
impact, and will strengthen the global competence and competitiveness of US
students. One direct outcome of this program would be the development of
prototype renewable polymers for educational demonstration. Furthermore, a
Project Seed Program will be supported to allow high school students from
economically disadvantaged families to carry out summer research.
Underrepresented students will be an important part of all educational
activities. This program would also serve as an integrated educational
experience for graduate students.