* 1252218
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Language Ideology, Multilingualism, and Syntactic Variation in Albanian and Macedonian
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Line Mikkelsen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2015
* USD 13,953.00

Macedonian and Albanian share striking similarities in grammatical structure.
Despite being very distant descendants from Indo-European (comparable to the
difference between English and Persian), these languages share such similarity
in grammar and phraseology that some sentences can be translated word-for-word,
a phenomenon that specialists in Balkan languages argue to have resulted from a
social system that encouraged mutual multilingualism among speakers of these
languages for a period of centuries. Their surface similarities have been
accounted for as an inventory of "Balkanisms" -- commonalities in word order,
grammatical construction, and word building shared between Balkan languages as a
result of contact between these languages and not due to inheritance from their
respective linguistic predecessors. These findings, however, have not
necessarily been mapped with cross-linguistically comparable theoretical
descriptions that would connect them to broader research on how the human mind
produces and comprehends language.

Prendergast will examine three syntactic Balkanisms that recommend themselves to
both socio-cultural linguistic investigation and theoretical syntactic
description: 1) overt direct and indirect object doubling by a clitic pronoun;
2) relative clause head-marking; and 3) definite article omission in
prepositional phrases. These syntactic Balkanisms share an orientation toward a
generative syntactic theoretical primitive: the determiner phrase (DP).

Prendergast will collect data in Albania and the Republic of Macedonia over six
months on language use and social attitudes toward language among Macedonian-
and Albanian-speakers by means of ethnographic interviewing and structured
surveys gauging speakers' grammaticality judgments. He will seek to plot
variation in these syntactic Balkanisms according to the dynamics of
multilingual speaker contact (or lack thereof) in contemporary Republic of
Macedonia, assessing whether speakers who continue traditional Balkan
multilingualism differ in their underlying grammatical structures from speakers
who participate in a new social model of Balkan monolingualism and ethnic
segregation. Data on these variations then become the basis for a generative
syntactic description of the Balkan DP.

The results of this project will contribute to current theoretical syntactic
research on the DP cross-linguistically. Prendergast seeks to demonstrate that
there are "deep structural Balkanisms" important to understanding the process of
mutually multilingual contact among speakers, a situation that has shaped the
development of a considerable number of languages around the world. This project
will also enhance the training of a graduate student.