* 1252177
* Collaborative Research: Incorporating hillslope transport into laboratory landscape experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Joshua Roering, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2017
* USD 191,088.00

Hilly and mountainous terrain has a remarkable tendency to organize itself into
repeating ridges and valleys. The spacing of these landform sequences, which
sets the density of drainage networks and the height of mountains, depends on
the competition between advective sediment transport in channels and diffusive
sediment transport on hillslopes. Despite promising results from numerical
models, it is unclear how climate and tectonics modulates the relative
effectiveness of hillslope and channel processes in determining landscape
dissection. To test controls on these fundamental landscape properties, this
research will incorporate diffusive hillslope transport into an existing
laboratory model for actively eroding landscapes. Our physical experiments will
generate reproducible hillslope transport via sediment incorporation in needle
ice on the landscape surface while channels will evolve through precipitation
from sprinklers. Because the experiments will be able to isolate and manipulate
rates of hillslope and channel processes, we will document landform development
under a wide range of climatic and tectonic scenarios. Furthermore, as the first
physical experiment to explicitly incorporate hillslope processes, this research
will track the dynamics of landform adjustment, such as ridge migration and
drainage capture, in a system with relevance to much of the Earth?s
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous numerical and experimental studies of
climate controls on landscape evolution generally focus on how precipitation
drives channel discharge and valley incision. However, climate also modulates
sediment production and transport on hillslopes through changes in periglacial
processes and vegetation, profoundly affecting the topographic organization of
landscapes. Results from our experimental landscape will inform efforts to
decode past climate signals in topography as well as predict the effect of
future climate change on landscape evolution. Physical experiments are a
powerful tool for outreach and science recruitment because of their ability to
reduce complex, million-year-scale processes in a real-time and highly
accessible fashion. The funds will also provide for the construction of an
experimental landscape apparatus designed explicitly for teaching and outreach.
In addition to supporting the education of a PhD student, this grant includes
research experience for students from local community colleges and provides for
the development of a landscape evolution seminar for undergraduates.