* 1252123
* Influence of Cenozoic Climate and Environmental Change on the Evolution and Ecology of North American Ungulate Mammals
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Jonathan Marcot, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2017
* USD 90,000.00

Jonathan David Marcot&lt;br/&gt;EAR 1252123&lt;br/&gt;Influence of Cenozoic
Climate and Environmental Change on the Evolution and Ecology of North American
Ungulate Mammals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in Earth's climate and physical
environment have shaped the diversity of life by causing the extinction of
species, the origin of new species, and evolutionary change in existing species.
Over the past 55 million years, ungulate mammals from the Great Plains of North
America (e.g., camels, horses, antelope) diversified in the face of substantial
climatic changes and major ecosystem rearrangements, including the origin and
spread of the North American prairie. These climatic and environmental changes
are well established, and ungulates are abundantly preserved as fossils
throughout this time interval. The objective of this project is to use the
excellent fossil record of ungulates to detail the evolution of key traits
within lineages, the origin and extinction of lineages, and how these processes
altered the ecology of ungulate communities. Previous studies have addressed
these topics in various plant and animal groups, but rarely have all three
patterns been integrated in simultaneous analysis. These patterns will then be
compared against the climatic and environmental changes in North America to
directly test the strength their influence. It is generally expected that
intervals of rapid climatic change will drive rapid evolution and ecological
turnover among ungulates, but these patterns may differ, for example, between
intervals of climatic warming versus cooling. Overall, this project will help us
better understand how climate change shapes vertebrate evolution and communities
in the modern world, and will give us an additional quantitative tools for
studying past environments. The relatively simple methods of data collection
will facilitate the involvement of undergraduate and graduate students, and will
be leveraged to recruit and retain traditionally underrepresented minority (URM)
undergraduate students in scientific research.