* 1252380
* Feedback as an Element of Designed Environments: An Exploration of Structure and Context
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sasha Barab, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,548,206.00

In this REESE/REAL project, the PIs have the goal of investigating the kinds of
feedback that are most effective when students are solving complex problems
requiring mathematics or other disciplinary knowledge. When learners are solving
such problems in an immersive environment on the computer, technology can both
provide feedback to learners and also be used to collect and present data that
will allow teachers to know what learners understand and are capable of. This
project examines the effects of different forms of feedback on students'
learning and engagement in mathematics. Specifically, the PIs are exploring how
different forms of feedback (tied to the problem solving narrative, tied to the
disciplinary content, and a blend) and timing of feedback (frequency and
relation to major assessment moments) contribute to how students engage in
learning activities and what they come to understand. The work is being done in
the context of two "quests" (complex challenges derived to promote understanding
and skills) implemented on the Atlantis Remixed platform (formerly called Quest
Atlantis), an immersive computing environment. The two quests are based on two
well-researched and effective units from the pre-algebra mathematics curriculum
Adventures of Jasper Woodbury. In that curriculum, 5th and 6th graders learn
mathematics in the context of solving real-world problems. Refining these units
for the Atlantis Remixed platform offers learners possibilities of getting
advice and feedback as needed in the context of their mathematics work and more
easily accessing resources and representations necessary for solving the problem
and sharing insights with fellow learners. In addition to investigating
effective ways of providing advice and feedback to learners, PIs are exploring
the benefits and challenges of each form of feedback and its timing for
providing teachers with frequent and reliable sources of information about their
students? understanding and the activities they are engaging in online.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenge to promoting learning in mathematics is giving
learners the advice and feedback they need at the times they need it. If
learners are solving problems in the context of a computer environment, the
computer can be used to provide such feedback. To do that well, researchers need
to determine which kinds of feedback should be provided in which kinds of
situations and when are the most appropriate times to give feedback, during
problem solving work or after problem solving is complete. In this project, the
investigators are exploring those questions in the context of pre-algebra
mathematics learning.