* 1252651
* CAREER: Integrating Research and Education via Low-Temperature Solventless Formation of Hierarchical Porous-on-Porous Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Malancha Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2019
* USD 459,590.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for the
development of a new technique to deposit functional porous polymers onto porous
materials in order to develop microfluidic devices for disease detection and
multifunctional filtration membranes for water purification. The primary
objective of this research is to determine the mechanism and kinetics associated
with using significantly reduced substrate temperatures in order to
simultaneously freeze and polymerize monomer, leading to the formation of novel
porous-on-porous materials. The research approach is to systematically evaluate
the effects of process parameters on the pore size distribution, investigate the
formation of both uncapped and capped membranes, determine whether localized
cooling can control pore formation in the x, y, and z-directions, and utilize
the new-found implications of controlling the symmetry, surface chemistry, and
structure of these membranes to create innovative, real-world multifunctional
porous-on-porous materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will lead to a fundamental understanding of the chemistry and
physics associated with low-temperature deposition of polymer membranes, and
ultimately the fabrication of next-generation diagnostic devices and
purification membranes. A series of hands-on demonstrations will be developed to
ignite interest in engineering fields among middle school students in downtown
Los Angeles that rarely have access to such topics. A new multi-tiered
mentorship program will be created by pairing female students with female
faculty in order to foster career development and help improve the retention of
women in engineering fields.