* 1252690
* AGU Chapman Conference on the Agulhas System and its Role in Changing Ocean Circulation, Climate, and Marine Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Brenda Weaver, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 21,206.00

This award will provide partial support for a Chapman Conference on the Agulhas
system that will be held 8-12 October 2012 in Western Cape, South Africa.
Chapman Conferences are topic meetings sponsored by the American Geophysical
Union and are designed to promote opportunities to discuss scientific issues
that are not normally available at larger meetings. Attendance at the October
conference is expected to be on the order of 125 participants to include senior
scientists, midcareer scientists, postdoctoral researchers, and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Agulhas System plays a significant role in
the global ocean circulation and climate.&lt;br/&gt;Warm, saline waters from the
Indian Ocean flow into the Atlantic as part of the interocean&lt;br/&gt;exchange
around the southern tip of Africa. Ongoing increases in this so-called
Agulhas&lt;br/&gt;Leakage, presently under anthropogenic forcing, could
strengthen the global overturning&lt;br/&gt;circulation in the Atlantic at a
time when warming and accelerated meltwater input in the
North&lt;br/&gt;Atlantic are predicted to weaken it. However compared to
processes in the North Atlantic, the&lt;br/&gt;Agulhas system has been largely
ignored as a potential trigger or stabilizer of climate
variability.&lt;br/&gt;At regional scales the Agulhas influences extreme weather
events while interannual&lt;br/&gt;rainfall variations in southern Africa are
correlated with warm and cold anomalies in the Agulhas&lt;br/&gt;system,
associated with the Indian Ocean climate modes. Large Marine Ecosystems in the
region&lt;br/&gt;and the distribution of large pelagic species and their
fisheries are also influenced by variations&lt;br/&gt;in the physical Agulhas
system in an as yet poorly known manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this Chapman Conference is to identify the most pressing questions and to
design&lt;br/&gt;modeling experiments in combination with paleoceanographic and
(sustained) modern&lt;br/&gt;observations to establish the role of the Agulhas
system from regional to global scales.