* 1252225
* Collaborative Research:  Interactions between Holocene Lake Levels and Alluvial Fans in the Western U.S. in Response to Changing Climates
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Kenneth Adams, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2017
* USD 254,452.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop an integrated record of late
Holocene hydrologic change and landscape response in the western U.S. to
understand the effects of recent climate changes on landscape processes, thereby
providing an analog for what may happen in the future under different climate
scenarios. This will be accomplished by integrating late Holocene lake-level
records of four different basins with their surrounding alluvial fan records
along a 450 km north-south transect in the western Great Basin. Raised
shorelines surrounding Pyramid and Winnemucca lakes, Walker Lake, and Owens Lake
reflect significant fluctuations in the water balance of the region and form
excellent time markers that can be used to establish the timing, spatial
distribution, and types of floods on alluvial fans across broad areas. These
records will be augmented by additional age dating of shorelines and fans to
further understand how each lake basin responded to subtle late Holocene climate
fluctuations, both in terms of their water balance and the types and frequencies
of floods caused by altered climate regimes.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research range from educational activities and broad dissemination of
results to geologic hazard assessment. The science of delineating flood hazards
on alluvial fans is relatively immature compared to assessing hazards associated
with river floods. This project will provide critical information on alluvial
fan flooding to practitioners of hazard assessments by documenting the timing,
frequency, style, spatial extent, and causes of young alluvial fan activity
across large areas. The project will utilize a diverse set of tools including
geologic mapping, geomorphology, sedimentology, stratigraphy, geochronology,
tephrochronology, remote sensing, and paleoclimate analysis to develop a
regional synthesis of hydrologic variability and alluvial fan activity across a
broad N-S swath of the western U.S. The interdisciplinary nature of this project
lends itself to teaching students a variety of skill sets used by Quaternary
geologists and will contribute to the education of two graduate students, as
well as undergraduate research assistants involved in the project and about
15-20 other students who will enroll in a course based on this research at
University of Nevada, Reno. Results will be presented at two or more
professional meetings and published in at least two peer-reviewed journal
articles. To reach a broader audience, results will also be used to develop an
educational module on the effects of climate change on the landscape that will
be featured on the Great Basin Paleoenvironmental Database (GBPED) web site
(http://www.dri.edu/gbped). The GBPED is a publicly accessible resource viewable
in Google earth that provides abstracts of scientific papers on all aspects of
environmental change along with place marks that show where the studies were
conducted.