* 1252850
* EAGER: Thermoplastic Foams Stabilized with Interfacially-Active Particles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,374.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant provides funding
to test whether interfacially-adsorbed particles can stabilize polymer foams. In
aqueous systems, particles that adsorb or adhere to air/water surfaces are known
to stabilize foams. The hypothesis of this proposal is that similar
stabilization can be achieved when the bulk fluid is not water, but a molten
polymer. The EAGER proposal seeks to evaluate whether particle stabilization is
technically feasible in the real world using a commercial polymer and a foam
process similar to that used industrially. Two kinds of experiments will be
conducted. The first will be with polystyrene foams stabilized by spherical
silica particles; these experiments will test whether particles can adsorb at
the air/polymer interface even when the bulk fluid has a very high viscosity.
The second will be with polypropylene foams stabilized with fluorinated
particles; these will test whether particle-stabilized foams will survive even
if kept under molten conditions for extended
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer foams such as polystyrene foam or
polyurethane foam are commonly used for insulation, cushioning, packaging, and
for reducing the weight of structural parts. Foam bubble coalescence restricts
the range of materials that can be foamed and the processing conditions under
which foaming can occur. Particle stabilization provides a new method for
stabilizing foams with the potential for conducting foaming operations in a
wider parameter space, and also foam materials traditionally regarded as
unfoamable. The research to be conducted during this grant will clearly
establish whether the concept of particle-stabilized foams is viable
commercially; if so, the results will provide an strong foundation for further
fundamental research on the mechanisms of particle-stabilization.