* 1252533
* EAGER:  The role of small RNAs (fRNAs) in Chlamydomonas flagella
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Lefebvre, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,667.00

Intellectual Merit. Although decades of research have developed a large
catalogue of protein and lipid components of eukaryotic cilia and flagella, RNA
has not been previously described as a flagellar component. In Chlamydomonas
flagella, however, abundant, small RNAs (called flagellar RNAs or fRNAs) ranging
in size from 30 to 200 nucleotides can be found in highly purified flagellar
fractions. One attractive hypothesis for the role of these fRNAs is to regulate
the expression of the genes for flagellar proteins. There is a large body of
research showing that the assembled state of Chlamydomonas flagella is directly
correlated with the synthesis of flagellar proteins. Given the multi-faceted
roles of many different small RNAs in regulating gene expression in eukaryotic
cells, it seems likely that the sequestration of specific small RNAs in the
flagellar compartment might play a role in communicating the assembled state of
the flagella to the gene expression machinery in the cell. This project seeks to
characterize these RNAs to generate preliminary data to support a full research
grant proposal. The goals of the research are to: 1) use high throughput
sequencing procedures to identify the individual fRNAs and determine whether
they correspond to known small RNAs such as snoRNAs, miRNAs, piRNAs or others;
2) to develop specific hybridization probes to localize the fRNAs in cell bodies
and flagella; 3) to use fractionation procedures on mutant and wild-type
flagella to determine whether the fRNAs are associated with specific sub-
flagellar compartments, such as the membrane or the central pair microtubules;
and 4) to examine the kinetics of accumulation of fRNAs during flagellar
assembly and chemically induced resorption in wild-type cells and mutants with
defects in assembly and small RNA metabolism. In more than five decades of
research focused on the cell biology, biochemistry and genetics of eukaryotic
flagella, no hint of a role for RNA in flagellar assembly and function has
emerged. The outcome of this research could transform our understanding and open
a new field of research centered on the assembly and function of eukaryotic
cilia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The preliminary data that formed
the basis for this proposal were generated by an undergraduate student.
Undergraduates will continue to play a role in this research, and the project
will also provide training opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher.