* 1252697
* CAREER: Sensible Privacy: Pragmatic Privacy Controls in an Era of Sensor-Enabled Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Apu Kapadia, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2019
* USD 574,887.00

Social networking and sensor-rich devices such as smartphones are becoming
increasingly pervasive in today's society. People can share information
concerning their location, activity, fitness, and health with their friends and
family while benefiting from applications that leverage such information. Yet,
users already find managing their privacy to be challenging, and the complexity
involved in doing so is bound to increase. Usable techniques are required to
enable people to effectively manage the dissemination of their private
information as sensed by their mobile devices and sensors in their environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores `sensible' privacy controls and
feedback mechanisms that allow people (or automated mechanisms acting on their
behalf) to respond to unanticipated patterns and actual uses of their
information in a way that is usable and intuitive. This approach has two
advantages: 1) people need only care about the subset of data and usage
scenarios that have the potential to violate their privacy, thus reducing the
amount of data to which they must regulate access; and 2) people make better
decisions concerning such access when these decisions are made in a context
where they know how their data is being used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensible
privacy mechanisms can have a profound and positive societal impact by not only
helping people control their privacy, but also potentially increasing their
participation in sensor-enabled computing because of this added control. This
project firmly integrates education into the research through research
experiences for underrepresented groups and the development of course modules on
privacy at the undergraduate and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;