* 1252944
* CAREER:Toward a Self-Managing and Efficient Power Grid enabled by Corrective Power Flow Control and Distributed Grid Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Gabriela Hug, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The existing electric power grid was built for a situation in which power was
injected at a few locations by dispatchable bulk power plants to supply
inflexible loads. It was designed for reoccurring power flow patterns, has
limited control capabilities and is operated such as to fulfill the requirement
given by the deterministic formulation of N-1 security. The resulting
constraints imposed on grid operations lead to an inefficient and conservative
usage of the available transmission capacities and cause generation to be
dispatched in an economically suboptimal way. To enable the transition to an
efficient sustainable electric energy supply system, the transmission grid of
the future needs to be able to adjust to the increasingly varying power flows
caused by variable renewable generation and flexible demand. This also includes
operating the grid according to a definition of security which reflects the
probabilistic nature of system security to ensure a reasonable trade-off between
the level of security and generation cost. A grid equipped with ubiquitous power
flow control capable of rerouting power to where transmission capacity is
available forms the basis to achieve these goals. However, the associated
increase in the number of control variables also significantly increases the
complexity of operating the power grid which is difficult or even impossible to
handle with the traditional centralized grid management
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this proposal, a
fundamentally new approach for managing the transmission grid is proposed
enabling a future in which ubiquitous power flow control has become a reality. A
distributed grid management scheme based on decomposition theory is devised
which takes into account the capability for corrective, i.e. post-contingency,
actions provided by power flow control devices. Advantage is taken of the
decoupling between normal state and contingency cases and of the spatially
limited influence of outages to derive computationally efficient algorithms. The
objective is to minimize a risk-based security index in which probabilities of
contingencies and the severity of their consequences are used to define the
level of system security. To preserve the existing centralized market structure
for generation dispatch, Locational Security Impact Factors (LSIF) are newly
introduced. These factors provide the operator with a measure of influence of a
generation redispatch on security. Hence, the proposed research provides the
methods to transform the power grid into a flexible asset and realizes the
vision of a self-managing grid. The available transmission assets are used in a
non-conservative yet secure way to accommodate an economically optimal
generation dispatch achieving the desired trade-off between security and
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed project offers a
completely new view on power grid management. It is expected to yield
significant computational improvements which are needed to make optimal usage of
ubiquitous power flow control in the electric power system. Applying the
proposed concepts promises substantial reductions in renewable generation
curtailment and overall cost of generation expediting the development and
adoption of power flow control and integration of renewable generation. Hence,
the power grid is turned into an enabler rather than being an obstacle on the
path towards a sustainable electric energy future. Furthermore, the developments
in distributed system operation will be useful across other types of large-scale
systems. The proposed research will be carried out by graduate and undergraduate
students and the results will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate
courses. As the chair of the IEEE Women in Engineering (WIE) Pittsburgh section
and an instructor in the Summer Engineering Experience for Girls program at CMU,
the PI will use this research as motivation for K12 students and women to choose
power systems engineering as their field of study. This not only contributes to
increasing the number of minorities in engineering but also to training students
for a future in an industry for which one of the biggest challenges is the aging
workforce.