* 1252597
* CAREER: Modeling the structure and dynamics of neuronal circuits in the Drosophila larvae using image analytics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Gavriil Tsechpenakis, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2018
* USD 572,526.00

The ability to adjust dynamically to attain stability in the face of widely
ranging internal changes and external insults is a feature observed commonly in
natural systems. The human brain, for example, has an amazing capacity to
functionally recover from strokes that caused damages to local neuronal
circuitries. Despite their scientific and social values, little is known about
the principles of such highly adaptive systems. However, recent advances in
imaging and computational technologies are practically ripe for visualizing and
processing the small insect brain in its entirety, down to the level of
individual synaptic connectivity. The objective of this project is the image-
based computational modeling of how synaptic connectivity is established in vivo
during brain development, a major question in neuroscience today. Using imagery
acquired with state-of-the-art imaging techniques (Brainbow and MARCM) at two
Drosophila neuroscience laboratories, the goal is to estimate and pattern the
complete morphology, connectivity properties and structure dynamics of single
neurons and neuronal circuits in the Drosophila larvae. This research effort
aims at setting the principle for large-scale studies of more complex brains at
single-cell resolution, and modeling adaptive responses of neuronal circuits to
changes such as aging, disease and injury. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overreaching hypothesis of this research is that the brain is a highly adaptive
system defined by specific structure and dynamics, as a whole and at the single
cell level. Although this is a fundamental hypothesis, it has been difficult to
test using live animals, quantitatively through numerical modeling, or even
qualitatively through observation. By bringing together leading-edge imaging
technologies and computationally intensive image analytics, this project
initiates the pursuit of what makes the brain function as a whole throughout
life and continuously adapt to various changes such as aging, disease, drug
treatment, and injury. The research plan includes training a number of graduate,
undergraduate and K12 students, integrating cutting-edge research in Computer
Science and Computational Neuroscience with education. All findings, methods,
developed algorithms (open source), publications, and data will be publicly
available at the project website: http://neurovision.cs.iupui.edu/