* 1252755
* EAGER:  Characterization of Surface Tension During the Western Atlantic Climate Study (WACS)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Daniel Jacob, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2013
* USD 13,722.00

Physicochemical interactions involving marine organic matter (OM) in the surface
ocean, at the air-sea interface, and in the atmosphere have important
implications for radiative transfer and climate. Current understanding of OM
dynamics in the surface ocean and corresponding interactions with wave processes
and marine aerosol production largely neglect the physical processes that occur
within a wave-breaking bubble plume and at the sea surface: Aerosol production
in Earth system models is parameterized by wind-speed alone, and OM is often
prognostically linked to observable parameters such as chlorophyll-a, which do
not reflect observed variability. The poor state of current understanding
reflected in these highly simplified approaches results from the lack of (1)
relevant observations of surfactant characteristics at the ocean surface and (2)
a reliable theoretical framework that captures the associated non-linearity.

Seawater OM exhibits variable surfactant characteristics, which result from
nutrient-mediated microbial processes in and below the surface mixed layer,
modulated by seasonal stratification. This leads to the hypothesis that there is
a significant surfactant signature associated with these surface and at-depth
DOC pools that is reflected in the observed population of nascent ocean-derived
aerosols. It is to test this hypothesis as part of a NOAA- and NSF-funded cruise
from Boston, MA to Bermuda during August 2012 using measurements of surface
tension in conjunction with direct observation of in situ surfactants in
seawater and a large suite of ancillary measurements of water column,
atmospheric boundary layer, and aerosol properties.

This EAGER award will specifically support novel application of the maximum
bubble pressure (MBP) method to characterize surface tension at the natural air-
seawater interface. The method involves measuring pressure within gas bubbles at
the end of a fine capillary tube of a controlled size and rate injected into the
water column. The surface tension for bubbles with variable lifetimes at the
capillary tip as the bubbles are generated is governed by the diffusion rate of
surfactants from the bulk liquid to the bubble surface, based on the Laplace
equation for a film-mediated bubble.

The exploratory MBP measurements, if successful, will represent the first step
toward building a representative map of ocean surfactants, which will be useful
both to atmospheric scientists and chemical oceanographers. This will prove
valuable in improving Earth system models used in climate prediction as well as
ocean wave and weather forecast models that directly affect commerce and
transportation. A postdoctoral scholar will gain experience with the method and
benefit from participation on a research cruise with a world-class team of
atmospheric chemists and oceanographers.