* 1252157
* Integrating multidisciplinary tools to study Plio-Pleistocene paleoecology of early hominins from the Omo Valley, Ethiopia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2013,01/31/2020
* Matt Sponheimer, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 01/31/2020
* USD 179,825.00

Integrating multidisciplinary tools to study Plio-Pleistocene paleoecology of
early hominins from the Omo Valley, Ethiopia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeresenay
Alemseged, California Academy of Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to address one of the key research
questions for understanding the paleobiology of early hominins: what was the
role of ecological change on the development of major early human adaptations?
The PIs will address this broad question by developing integrative approaches to
bring new data to the paleofaunal databases from the hominin-bearing Omo
sequence (paleofauna collected by the The International Omo Research Expedition,
IORE, 1966-1976). Existing taxonomic abundance data from these large and
systematically collected paleofaunal databases will be integrated with new,
independent paleoecological data from stable isotopes and ecomorphological
features of the paleofaunal community. The stable isotopic composition of tooth
enamel from hominins and other primates from this sequence will also be analyzed
for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will not only address
questions of paleodiets and paleoecology of East African faunas, but may
significantly transform our understanding of the the evolution of the mammalian
community in the Omo-Turkana Basin of Ethiopia and Kenya from &gt;4 to 1.2
million years ago, which is one of the most significant basins for early human
evolutionary studies. This study will also provide direct and fresh data on the
diets consumed by at least four hominin species encountered in the Omo sequence,
and will better our understanding of when and where hominins first began to
significantly consume foods derived from savanna resources. The research will
continue international collaborations between US academic institutions and the
National Museum of Ethiopia in Addis Ababa, which provides a venue for public
outreach and education within Ethiopia and beyond. The data from this project
will be incorporated into a database system, and made readily available via
several outlets. This proposal will provide graduate training for two graduate
students integrating several research communities: geology, geochemistry,
paleontology, and paleoanthropology. The research results will be used in a
variety of outlets for public outreach.