* 1252128
* Collaborative Research:   Genome-enabled Investigation of S(0) Cycling in a Subterranean Microbial Ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Macalady, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Microbial-mineral interactions are ubiquitous and crucial aspects of geochemical
cycling at the Earth's surface. Significant progress has been made towards
identifying how specific groups of microorganisms interact with minerals,
especially Fe oxides. However, there has been little work on how microbes make
and break elemental sulfur (S(0)), though geologists have postulated microbial
involvement in producing economic S(0) deposits. Chemical and biological
controls on this process are not well understood, and will require a better
understanding of factors affecting S(0) production and consumption within
microbial biofilms.

Sulfur-cycling in the deep subsurface Frasassi cave system has been the target
of several previous investigations due to its unique biogeochemistry and
relative accessibility to human exploration. The cave ecosystem is sustained by
microbial chemosynthesis taking place near the surface of its perenially
sulfidic and microoxic aquifer. Conspicuous white biofilms in the cave waters
contain 20 to 80% elemental sulfur by mass. Thus its geochemical and
microbiological features make Frasassi a promising system for investigating
microbial interactions with S(0), an important solid-phase intermediate in the
sulfur cycle. Enigmatic Epsilonproteobacteria from the globally distributed and
largely uncultivated Sulfurovumales clade are major players in Frassasi
biofilms. They are especially abundant in waters with high sulfide and low
oxygen supply, conditions which should lead to S(0) accumulation due to limited
availability of electron acceptors. Using Frasassi biofilms and enrichment
cultures as a model system, investigators are combining metatranscriptomics,
correlative electron microscopy, and geochemistry with field and laboratory
experiments to develop new understanding of S(0)-accumulating biofilm
communities. This research will improve understanding of (i) the microbial role
in producing geologic S(0) deposits; (ii) mechanisms for microbial interactions
with solid phase S(0); and (iii) the metabolic capabilities of currently
uncultured Epsilonproteobacteria. The research supports the long-term goal of
integrating genetic and geochemical understanding of modern and ancient S
biogeochemistry.

Project funds provide for the mentoring of two graduate students and a
postdoctoral scholar. The proposed project provides outstanding opportunities
for outreach to the general public due to interest in caves and extreme
microbes. Images and microbial cultures from the project will be utilized in two
highly successful annual events: PSU Exploration Day and PSU Geosciences Dept.
"Shake, Rattle, Rocks". These events reach more than 2000 K-12 students and
parents last year and 150 third grade students. Project microslide cultures will
be incorporated into a hands-on grade 6-12 teacher workshop and the College of
Earth, Ocean and Environment's annual Coast Day on the Lewes campus, a 34-year
tradition that now attracts thousands of community members. Results will also be
shared as part of the DE Sea Grant At Sea newsletter, and Sea Talk radio
segments on NPR.