* 1252706
* CAREER:   Molecular mechanisms of phloem transport and seed loading of heavy metals
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* David Mendoza-Cozatl, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,077,516.00

Plants and seeds are the main dietary source of proteins, vitamins and
micronutrients such as zinc, iron and manganese. This project focuses on
understanding how molecules are loaded into seeds as a basis to selectively
enrich staple seed crops with specific nutrients such as iron and zinc, a
process referred to as bio-fortification. Phloem is a vascular tissue that
transports nutrients to all parts of the plant. Nutrients are loaded into seeds
by phloem vessels (veins) that run across the leaves and through the stem. In
leaves, molecules are loaded into the phloem stream by transporter proteins
located in companion cells. Despite their importance, the majority of
transporter proteins specific to companion cells remain unknown. This project
will use a powerful molecular technique (ribo-seq) to differentiate between
transporter genes expressed in companion cells and transporter genes expressed
in other types of cells. Phloem-loading transporter genes will be further
characterized by identifying the type of molecule (amino acids, vitamins,
metals, etc) each transporter gene mobilizes into the phloem stream.
Additionally, this project will integrate cross-disciplinary educational
programs by pursuing three major outreach activities that will be continuously
monitored and evaluated to maximize the benefits. First, journalism students
will have hands-on experience on scientific activities and will communicate
their experiences through media stories, videos and blogs. Scientific journalism
is vital to promoting awareness about how science impacts communities. Second,
this project will bring together plant science and engineering students by
engaging them in interdisciplinary research. These types of interactions have
dramatically improved the way biological systems are understood and will
generate more opportunities for future interdisciplinary collaboration. Third,
high school science teachers will be invited to discuss current research on
plant biology and incorporate new developments into their existing curriculum.