* 1252238
* EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop:  Engaging the Critical Zone community to bridge long tail science with big data
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Christopher Duffy, Stroud Water Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2013
* USD 99,922.00

Critical Zone (CZ) scientists take as their charge the effort to integrate
theory, models and data from the multitude of disciplines studying processes on
the Earth's surface - from the atmosphere at the vegetation's canopy to the
lower boundary of actively cycling ground waters. As such, critical zone
scientists and their data managers are at the front line of efforts to
effectively compile and use the "dark data in the Long Tail" of earth science
and integrate that data with the "Big Data" produced by hydrologists,
atmospheric scientists, geospatial modelers and molecular biologists.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF EarthCube initiative recently solicited proposals
for domain workshops "designed to listen to the needs of the end-user groups
that make up the geosciences and to understand better how data-enabled science
can help them achieve their scientific goals." The proponents will convene a
workshop to bring together critical zone domain scientists with computer
scientists active in EarthCube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop would thus
serve two objectives: (1) engage approximately 45 cyber-literate critical zone
scientists in the EarthCube process; and (2) inform about 20 of EarthCube's
cyberscientists of the diversity needs of CZ science. The overall goal of the
workshop would be to develop a set of unifying requirements for the integration
of "long tail" data and "big data" and to develop an interactive community of
domain and cyber scientists to pursue solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
many examples of how cyber-infrastructure developed for geoscientists have
broader impacts to the public. The national weather service data and model
forecasts are highlighted on television and other media outlets. Fishermen,
rafters and canoeists rely on USGS gauging data for their recreational
activities. The Model My Watershed platform is harnessing GIS and hydrological
modeling for educational purposes in classrooms and informal settings and also
by citizen scientists.