* 1252359
* CAREER: Multi-Frequency Multi-Output Switching Power Converters for Dynamic Energy Distribution in Highly Integrated Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Ayman Fayed, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 10/31/2015
* USD 233,345.00

CAREER: Multi-Frequency Multi-Output Switching Power Converters for Dynamic
Energy Distribution in Highly Integrated Systems &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: With the diminishing returns of technology
scaling in terms of reducing power consumption in highly integrated systems,
researchers are moving towards dividing the system into many sub-components and
dynamically adapting their power supplies to their exact demand at any given
time. For this to be effective there is a need to implement numerous highly-
efficient power supplies with minimal cost and footprint. These power supplies
must feature wide bandwidth to enable dynamic demand-based operation. The goal
of this research is to develop new power supply architectures that are capable
of efficiently generating large number of power domains with over 500MHz
bandwidth using only integrated capacitors and a single shared inductor. This
will be accomplished by adopting a single-step power conversion approach to
avoid efficiency degradation due to cascaded power converters, and implementing
the large number of power domains by proposing a Multi-Frequency Single-
Inductor-Multiple-Output power converter topology. In this new topology, the
rate of energy switching from the main energy source is decoupled from the rate
of energy distribution to the multiple outputs, and therefore, the output
bandwidth becomes no longer limited by low frequency switching at the input
side. By using high frequency energy distribution to the outputs, very fast
transient response can be achieved and the output capacitors required can be
scaled-down and integrated on-chip, thus limiting off-chip components to a
single inductor. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research focuses on the
critical area of power conversion and distribution in highly integrated systems
in response to the growing demand for energy-efficient, cost-effective, and
small footprint solutions. The proposed power conversion topology will overcome
the fundamental challenge of implementing a large number of power supplies while
also preserving high efficiency, achieving wide bandwidth, and small footprint
and cost. This will enable high speed dynamic adaptation of power supplies,
which will significantly reduce power consumption in highly integrated systems.
The ability to do that will be transformational not only for battery-operated
devices, but also in non-battery-operated ones where heat dissipation is
critical. The educational component of the proposed project will help contribute
to filling a serious gap in electrical engineering education in the US, where
integrated power supply design is neither covered under traditional power
electronics, nor integrated circuits curriculums. The proposed outreach
activities in collaboration with the University of Texas-Pan American involving
Hispanic students will further contribute to improving participation by minority
groups in the field of science and engineering.