* 1252876
* ROBOT ENHANCED MOBILITY II:  THE EMERGENCE OF MOBILITY AND SOCIALIZATION IN YOUNG CHILDREN
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Sunil Agrawal, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2017
* USD 514,998.00

Infants are intense explorers. Each infant develops the ability to think, sense
and move from experiences gathered during daily exploration of the world. The
ability to be independently mobile through crawling and then walking is a major
cause of developmental change for the infant. In their previous NSF funded
project this team developed a novel robot enhanced mobility device as a model
system to test hypotheses related to how an infant's mobility impacts their
cognition, language and movement development. Specifically, they found that very
young infants have the ability to learn to drive a 4 wheeled mobile robot before
they can crawl or walk. More importantly, this early mobility advanced their
cognitive, language and motor development. This early mobility was learned in a
typical lab environment with no other children present. In this follow-up
project, this team continues the use of mobile robotics but now with a new robot
that allows infants to learn mobility and socialization within a social setting
with other children. This new technology and training will allow investigators
to test another key question: If early mobility that is learned in a non social
setting advance cognition, can early mobility that emerges within a social
setting advance early social behaviors? Here, infants will be provided with
early mobility training creatively linked by a new socially mobile 4 wheeled
robot that allows infant to be mobile while playing with other children. This
novel robot uses a special joystick and unique tracking sensors to "encourage"
the infant driver to engage in social play with other children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has basic science, medical, business and
educational impact. For example, it will increase our understanding of the
general exploratory capacity of infants, and advance developmentally inspired
robotics. The resulting training and technology will be openly shared with other
basic and applied labs so that they can test the role of mobility in their areas
of development. Resulting data and technology provide a foundation for the next
generation of real world vehicles for use by infants born with mobility
impairments. Due to the lack of technology, these infants must wait until they
are 3-5 years of age before power wheelchairs are available. This team believes
the significant behavioral, neurophysiological, educational and societal costs
of delaying mobility are unnecessary. There is already significant medical and
business interest in small wheeled vehicle that could provide real world
mobility and advance a young child's development. The educational impact is
equally exciting and results from the unique collaboration of robotics,
psychology, early education and pediatric rehabilitation. High school and
university students interested in engineering and/or child development work as
valued members on meaningful aspects of this project. As with the previous NSF
work, this team involves students, teachers and clinicians in robotics design,
courses and seminars for early educators, webinars on topics such as
developmentally inspired robotics and high tech pediatric rehabilitation. This
team also maintains active relationships with graduate/undergraduate/secondary
school programs with a particular interest in engaging under-represented groups
in the fun and discovery of science and engineering. This team continues their
push to place the lab within the community and vice versa ("civic science") such
that all members of the community can participate in the fun, excitement and
deep satisfaction that comes from using basic science to answer real world
questions.