* 1252443
* Student and Postdoc Travel Support for DNA19
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2014
* USD 21,000.00

This award will support student and postdoctoral scholar travel expenses for the
19th International Meeting on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming (DNA19),
which will take place September 23-27, 2013 at Arizona State University. This
conference emphasizes topics that bridge computation, biology, and
nanotechnology and attracts top researchers in the fields of Computer Science,
Mathematics, Chemistry, Molecular Biology, and Nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of these funds is to provide assistance to
students and postdoctoral scholars who are delivering oral or poster
presentations at the conference. The process of selecting the travel award
recipients is intended to give priority to women and underrepresented
minorities, in addition to supporting quality research presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The topics of the DNA
computing and molecular programming conference include control of molecular
folding and self-assembly to construct nanostructures; demonstration of
switches, gates, devices, and circuits with biomolecules; molecular motors and
molecular robotics; computational processes in vitro and in vivo; studies of
fault tolerance and error correction; synthetic biology and in vitro evolution;
software tools for analysis, simulation, and design; as well as a range of
applications in engineering, physics, chemistry, biology, and medicine.
Scientific discoveries discussed in this conference should eventually produce
important new technologies and new nanoscale manufacturing techniques for
materials and devices, new medical biosensor and therapeutics, and new models
for understanding organization and complexity in biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;The travel awards will
help to foster the development of the next generation of molecular programmers,
by encouraging students and postdocs to attend, present their work, and interact
with other important players in the field. There is a unique blend of theory and
practice at DNA computing and molecular programming conferences, from a range of
academic disciplines. Attending this conference will allow the students and
postdocs to gain an understanding of the process of creating and developing
novel scientific ideas.