* 1252975
* CAREER: NEURAL-COMPUTATIONAL ANALYSIS OF READING (AND READING IMPAIRMENT) IN INDIVIDUALS
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Sarah Laszlo, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 05/31/2018
* USD 413,263.00

The ability to read has important economic and social consequences. Adults that
cannot read face disadvantages in the work force and as a result sometimes
suffer from mental health problems like depression. Children that have
difficulty learning to read, in addition to being at risk for depression, also
suffer from increased rates of bullying and can experience poorer relationships
with their parents and teachers, when compared with children that learn to read
normally. A crucial task for the psychological and educational sciences is to
ensure that the best possible tools are available for making sure that every
elementary school student has the maximum possible chance for reading success.
This project will contribute to that goal by characterizing the brain states of
children learning how to read in a more in-depth manner than has ever been done
before. The team will create a new, detailed picture of the different strategies
individuals use to become successful readers, and what goes wrong in those
strategies in individuals that struggle with reading. This picture will be based
on a combination of measures ranging from report card scores to the signature
activity that occurs in the brain when a word is successfully identified.

The principle investigator has pledged to work closely with doctors at her
area's leading center for developmental science (the Binghamton University
Institute for Child Development) to make sure that the results of the tudy are
immediately put in to practice in a responsible manner, so that children in the
community can start enjoying the benefits of the work as soon as possible. The
research team further pledges to make the (anonymous) results of the study
available publicly, on the internet, so that educators and researchers
everywhere can use the new information collected through this project to aid
students in their own communities. Because the results will be available so
widely, many more research groups will be able to interpret and extend what is
found than would be the case if the results were not so extensively shared. This
means that the work started here has the potential to ignite a new era of
investigation, nation and world-wide, that seeks to use the human brain to
inform literacy education as it never has before.