* 1252440
* Learning by Teaching a Synthetic Peer: Investigating the effect of tutor scaffolding for tutor learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,519,349.00

This project focusses on equation solving in Algebra I for seventh and eighth
grade students. This research extends research on an on-going project on
developing an on-line, game-like learning environment called APLUS (Artificial
Peer Learning environment Using SimStudent) in which students learn by teaching
a synthetic peer called SimStudent. Learning by teaching is an exciting and
innovative approach to learning and instruction that is often reported to be
effective in classroom trials. However, little is known about the underlying
cognitive and social theory on how and when students learn by teaching. Although
some studies have shown a potential for scale learning by teaching through
implementation in technology, very little is known about the transformative
theory to successfully implement learning by teaching. To address this issue,
the researchers build on their current work to further develop the theory of
learning by teaching and to understand how best to achieve the theory
development through advanced technology support. The researchers also
investigate the similarities and differences between learning by teaching and
learning by being tutored to better engineer effective advanced learning
technology. In particular, the researchers propose to improve the effectiveness
of APLUS by providing adaptive scaffolding for students to teach SimStudent
correctly and appropriately. The researchers also propose to collect detailed
process data that show fine-grained interactions between the student and
SimStudent in addition to outcome data, which are test scores. By combining the
process and outcome data, the researchers will explore the cognitive and social
theory of learning by teaching. The researchers hypothesize that providing help
on how to solve problems (cognitive help) and how to tutor (metacognitive help)
will facilitate tutor learning. They also conjecture that the interaction
between cognitive and metacognitive help will yield a rich learning environment
that, in combination with the unique characteristics of learning by teaching,
will be more effective than learning by being tutored. The following research
questions will be addressed:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Q1: Does cognitive help
facilitate tutor learning? If so, how and why?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Q2: Does
metacognitive help facilitate tutor learning? If so, how and
why?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Q3: Is learning by teaching with the meta-tutor
assistance better than learning by being tutored?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Learning by teaching has been widely recognized to be effective for
academically challenging populations, including African American students and
underprivileged students. Therefore, the proposed intervention, if proven to be
effective, would contribute to the development of effective STEM learning
support system for all students regardless of their race/ethnicity, gender,
socioeconomic status, or geographical locale in contemporary US classrooms.
Since the entire proposed technology would run as a web-based application, the
software products will be distributed widely and rapidly. The study data will be
shared through the opendata repository, DataShop, under the direct supervision
of the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center. Thus, the research effort will
contribute to the general learning research community by providing that
community opportunities to conduct secondary data analyses.