* 1252069
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Temperature, Melting, and Mantle Flow in the North American Upper Mantle with 3-D Models of Shear Velocity, Radial Anisotropy, and Attenuation
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Colleen Dalton, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 62,326.00

The continent of North America is geologically and tectonically diverse. The
western half of the continent includes a major plate boundary and has been host
to mountain-building events, volcanism, and extension within the recent
geological past. The eastern portion of North America is located far from any
plate boundary and has not experienced significant tectonic activity in hundreds
of millions of years. Understanding how the dynamic processes occurring in
Earth's interior have given rise to this complex terrain is fundamental to
understanding the growth and evolution of continents in general and North
America in particular. Imaging variations in the speed of seismic waves
traveling through the crust and mantle provides important constraints on the
temperature and composition of those regions as well as the presence of
partially molten rock. However, since each of these factors, and any combination
of them, can affect velocity, additional data sets are needed to achieve a
robust interpretation. The absorption of seismic-wave energy is also controlled
by temperature, composition, and melt content, and thus jointly interpreting
variations in seismic-wave velocity and attenuation allows for improved
constraints on the properties of Earth's interior. To date, there have been very
few studies of seismic attenuation beneath North America, largely because of the
difficulties involved with measuring and analyzing the amplitudes of seismic
waves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop 3-D models of shear
attenuation and radially anisotropic shear velocity for the North American upper
mantle using surface waves recorded by USArray. Surface-wave phase and amplitude
are measured using a new interstation cross-correlation approach that exploits
waveform similarity at nearby stations, and the phase and amplitude data will be
utilized together to take advantage of the dependence of both data sets on
seismic velocity and attenuation. From these models, variations in temperature,
composition, and partial melt across the continent will be estimated, and a more
complete picture of how structures like the Colorado Plateau, the Basin and
Range, the Mid-Continent Rift, and the North American craton are controlled by
the processes in and properties of the underlying mantle will emerge.