* 1252315
* Perturbation Pressure Variations Deduced from Earthscope's US Array
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* John Horel, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2017
* USD 381,605.00

Observations of surface pressure perturbations have been used for decades to
understand gravity waves, convective processes, and terrain-flow interactions.
While pressure perturbations on all scales have been studied, there is a
research gap between the emphasis on low amplitude, high frequency perturbations
arising typically from local turbulent boundary layer processes and large
amplitude, lower frequency ones that can propagate over large distances and
often lead to damaging winds. The pressure perturbations and pressure gradients
leading to wind ramps that affect wind energy tend to fall between these two
extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will take advantage of the
deployment beginning in 2010 of pressure sensors on the NSF sponsored Earthscope
seismic Transportable Array (US Array). The sensors were initially in the
central United States and now beginning to be deployed after two years to the
eastern United States. These pressure data at a sampling interval of 1 Hz at
~400 stations will be used to document pressure perturbations on temporal scales
from seconds to days and spatial gradients and wave-like characteristics of such
perturbations on spatial scales larger than ~150 km.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of this study are: (1) Improve access for the atmospheric
research community to pressure data acquired by the US Array; (2) Develop
climatologies at each observing site of pressure perturbations in terms of
frequency and amplitude as a function of location, season, and time of day; (3)
Assess the amplitudes of horizontal perturbation pressure gradients in the
context of local, mesoscale, and synoptic-scale flows; (4) Determine regional
differences in the characteristics of propagating pressure perturbations; and
(5) Examine pressure perturbations arising from terrain-flow interactions and
thermally forced systems. The local and regional climatologies, case studies,
and composites generated as part of this study will be used to examine the
interactions of the many physical processes leading to pressure perturbations,
i.e., solar tides, mountain-flow interactions, convective systems, ducted
gravity waves, water breeze systems, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This research may potentially advance knowledge and
understanding of the numerous physical processes that lead to the redistribution
of mass in the atmosphere. While there has been considerable work on how surface
pressure perturbations are generated and their impacts, there has no any
systematic study of pressure perturbations over the broad range of relevant
temporal scales (seconds to days) over a large region (in this case, the eastern
half of the United States). This research and the knowledge gained from the
study will be applicable to similar phenomenon around the world. The project
builds on familiarity with the US Array project, computer science expertise in
data analysis, mining, and visualization, and prior research in statistical
analysis, data assimilation, water breeze systems, and boundary-layer processes
in mountainous terrain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Improved access to the US Array pressure data will lead to increasing
collaboration among researchers interested in a broad spectrum of research
arising from applications of these data. Benefits for society at large include
improved nowcasting and prediction of severe storms arising from many different
types of weather situations and better utilizations of wind energy resources.
The research and teaching activities of the lead PI are closely related and
enable the direct infusion of research findings into undergraduate and graduate
courses at the University of Utah and elsewhere. The project involves the
support and mentoring of a postdoctoral fellow and a doctoral student.