* 1252819
* EAGER: Identifying Graphic Design Principles for Reports and Presentations
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Maneesh Agrawala, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

Reports and presentations are frequently used to share information. In business,
science, education, law, and government, such documents are ubiquitous. When
they are well-designed reports and presentations combine text with charts,
tables and diagrams to visually highlight important findings. Good designers
carefully choose colors, fonts, layout and composition to clarify and emphasize
key ideas. Yet, creating an effective graphic design is challenging; most people
who need to produce reports and presentations do not have the relevant training
in art and design. Even with the proper training, creating effective designs can
be extremely time-consuming. The result is that all too often reports and
presentations are poorly designed. The goal of this exploratory research is to
develop new tools for improving the graphic design of reports and presentations
to highlight the desired information content. The initial work centers on the
problem of identifying the principles of effective visual communication and
graphic design for generating high-quality reports and diagrams. The challenge
is to identify the most significant dimensions of visual design (e.g. spatial
layout, fonts, colors, etc.) based on a large corpus of reports and
presentations. A combination of crowdsourcing, image analysis and machine
learning techniques will be used to determine the visual properties that
characterize good graphic designs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected result
will lead to better understanding of how graphic design contributes to the
clarity and usability of a report or presentation. This work will produce an
explicit set of principles for creating effective graphic design and web-based
materials for teaching these principles to improve design literacy in society at
large. The project provides research experience to students and design
principles will also be presented to high school and college students. The
project Web site (http://vis.berkeley.edu/projects/graphicDesignPrinciples ) is
used to disseminate results, including software; a corpus of reports and
presentations from web-based sources; papers and technical reports; and
educational materials.