* 1252795
* CAREER: Deformations in statistics, cosmology and image analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2021
* Ethan Anderes, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,004.00

Smooth invertible transformations, or deformations, are fast becoming important
tools in modern data analysis. The nonlinear nature of deformations makes these
objects extremely powerful while at the same time making them challenging to
estimate and theoretically explore. This proposal is dedicated to the
development and theoretical understanding of deformations applied to three
specific areas of research: statistics, cosmology and image analysis. The
theoretical properties of estimated deformations for generating nonparametric
and semiparametric statistical estimates are analyzed through a surprising
connection with Stein's method. In addition, the investigator focuses on recent
results found in the theory of optimal transport, which has the potential to
provide a rigorous theoretical foundation for deformable templates. The
computational aspects of estimated deformations will utilize a new Euler-
Lagrange characterization of a penalized maximum likelihood estimate, which can
significantly relieve the typical computational burden associated with
estimation. One consequence will be to make these methods available for
widespread use by statistical practitioners in a broad range of problems:
nonparametric and semiparametric density estimation, estimating gravitational
lensing in cosmology and posterior sampling techniques, to name a few. Another
intellectual merit of this proposal are the scientific ramifications of two new
proposed deformation estimates of weak lensing of the cosmic microwave
background (CMB): a wavelet/Slepian quadratic estimator and a new Bayesian
lensing estimator. Gravitational lensing studies have become one of the most
successful tools for probing the nature of dark matter. The precise estimation
of lensing is important for a number of reasons including, but not limited to,
understanding cosmic structure, constraining cosmological parameters and
detecting gravity waves. The investigator proposes to uses wavelets and Slepian
multi-tapers to adapt the quadratic estimate to local foreground contaminants
and sky cuts, which are ubiquitous features in most modern cosmological surveys.
The investigator proposes a new Bayesian estimator which has the potential to
dramatically change the way gravitational lensing studies are done and how they
are integrated within other astronomical surveys.

Smooth invertible transformations, or deformations, are fast becoming important
tools in modern data analysis. They have been used with spectacular success in
the field of computational anatomy where time varying vector field flows which
generate deformations are used to statistically analyze medical fMRI images and
quantify abnormal morphological structure. In cosmology, deformations are used
to model gravitational distortions of the cosmic microwave background from dark
matter density fluctuations, and have resulted in a deeper understanding of
cosmic structure. Even though these important tools are becoming integrated in
modern scientific methods, the statistical properties of estimated deformations
have been largely unexplored. This proposal is dedicated to the development and
theoretical understanding of deformations applied to three specific areas of
research: statistics, cosmology and image analysis. The tools resulting from
this project will be useful, not only in statistics, but also in other branches
of science and technology ranging from genetics to machine learning. In the
field of physics, for example, the potential scientific progress resulting from
gravitational lensing estimation could a have broad impact on scientific
understanding and the future of scientific research. Moreover, it is becoming
increasingly important to train graduate and undergraduate students with the
tools necessary to successfully navigate interdisciplinary work, and who are
prepared for independent research. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposal
will foster a culture of collaboration that will reach the fundamentals of
statistical education and will deepen ties with statistics and other physical
sciences. In addition, through the integration of research and education, the
proposal will teach both graduate and undergraduate students research skills.
The result will be two fold. First, it will train graduate students to become
creative independent researchers who can contribute within an academic
environment. Second, it will educate undergraduates to navigate a work
environment which values creative independent investigation.