* 1252477
* Testing the Effects of Real-time Scaffolding of Science Inquiry Driven by Automated Performance Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Janice Gobert, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,499,346.00

This project addresses how middle school students conduct scientific inquiry in
complex domains. Expertise and methods from the learning sciences, science
education, assessment, statistics, computer science, and educational data mining
are combined in a program of work that: (1) uses knowledge engineering and data
mining to develop methods for performance assessment of inquiry in earth and
life sciences; (2) uses these performance algorithms to trigger a pedagogical
agent that will provide individualized scaffolding to students in real time; and
(3) studies the effects of that scaffolding. This project builds on an extensive
body of prior research (including several NSF-supported projects) on STEM
learning with simulations and assessments of STEM learning. The two main
research questions seek to address the extent to which inquiry skills scaffolded
by the pedagogical agent transfer across tasks within the same topic, and across
topics within the same domain. Key activities to be conducted over the course of
the three-year project include: (1) developing multiple types of scaffolds for
the pedagogical agent; (2) pilot testing and analysis with students and teachers
to drive iterative improvement; (3) developing (using knowledge engineered and
data mined algorithms) and validating metrics to assess the inquiry skills of
(a) hypothesis generation, (b) data collection, (c) data interpretation, and (d)
warranting claims; (4) integrating assessment metrics with the pedagogical
agent; and (5) data collection and analysis to address the research questions.
Data collection will take place in five Massachusetts schools, comparing middle
school students who do to those who do not receive inquiry scaffolding via the
pedagogical agent (students randomly assigned to treatment conditions by topic).
At the conclusion of the project, log data will be made freely available to
scientific researchers for secondary research and teaching purposes via the
Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center DataShop.