* 1252187
* EAR/IF:   Prototype Investigations into Integrated GPS/Seismic Networks for Improved Finite Fault Slip Modeling and Earthquake Characterization
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Yehuda Bock, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Recent great earthquakes and ensuing tsunamis in Sumatra, Chile and Japan have
demonstrated the need for accurate ground displacements that fully characterize
the great amplitudes and broad dynamic range associated with these vast, complex
ruptures. Our ability to model these events, whether in real-time or after the
fact, is limited by the weaknesses of both seismic and geodetic networks.
Geodetic instruments provide the static component as well as coarse dynamic
motions but are much less precise than seismic instruments, especially in the
vertical direction. Seismic instruments, in turn, provide exceptionally-
sensitive dynamic motions but typically have difficulty recovering unbiased
near-field static offsets and low-frequency motions because of contamination,
for example, from instrument tilt. This three-year project is demonstrating a
new paradigm for studying the processes of large earthquakes and the hazards
they pose. Accurate three-dimensional seismogeodetic waveforms (broadband
displacements and velocities) that span the full spectrum of seismic motion will
be achieved through integration of geodetic and seismic measurements
instrumentation developed at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. The main
science objectives are to improve finite-fault slip inversions through the
optimal combination of geodetic and seismic data at the observational level and
to investigate appropriate methodologies to perform full waveform inversions
using the resulting data. With UNAVCO engineers, a test bed of integrated
GPS/seismic stations is being established at existing real-time Plate Boundary
Observatory stations along the southern San Andreas fault system as a prototype
for further expansion along the Western North America plate margin. The stations
are being upgraded with low-cost MEMS accelerometers and a Geodetic Module that
will synchronize the GPS and accelerometer data and estimate seismogeodetic
displacements and velocities.

The project is installing and testing seismic upgrades to existing GPS
monitoring stations for improved response to and modeling and understanding of
large earthquakes and ensuing tsunamis, such as recent ones in Sumatra, Chile
and Japan. The broader impacts of this project are significant in terms of
scientific value, engineering infrastructure, civilian use, and economic impact,
and are related for the most part to the real-time nature and capabilities of
enhanced GPS/seismic monitoring. The new observations contribute directly to
natural hazards research and early warning systems for earthquakes, volcanoes
and tsunamis, to atmospheric research including short-term weather forecasting
and related flooding hazards, and to earthquake engineering research for large
structures (e.g., bridges, buildings, dams). The ultimate goal is to save lives
and minimize damage to essential infrastructure. The new observations also
contribute to civilian applications requiring precise real-time positioning
(e.g., surveying, geographic information systems, agriculture) and hence to
economic stimulus. Finally, the project supports collaborative and
interdisciplinary research, education of technologically sophisticated graduate
students, strengthening of diversity in support of workforce development, and
enhancement of curricula at a variety of levels through engagement new types of
data sets that have direct societal impact.