* 1252249
* EAGER: Effects of Thermodynamic Phase Changes at Reservoir Conditions on the Interfacial Properties of Chemicals Used in Hydraulic Fracturing
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Jeffrey Harwell, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2014
* USD 95,183.00

1252249&lt;br/&gt;Harwell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of hydraulic
fracturing and horizontal drilling has dramatically affected energy production
in the United States and is poised to have a similar impact across the rest of
the world. Increased natural gas production from previously uneconomical shale
gas reservoir has already led to plummeting natural gas prices, economic booms
in several states, and dramatic investments in new manufacturing facilities. The
potential is so large that there is already discussion of the possibility of the
US becoming energy independent and even becoming a net energy exporter. The
growth in hydraulic fracturing operations has, however, led to fears of
environmental impacts. One potential impact which causes perhaps the most
concern is ground water contamination by the chemicals used in the fracking
fluid. Extensive fate and transport studies over the past four decades provide a
deep resource for understanding and predicting the migration of typical fracking
fluid chemicals should they reach ground water aquifers, but conditions in a
typical shale gas reservoir differ dramatically from those in an aquifer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project stems from the hypothesis that
thermodynamic phase changes in the aqueous solutions which are the carrier
fluids in hydraulic fracturing will lead to greatly increased adsorption of
fracturing fluid chemicals by both the shale gas minerals and the sand used as a
proppant. This increased adsorption implies a greatly reduced potential for the
chemicals to find any kind of path by which they might migrate to a ground water
aquifer. Understanding these potential phase changes is made more difficult by
the high concentrations of dissolved salts (total dissolved solids, TDS) found
in hydraulic fracturing operation ?flowback? water. The investigators propose
experiments to study the phase changes induced in fracturing fluids by the high
temperatures and electrolyte concentrations that develop when the fluids are
injected into a shale gas reservoir. They will also measure the interfacial
properties of fracking chemicals at the rock/brine and proppant/brine interfaces
at gas reservoir conditions of temperature, pressure and TDS. Experiments will
include both batch and flow-through reactors and measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of the proposal arises
from the contribution to better understanding the effect of reservoir conditions
on the thermodynamic activity of fracturing fluid chemicals in a reservoir. The
results will provide another key element in understanding the true potential of
hydraulic fracturing operations to produce long term environmental damage in the
form of chemical contamination of ground water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposal arises from the educational benefits to the
graduate and undergraduate students who will be supported while conducting the
experiments described in the proposal. The results will also make a significant
contribution to the debate about fracking?s potential for ground water
contamination. The investigators also expect the results to lead to a discussion
of design of better fracking chemicals to improve the performance of the
fracking fluids under the extreme conditions found in gas shale reservoirs.