* 1252539
* CAREER: Orchestrating transcriptional reprogramming by combinatorial complexity of general transcriptional regulation and specific immune responses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Ping He, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,086,592.00

Perception of evolutionarily conserved microbial components elicits robust plant
immune responses, including rapid and profound transcriptional reprogramming
against pathogen attack. The signaling networks underlying plant immunity remain
largely elusive. We have developed a sensitive genetic screen based on the early
transcriptional changes upon pathogen signal perception. This high-throughput
screen was grounded in Arabidopsis transgenic plants carrying an early and
specific immune responsive marker gene FRK1 promoter fused with a luciferase
(LUC) reporter. A series of mutants with altered pFRK1::LUC activity were
identified from an EMS-mutagenized population and named as Arabidopsis genes
governing immune gene expression (aggie). These aggie mutants exhibited distinct
patterns of altered immune responses, suggesting that the mutations likely occur
at different genes/pathways in plant immune signaling. Molecular cloning and
biochemical characterization of these Aggie genes hold significant promise to
reveal novel components in plant immune signaling and uncover mechanisms by
which specific immune responsive gene expression is regulated by the general
transcriptional machinery. The project will elucidate the signaling networks
underlying plant immunity and provide enriched genetic resources for
manipulation of crops with broad-spectrum and durable resistance. Our aggie-luc
screen was specifically tailored for undergraduate students, and will provide
training for graduate and postdoctoral researchers. The project includes an
innovative and comprehensive education and outreach program centering on Green
Immunology with seminars, lectures and cutting-edge research experiences for
high school and undergraduate students, particularly underrepresented minority
students in the Texas Rio Grande Valley.