* 1252235
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Processing of Referential Expressions in Discourse in L2 English
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Mari Miyao, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2016
* USD 16,404.00

There are various ways speakers use language to refer to things and people.
Depending on context, a person named JOHN can be referred to as "he," "the guy,"
"John," etc. English native speakers tend to use a pronoun (e.g., "he") when its
referent is salient in their mind, such as when it is the discourse topic; when
saliency decreases, they tend to use a more explicit form, such as a repeated
proper name (e.g., "John"). In comparison to English, Chinese and Japanese have
an additional option: omission, i.e., the "null pronoun." When the referent is
highly salient, native Chinese speakers use overt pronouns, but they can also
use the null pronoun. By contrast, native Japanese speakers rarely use overt
pronouns but frequently use the null pronoun.

This project investigates how intermediate-to-advanced second language learners
of English, whose native language is Chinese or Japanese, as well as native
speakers of these three languages, refer to people embedded in various discourse
contexts. The participants' preferences for referential expressions are examined
in real-time comprehension and production tasks. The research project
investigates whether preferences are influenced by differences of saliency
manipulated in contexts and/or by cognitive load; greater processing demand
(e.g., production) should decrease saliency of referents, which should in turn
increase the preference of a more explicit form. The project also investigates
whether Chinese learners use more overt pronouns in English than Japanese
learners do, reflecting their use of pronouns in their native language.

This is the first study to systematically examine the preferences in both
comprehension and production tasks by learners of English and the three groups
of native speakers. Unlike previous second-language studies that used complex
tasks and found problems coordinating discourse and syntax even in near-native
learners, this project uses simple sentences and procedures to see learners?
true processing behavior. Since foreign-language classrooms rarely cover use of
referential expressions in discourse, the research results should provide
language educators with much-needed insights into their acquisition and use.
This project also enhances the training of a promising graduate student.