* 1252463
* Developmental skills linked to math and science achievement: An interdisciplinary data-intensive approach to identification and improvement through experimental intervention
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Christopher Hulleman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,499,248.00

"Developmental skills linked to math and science achievement: An
interdisciplinary data-intensive approach to identification and improvement
through experimental intervention" is a 5-year project of the Research and
Evaluation on Education in Science and Engineering (REESE) program to better
understand and devise (and test) interventions to address deficits in
foundational skills that the investigators hypothesize may help to close
racial/SES and international gaps in math and science. The hypotheses suggest
that deficits in certain early skills underlie a significant proportion of
racial/SES math and science gaps, and the large proportion (about one-half) of
U.S. students with significant skill gaps underlies a significant part of
mediocre international math/science scores. This work builds on prior NSF-
supported research. Goals of the proposed research are to: (1) expand
longitudinal data sets used to identify and characterize the developmental
skills linked to later math/science, (2) strengthen the statistical methodology
used to link early developmental skills to later achievement and incorporate
analysis at the math/science subscale level, (3) introduce a new statistical
methodology - latent profile analysis - to cluster children using their multiple
skill distributions into groups with similar profiles and utilize growth models
to predict their achievement trajectories as skills change, (4) formalize and
shorten the process involved in the design, development and experimental testing
of interventions, (5) develop strategies for combining interventions and using
multiple interventions for a cohort of children from preschool to early grades
that would eliminate achievement gaps, and (6) formulate a comprehensive
national strategy and priorities for addressing the skill deficits linked to
math/science achievement gaps.