* 1252226
* Window onto a Vanished World: Preservation and Analysis of Lahu Texts from the 1960's
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Matisoff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2017
* USD 158,349.00

Lahu is a Tibeto-Burman language spoken by more than half a million people
scattered over the hills of China's Yunnan Province, Burma's Shan State,
Northern Thailand, NW Laos, and North Vietnam. Beginning in 1965-66, Principal
Investigator Dr. James Matisoff has devoted much of his scholarly activity to
the documentation of this language, including a 693-page Lahu grammar (1973/82),
a 1500-page Lahu-English dictionary (1988), and a 472-page English-Lahu lexicon
(2006).

Most of the PI's work on Lahu has been based on the voluminous corpus of texts
he collected in Northern Thai villages in the 1960's, recorded on reel-to-reel
tape-recorders and transcribed in longhand, then corrected during subsequent
fieldtrips in the 1970's. These texts comprise a wide variety of genres and
registers, including descriptions of daily activities, often enacted in the form
of skits or playlets; conversations (e.g. on village life and its hardships);
jokes and anecdotes; trickster tales; fables and other stories with a moral;
traditional love poetry and songs; pre-Christian myths and prayers from the
animist tradition; Christian sermons, hymns, and Bible readings. They reflect a
cultural milieu nearly half a century old, before the profound changes in
village life of recent decades. Many of the words and expressions in these texts
are no longer in common use, and are sometimes unintelligible to current
generations of speakers.

About 130 of these 170 texts have already been translated by the PI. In the
spring of 2011, the Lahu transcriptions were entered into the computer by a
visiting Lahu graduate student from Thailand. During the projected two-year
grant period, the following steps will be undertaken: (1) completion and
revision of the free translations; (2) interlinear glossing of every morpheme in
each text; (3) copious annotation, both linguistic and cultural; (4) formatting
the texts and translations for publication in the University of California
Publications in Linguistics series. The printed volume will be accompanied by a
time-aligned electronic archive of the original audiotapes from the 1960's and
1970's.

In order to ensure maximum usefulness to the Lahu people themselves, the texts
will be presented in all three of the orthographies now in use: the Baptist
missionary system used by the Lahu in Burma and Thailand; the pinyin-based
orthography used by the Lahu in China; and the PI's phonemic orthography used in
his grammar, dictionaries, and articles on Lahu. The end result will be a volume
of several hundred pages, which will be of interest to scholars in a variety of
humanistic and social scientific disciplines, and most importantly, to the Lahu
people themselves.