* 1252370
* CAREER: The Mechanism and Genome-Wide Regulation of Genes and Transposable Elements by Epigenetically Active Small Interfering RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* R Keith Slotkin, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2018
* USD 821,277.00

Intellectual Merit. Transposable elements (TEs) are mobile and can insert into
genes, causing mutations. To guard against this mutagenic potential, organisms
have evolved mechanisms to repress transcription of TEs. Recently the PI's
laboratory has discovered that when TEs are transcriptionally activated in
Arabidopsis plants, many of the TE transcripts are processed into large
quantities of novel small RNAs that are termed epigenetically active small
interfering RNAs (easiRNAs). These easiRNAs are hypothesized to be responsible
for the initiation of silencing of active TEs, the establishment of epigenetic
regulation in the form of DNA methylation, as well as production of large-scale
transcriptomic changes. The major goal of this project is to explore how easiRNA
biogenesis is triggered and to understand the multiple biological functions of
easiRNA production. Investigation of these processes is critical for
understanding how the genome maintains integrity and survives TE transcriptional
activation, as well as how a cell can recognize what needs to be expressed
(cellular genes) from what should be silenced (TEs). Moreover, easiRNA influence
on multiple cellular functions may explain some important agricultural
phenomena, and therefore it is fundamental to understand these mechanisms and
which genes are affected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project
will support training and mentoring of undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral
scientists. In addition, the project will include two independent activities
designed to best integrate the PI's research, teaching, and diversity outreach
components. First, the PI's current Young Scholars Program Biology Enhancement
Workshop, which is taught to 7th grade students from the urban Columbus public
school system, will be continued and leveraged to generate the Young Scholars
Program Biology Internships. In this novel program middle school
underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines will be integrated into the PI?s
laboratory and get real biology laboratory experience and advance biological
discovery while engaged in training and learning exercises. Once the internship
is completed, the student will automatically transition into a scientific
mentoring program with the PI. This program will be expanded to include other
PIs and will impact the community by providing a professional scientific
research experience with extended mentoring to underrepresented students.
Second, the PI will fully integrate the research in this project into an annual
upper-division undergraduate laboratory course. With help from Course Design
Institute of the Ohio State University Center for the Advancement of Teaching,
the PI will integrate specific sub-aims from this project into the undergraduate
laboratory curriculum and education. The original data produced from the course
experiments will be published by the class in an undergraduate research journal
and will be used directly by the PI. This course will leverage the Department of
Molecular Genetics teaching infrastructure to teach and train undergraduate
students molecular biology, while also exciting students about advancing
scientific discovery.