* 1252901
* CAREER:   Defining the evolutionary trajectory of CAM photosynthesis in Portulacineae (Caryophyllales)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,10/31/2017
* Erika Edwards, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 10/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

Crassulacean Acid Metabolism (CAM) refers to a set of changes to the
photosynthetic pathway that allows plants to grow more efficiently under
conditions of drought, high temperatures, and/or low atmospheric CO2. It is
biochemically similar to another modification, C4 photosynthesis, but requires
fewer structural changes to leaf tissue. We know a great deal about the
evolutionary history of the C4 syndrome, and this knowledge has informed efforts
to genetically engineer this photosynthetic improvement into crops such as rice.
We know virtually nothing about CAM evolution- its genetic underpinnings, its
relationship to other plant traits, and whether it is equally likely to evolve
in all plant lineages. Here the PI proposes to significantly increase our
understanding of how CAM evolves, utilizing a comparative approach and focusing
on one horticulturally important plant lineage known for drought tolerance,
which includes the cacti. The project involves extensive genetic and ecological
analyses, and will also develop a new metric to efficiently screen species for
low level CAM activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this is a CAREER award,
all research goals of the project are tightly interwoven into an innovative
education program involving undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral
researchers at Brown University, and graduate students from Peru. In addition to
the basic scientific understanding that will be gained, this project should
yield valuable insight into the use of CAM photosynthesis for engineering more
drought-resistant crops. Moreover it will build a foundational bridge of
scientific collaboration between the United States and Peru, and contribute
significantly to capacity building and scientific training in a developing
nation.