* 1252382
* Digital Games as Analogical Sources for Science Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Katherine McMillan, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,499,229.00

In this REESE medium empirical research study, being conducted by Education
Development Center, Inc.'s Center for Children and Technology (EDC/CCT), the PIs
are systematically testing comparative advantages of different design features
of digital games in support of science learning. Their hypothesis is that
experience in a domain learners are already familiar with and that is analogous
to a targeted science domain can aid learning in the science domain if practice
in the analogous domain is aimed towards helping learners better make sense of
those aspects of the familiar domain that are difficult to understand in the
targeted science domain. They are exploring this representational hypothesis in
three science domains: electricity, photosynthesis, and heat transfer. In a
first phase, they are comparing practice and experiences in preparation for
learning in each domain, comparing, for each, preparation for learning in the
context of a game that is mimetic (gives learners a chance to practice making
sense of the science domain itself) and one that is non-mimetic (gives learners
a chance to make better sense of an analogous domain they are already familiar
with). In later phases of the work, they are investigating the role of and best
practices for explicit analogy guidance by teachers as they help learners
transfer what they are learning in the games to solving real-world problems in
the science domain. The aim is to identify good practices for helping middle-
grade science learners consolidate and transfer conceptual understanding beyond
the problems they are practicing on. In addition to drawing out lessons about
how non-mimetic practice can make contributions to students? understanding of
difficult science concepts, the study also explores questions about making
intuitive experiences in a game world accessible for consolidation and
application and the roles of explicit analogical mapping during instruction as a
method for supporting sense-making and consolidation of emergent conceptual
models of the target science concepts. They are identifying the
interrelationship of these features of game play as steps in coming to deep
understanding of science concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some kinds of electronic
games have the potential to provide learners with engaging environments for
making sense of and practicing use of new science concepts. Yet there is little
known right now about how to design and implement educational games to support
deep conceptual understanding of targeted science. This project has the
potential to transform approaches to developing games for science learning that
support sustained sense making and consolidation around difficult science
concepts and that promote transfer of conceptual understanding beyond the
problems learners are practicing with. This project is generating critical new
knowledge to guide development of learning experiences and pedagogy in support
of middle-grade science learning, especially addressing the needs of struggling
students who require more engaging and playful approaches in order to deeply
learn.