* 1252113
* Collaborative Research: Using Educational DVDs to Enhance Young Children's STEM Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Sandra Calvert, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 799,999.00

This 5-year research proposal lays out a set of studies that will be conducted
across 3 sites (UC-Riverside, Northwestern University, and Georgetown
University) with 18 month old to 6 year old children to explore how the
relationships that children form with fictional characters (called parasocial)
in DVDs and other digital media utilizing intelligent agents influence their
learning of STEM concepts. The studies, though all focused on social attachment
with media figures, use different measures and different stimuli: some assess
children's perceptions of known media characters, while others introduce novel
artifacts such as interactional toys. Little is known about how children's
relationships with characters traverse different media platforms and whether
similar learning principles apply in different media environments. In this
research, the collaborative group of investigators brings the developmental and
communication research areas into contact with the work in the learning sciences
in a series of studies examining the formation and impact of parasocial
relationships with characters in the toddler and preschool years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses children's social experiences with
characters on TV, DVDs, or as intelligent on-line agents (called avatars), and
how these experiences can support STEM learning. Young children form strong
relationships with their favorite characters. These characters can be used as
positive role models for children and also have the potential to provide
continuity for children as they are exposed to math and science in different
environments (e.g., home, school). The guidelines and principles derived from
this work should help policy makers, educators, and companies make better use of
the media characters that pervade the daily experiences of children to improve
STEM education.