* 1252634
* Collaborative Symposium:  Physiological Flexibility among Protists:  Insights from studies of genes to ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Rebecca Gast, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 23,179.00

Protists are single-celled eukaryotes that exhibit an extraordinary range of
physiological traits, ecological behaviors and nutritional modes. In particular,
many species are mixotrophs, and can use multiple nutritional pathways. As these
organisms can both fix carbon through photoautotrophy and consume organic carbon
sources through heterotrophy, a better understanding of their physiology,
genetics and ecology is central to our knowledge of nutrient cycling in aquatic
habitats. In particular, mixotrophs are known to be important in polar regions,
and it has been hypothesized that the ability to switch between nutritional
modes may be a critical trait in ecosystems that undergo dramatic seasonal
changes in light availability. This project will involve the organization of a
special symposium on mixotrophs at the International Congress on Protistology
Meeting, (ICOP XIV). Seven speakers will be recruited to speak on topics ranging
from mixotrophic genetics, ecology, physiology and nutrient cycling. This
activity will bring scientists together from multiple subdisciplines, allowing
new collaborations to be forged and new research directions to be planned.
Special efforts will be made to recruit individuals from groups traditionally
underrepresented in science. Speakers will be invited to submit manuscripts on
their presented work to the Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology to increase the
impact of this session beyond meeting participants.