* 1252875
* Spatial Mathematics, Engineering, and Science: Toward an Integrated STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Leona Schauble, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 09/30/2014
* USD 297,642.00

The goal of Spatial Mathematics, Engineering, and Science: Toward an Integrated
STEM Education is to develop a provisional learning progression spanning grades
K-5 that articulates and tests the potential of experiencing, describing, and
representing space as the core of an integrated STEM education. The science of
space has an extensive scope within and across disciplinary boundaries of
science, mathematics and engineering, the project will create a coherent
approach to elementary instruction in which mathematical reasoning about space
is systematically cultivated. Simultaneously, researchers are exploring the
potential of spatial mathematics as a resource for engineering design of
kinematic machines and for the development of mechanistic reasoning about the
behavior of these machines. Work across these disciplines situates and motivates
the mathematical work and also provides opportunities to investigate the
intersections and contrasts among signature disciplinary practices, such as
definition and proof in mathematics, design in engineering, and modeling in
science. The research and development is being conducted in a middle school
which is a full partner in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership,
researchers and participating teachers are designing and implementing curricular
approaches intended to support spatial knowledge and reasoning. Professional
development will enhance and capitalize on teachers' roles as specialists in
student thinking. The research consists of design studies conducted in 12
participating classrooms, K-5, and small-scale teaching experiments conducted
with children across the same grade span. The research will establish
provisional pathways and landmarks in learning about space, as well as the
curricular activities and teacher practices necessary to support integrated STEM
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is novel in three ways. First, it
provides children with early and systematic access to multiple geometries (e.g.,
plane, cylinder, sphere) to develop sophisticated understandings of powerful,
yet experientally accessible concepts, such as straight, and STEM-related
practices, such as model, definition and proof. Second, both the National
Research Council Science/Engineering and the Common Core State Standards
Mathematics highlight the role of practices in the development of disciplinary
knowledge, and this project is providing a practical avenue for coordinating the
co-development of disciplinary practices and knowledge. Third, the unifying
theme of space is threaded through problems and contexts in mathematics, science
and engineering, which provide a sound basis for generative STEM integration-
integration that does not lose sight of the distinctive practices in different
disciplines, but, instead, leverages these distinctions to produce multiple ways
of knowing about space. Research and development is being conducted with
underrepresented populations of students who are typically underserved in STEM
education. Although the numbers of students reached in this phase of the work
are relatively modest, the longer-term potential is great, because instruction
anchored in space may be more accessible to students who struggle with
traditional forms of mathematics education. The increased attention to
integrated STEM education at the national level also ensures that this effort is
likely to contribute to the knowledge base required to advance interdisciplinary
forms of schooling.