* 1252412
* CAREER: Distilling information structure from big and dirty data: Efficient learning of clusters and graphs in modern datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Aarti Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER project aims to advance the state-of-the-art in theory and methods
for extracting clusters and graphs from big and dirty datasets arising in modern
application domains. Clusters and graphs provide a meaningful representation of
the structure of information contained in data, e.g. in neuroscience and health
care domains, clustering patients with similar phenotypes and genotypes helps
identify target groups for drug design, clustering fiber tracks generated by
high-resolution Digital Surface Imaging (DSI) scans of brains help identify
significant neural pathways, and graph structures can reflect connectivity
between brain regions. The results of this work will significantly enhance the
ability to exploit such modern datasets through new methods for learning
clusters and graphs from data that is large-scale, high-dimensional, under-
sampled, corrupted, and often only available in a compressed or streaming
representation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will develop
computationally efficient and principled methods for learning clusters and
graphs that can (i) perform unsupervised feature selection to discard irrelevant
features in high dimensions, (ii) leverage feedback based on intelligent
adaptive queries that focus resources on most informative variables and
features, (iii) use compressive measurement design that adapts to the
information structure for measurement and computation efficiency, and (iv) be
able to handle noisy streaming data. The algorithms will be accompanied with
performance guarantees in the form of a precise characterization of the mis-
clustering rate and graph recovery error. Additionally, the project will
investigate the tradeoffs between number of measurements, computational
complexity and robustness in these problems. The methods and theory developed
will be evaluated through simulations as well as their applicability to real
datasets in neuroscience and healthcare domain, in collaboration with
practitioners from these fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research could potentially transform many application domains that involve
grouping similar variables and learning complex interactions between them, based
on big and dirty datasets. In particular, the neuroscience and healthcare
applications are likely have very direct and significant implications for
society. Accurately mapping neural pathways will help diagnose and treat brain
pathologies at an early stage, and help understand brain functioning. Clustering
patients and discovering disease spreading pathways based on few measurements of
relevant genetic features or indicators could help prevent and cure diseases,
and also minimize healthcare costs. The research activities will be tightly
integrated with education efforts that aim to develop a diverse workforce that
is better equipped with cross-disciplinary tools to address the challenges of
modern datasets. The education plan includes development of two inter-
disciplinary courses, and enhancement of the joint Statistics &amp; Machine
Learning PhD program at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). Outreach activities
include promoting undergraduate research, broadening participation of women and
underrepresented groups in STEM fields through OurCS (Opportunities for
Undergraduate Research in Computer Science), Andrew?s Leap (a summer enrichment
program for area high school and middle school students) and CS4HS program aimed
at High School and K-8 teachers at Carnegie Mellon University. The results of
this project (including publications, data sets, and software) will be
disseminated online at
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~aarti/research_projects/.&lt;br/&gt;