* 1252064
* Collaborative Research: Interpreting clumped isotope temperatures and &#948;18O records from pedogenic carbonate: influence of climate, seasonality, and elevation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2015
* USD 171,753.00

A new isotopic measurement technique of a common geologic material, calcium
carbonate, has the potential to reveal how continental temperatures and
environmental conditions have changed throughout Earth history. The technique,
called clumped isotope thermometry, exploits the temperature-dependent grouping
of the heavy isotopes of carbon and oxygen in calcium carbonate. Calcium
carbonate bearing soils are relatively common in the terrestrial geologic record
and present attractive targets for reconstructing past earth surface
environments. However, while the theoretical basis for clumped isotope
thermometry is robust, exactly how environmental conditions are reflected in
soil carbonate formation temperatures is not well understood. Thus, developing a
framework for understanding the environmental factors that influence the timing
of carbonate formation is the key to unlocking a potentially rich record of past
surface temperatures and enhancing the understanding of Earth?s terrestrial
paleoclimates.

A team of researchers from Syracuse University and the University of Washington,
in collaboration with researchers from the Pontificia Universidad Cátolica de
Chile, and the Instituto Argentino de Nivología, Glaciología y Ciencias
Ambientales (IANIGLA) in Argentina will conduct a two-year study in and adjacent
to the Andes near 30°S latitude to determine how the carbonate clumped isotope
thermometer records temperatures in modern to 100,000 year old soils, with a
focus on how these methods can be applied to understand Earth's past surface
conditions on the continents.

The primary research goals are to quantify: 1) the influence of seasonal
precipitation, air temperature, and vegetation on the timing and temperature of
soil carbonate formation; 2) how well clumped isotope temperatures of Holocene
(<11,500 year old) soil carbonates and calculated soil water oxygen isotopic
values predict modern elevation and the isotopic composition of precipitation;
and 3) the impact of signal integration over long (1000 to 10,000 year)
timescales by exploring how clumped-isotope temperature varies with soil
carbonate age and development stage. The Andean field site is ideal for this
study because the > 4 km of topographic relief in this area provides a wide
range of mean annual and seasonal temperatures. The east and west sides of the
Andes also have opposing rainy seasons and gradients in vegetation type and
density, enabling this study to tease apart the influence of these factors on
clumped isotope temperatures of soil carbonate.

This study will support the education and training of two doctoral students in
the Earth Sciences as well as foster collaboration among two US universities and
their South American counterparts. Components of this research will be used in
University and high school teaching via the participation of the PIs in
professional development programs for high school teachers in their respective
states. The results of this study will be disseminated in scientific journals,
professional conferences, the PIs' websites, university courses, and a hands-on
activity for the UW's outreach program, Rockin' Out. The project will benefit
the broader scientific community by developing a tool that can be applied in
many places for paleoclimate and paleoaltimetry research, and potentially change
the way researchers interpret stable isotope data for paleosols.