* 1252292
* CAREER: Routing in Cognitive Radio Networks Considering Activities of Primary Users
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Zhipeng Cai, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2019
* USD 470,992.00

Two types of users, Primary Users (PUs) and Secondary Users (SUs), share common
spectrum bands in Cognitive Radio Networks (CRNs). SUs communicate through un-
assigned spectrum bands without disrupting PUs. It is widely assumed that the
activities of PUs follow some probabilistic models regardless of time, geography
and social relationships. However, the time-and-geography-dependent social
activity patterns of PUs can definitely be taken advantage of by SUs to obtain
more spectrum opportunities and help with featuring the fundamental
characteristics of CRNs in a more meaningful way. Unfortunately, this fact has
been overlooked. This project conducts a comprehensive study on designing
routing protocols/algorithms integrating technologies from social networks and
traditional CRNs. New statistic learning models and community detection methods
considering PUs' activity patterns are proposed. The fundamental properties of
secondary networks under certain activity patterns and community patterns of PUs
are investigated. Corresponding guidance for designing upper layer protocols for
CRNs is provided. This project has a strong impact on both theoretical and
practical aspects of CRNs as well as social networks. Considering the
characteristics of PUs, new research challenges and significance of the
corresponding problems are elaborated. The project integrates research and
education with the intent of attracting undergraduate and graduate students to
the area of CRNs. It also outreaches high school students. The outcomes will
provide valuable resources for the CRN society and will be published in
conferences, journals, and on the Internet.