* 1252295
* CAREER: Evolutionary Processes in Crustal Seismic Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2020
* Kevin Mahan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 533,923.00

Variation in seismic wave speed as a function of propagation direction, or
seismic anisotropy, is an intrinsic property of rocks deformed at high
temperature due to preferred mineral alignment and is readily detectable by
methods that utilize natural seismic sources (e.g., earthquakes). With a
remarkably growing array of techniques, seismic studies are using this
phenomenon to detect new structural features in the Earth?s crust and mantle in
all types of active and past tectonic settings, including subduction zones,
arcs, collisional orogens, active transform faults, and large-scale extensional
systems. However, confident interpretations of these features are hampered by
the incomplete knowledge of the tectonic processes that govern the development
and preservation of seismic anisotropy. This project is utilizing field- and
laboratory-based analyses to explore three topical areas that impact the
evolution of seismic anisotropy in crustal rocks: 1) prograde and retrograde
chemical reactions (metamorphism), 2) the competing roles of different minerals,
and 3) the influence of strain type, magnitude, and multiple deformation
structures. The goal is to generate predictable relationships between
deformation, metamorphism, and seismic anisotropy in crustal rocks that can be
further tested by seismic observations and simulations. Such information will
lead to increased understanding of seismic images which will allow a better
understanding of crustal architecture and interpretation of tectonic processes.

Seismic anisotropy is fundamentally a microstructural phenomenon best understood
by crossing traditional boundaries between geology and physics. While graduate
students will be involved during the academic year, the undergraduate component
of the project during summers will focus on the University of Colorado?s
Research Experiences in Solid Earth Sciences for Students (RESESS) program, the
goal of which is to increase the number of students from underrepresented
minority populations entering graduate school in the Earth sciences. The role of
this project in the program is designed to positively impact both individual
RESESS students and the group as a whole through 1) science mentoring, 2) an
annual two-day Front Range multi-disciplinary field trip on Colorado geology,
geomorphology, and geophysics for all RESESS interns, and 3) providing a summer
fellowship for a graduate student to work with all the interns to provide
feedback and to help develop their science presentation skills. The broader goal
in this project is to expose graduate and undergraduate students to cross-
disciplinary science models and multi-cultural research communities, in as many
ways as possible, in order to better prepare these Earth scientists of the
future for research challenges in the 21st century.