* 1252158
* Galois Representations and Modular Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Richard Taylor, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 641,140.00

A big theme in number theory in the last 50 years has been the relationship
between automorphic forms, Galois representations and objects from algebraic
geometry. There is an extensive web of extraordinary conjectures (for instance
the Artin conjecture, the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture, Langlands'
conjectures,Serre's conjecture and the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture) linking these
three seemingly very different subjects (which relate to analysis, algebra and
geometry respectively). Progress on these conjectures is currently very
exciting. Under previous NSF grants the PI, with various collaborators,
completed the proof of the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture; proved the local
Langlands conjecture for GL(n) over a p-adic field; proved the Sato-Tate
conjecture for elliptic curves over totally real fields; proved the first
general automorphy lifting theorems and potential automorphy theorems for Galois
representations of arbitrary dimension; and proved that the L-function of any
polarized, regular, irreducible motive over a CM field has meromorphic
continuation to the whole complex plane and satisfies the expected functional
equation. The PI proposes to continue to improve the currently available
automorphy lifting and potential automorphy theorems; to relate the cohomology
of Rapoport- Zink spaces to the local Langlands conjecture for groups other than
GL(n); with Kevin Buzzard and Joe Rabinoff to prove the Artin conjecture for odd
degree two representations of the Galois group of a totally real field in which
5 splits completely; and to think about more speculative problems relating
Galois representations and automorphic forms, for instance how to understand the
case of very degenerate Hodge-Tate numbers/infinitesimal character. In addition
the PI will continue his work with post-docs and, particularly, with graduate
students.

This circle of ideas is the one that led to Andrew Wiles' celebrated proof of
Fermat's last theorem after over 300 years. They fall into the general area of
arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of
mathematics: number theory and geometry. This combination has proved
extraordinarily fruitful. Among its many consequences are new error correcting
codes. Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and
compact disks.