* 1252498
* Meeting: 2012 Meeting of the Society for Social Neuroscience (October 2012, New Orleans)
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2013
* John Cacioppo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 14,920.00

The neurosciences have traditionally considered the nervous system as an
isolated entity. However, recent research has amply demonstrated the
considerable impact of social structures (e.g., mother-infant attachments, pair-
bonds, stable versus unstable families) on brain development and function. These
factors operate on the individual through a continuous interplay of neural,
neuroendocrine, metabolic, immunologic, and genetic factors, in which the brain
is the central regulatory organ and a malleable target of social factors. It is
critical that the next generation of scientists be prepared to bring animal
models and human studies together to bear on how precisely social factors are
impacting human brain and biology. The current proposal contributes to this
critical need through support for the forthcoming meeting of the Society for
Social Neuroscience a meeting that emphasizes students and young scientists and
that promotes a dialog across diverse disciplines, model systems, and
methodologies. A major goal of the meeting is to provide graduate student
trainees with interdisciplinary and international perspectives on social
neuroscience. The program has been designed to ensure balance across gender,
topics and career stage and to provide time and opportunities for discussions
and interactions among student and faculty participants. In addition, the grant
funds small but prestigious awards that subsidizes the travel of junior PIs and
promising graduate students. The keynote speaker, the internationally renowned
neuroscientist Giacomo Rizzolatti who discovered the mirror neuron system, is
the recipient of many honors including the Golgi Prize for Physiology and the
Grawemeyer Prize. As the keynote speaker in this year's meeting, Rizzolatti will
illustrate the value of comparative research and will stimulate discussions
among our members and our students regarding the importance of opening new
dialogues between researchers who study animal models and those who study
humans. The dissemination plan ensures these messages reach an audience beyond
the attendees.