* 1252624
* CAREER: Flexible Network Estimation from High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Daniela Witten, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This research involves the development of new statistical methods and theory for
graphical modeling on the basis of high-dimensional data, in which the number of
features exceeds the number of observations. In certain applications, such as
the estimation of transcriptional regulatory networks on the basis of gene
expression data, existing techniques are inadequate for two reasons: the
assumptions that underlie these techniques are insufficient for accurate network
recovery in the face of such high dimensionality, and furthermore the
assumptions that are made may be unrealistic for the data. To address these two
problems, the investigator proposes to study (a) a set of techniques for more
effectively learning one or more Gaussian graphical models by making more
effective and structured assumptions about the topology of the true conditional
dependence networks, via convex penalties and other techniques; and (b) more
flexible frameworks for estimating conditional dependence relationships without
the usual Gaussianity assumptions.

In recent years, new technologies and fast computers have resulted in the
generation and availability of vast amounts of data in fields as diverse as
molecular biology, marketing, finance, sociology, linguistics, and computer
vision. Unfortunately, analyzing this type of "big data" poses severe
statistical challenges, and the classical statistical toolset cannot be applied.
Therefore, developing effective statistical machine learning techniques for
making sense of very large-scale data sets is crucial for progress in many areas
of science as well as industry, in order to bridge the gap between the data that
is being collected and the scientific and industrial questions that are being
asked about the data. As an example, being able to estimate gene networks on the
basis of genomic data has important implications for understanding biological
processes, and for making progress towards the treatment of cancer and other
disease. This proposal involves (1) developing techniques for improved network
estimation on the basis of high-dimensional data sets; (2) disseminating the
resulting techniques to the statistical and biomedical communities via
publications, seminars, and the public release of software; (3) training PhD
students in statistical machine learning techniques for big data; and (4)
increasing the exposure of high school students, undergraduates, and members of
underrepresented groups to statistical machine learning and big data challenges
via short courses, conference presentations, and other activities.