* 1252614
* CAREER:   Overcoming crown shyness: lianas determine ant community structure in the tropical rain forest canopy
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Stephen Yanoviak, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2019
* USD 750,000.00

Although much of the world's biodiversity exists in the rainforest canopy,
little is known about the factors that maintain that diversity or cause it to
vary across the landscape. Quantifying such factors is important because the
structure of tropical forests is rapidly changing. In particular, the abundance
of one major canopy component " lianas (woody vines) " is increasing due to
disturbance and climate change. Because lianas physically connect neighboring
trees, changes in their abundance should affect the distribution, behavior, and
diversity of non-flying animals that live in the canopy. This project tests that
hypothesis in Panama by creating a large-scale experiment in which lianas are
added or removed from some forest plots and not from others. The project focuses
on the response of ants because they are conspicuous, abundant, and play
important ecological roles in forests. The research specifically addresses three
interrelated questions. First, how does the physical connectivity provided by
lianas affect ant diversity in tree crowns? Second, do lianas help restore
canopy ant communities in forests that have been cut or otherwise disturbed?
Finally, do different ant species prefer to use different types of lianas, and
why? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical rainforests are the world's best classroom
for studying biodiversity, and this project provides outstanding opportunities
for students at the University of Louisville to gain valuable first-hand
research experience in an international setting. Likewise, local K-12 teachers
will collect data in Panama while developing curricula on rainforest
conservation for use during the school year. Because the field site is a popular
tourist destination, the project provides a unique opportunity for participants
to interact regularly with the general public. Prior research on rainforest
canopies has attracted international media attention, and this project is
expected to generate similar public interest. Finally, the work will reveal how
changes in tropical forest structure may shape canopy biodiversity over the next
several decades.