* 1252648
* CAREER: Self-adjusting Models as a New Direction in Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Mehmet dundar, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2019
* USD 499,998.00

Machine learning algorithms are now routinely used to build predictive models
from data in wide range of applications. However, current approaches to machine
learning have an important limitation: They assume that the set of classes
observed in a training data set is exhaustive and that new data samples
originate from one of the existing classes represented in the training data set.
This assumption is unrealistic in many real-world applications in which
previously unobserved classes of interest emerge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study explores a new class of machine learning algorithms that produce self-
adjusting models that can accommodate new classes observed in data in offline as
well as online learning scenarios. The project aims to (i) use non-parametric
models to dynamically incorporate the changing number of classes; (ii) develop
new online and offline inference techniques to accommodate new classes as they
emerge (iii) automatically associate newly discovered classes with higher-level
groups of classes in an attempt to identify potentially interesting class
formations, and (iv) develop partially-observed tree models containing observed
and unobserved nodes, where observed nodes represent existing classes and
unobserved nodes are introduced online to fill the gaps in the existing data
hierarchy that become evident only with the arrival of new
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work could extend to
several real world applications: Bio-security and bio-surveillance, information
retrieval, and remote sensing among others in settings where all of the classes
are not known a priori. The educational plan includes outreach to K-12 students
and enhanced research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in
computer science as well as at the intersection of computational and life
sciences. All the software, publications, and data sets resulting from the
project will be freely disseminated to the larger research and educational
community. Additional information about the project can be accessed through the
project website at http://www.cs.iupui.edu/~dundar/career.html