* 1252109
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Online and offline investigations of the effects of prosodic and morphosyntactic cues on acquisition in L2 German
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Nick Henry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2015
* USD 12,930.00

Second language acquisition is often assumed to depend on the processing of
linguistic forms (cues) and the development of connections between these cues
and their meanings. Consequently, it is important to understand the strategies
that learners use to process cues during sentence comprehension and if attention
to these cues hinders or promotes acquisition. Previous research has focused on
how reliance on lexical-semantic cues and the use of real-world knowledge may
impede the acquisition and use of grammatical cues. Yet little attention has
been paid to prosodic cues, such as stress, accent, and intonation. Despite the
fact that they often function as important cues to grammatical forms and
syntactic structure, few studies have investigated if meaningful interaction
with prosodic cues could promote the acquisition of grammatical cues. This
dissertation compares the effects of training on the acquisition and use of the
German accusative case and object-first word order using three different
training types: (1) grammatical cues only; (2) grammatical cues accompanied by
prosodic cues, or (3) no explicit manipulation of linguistic cues. After
training, participants will complete comprehension and production tests to
measure if their accuracy in comprehending and producing German case markings,
and that will also track how they process sentences moment-by-moment. Together,
these tests will determine if training increases the attention learners devote
to syntactic cues during sentence comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has several broader implications beyond contributing to the research on
second language sentence processing and prosody. Particularly, this research
could inform the development of classroom teaching materials and pedagogical
models, and whether prosodic training should accompany grammatical instruction
to promote the acquisition of grammatical forms, whenever prosodic and
grammatical cues are closely aligned. The project will also enhance the training
of a graduate student.