* 1252890
* CAREER: Understanding Robustness of Cellular Organization in Escherichia Coli through Nanofabricated Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Jaan Mannik, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2019
* USD 653,000.00

This project explores the robustness of cellular organization, specifically the
chromosome and the cell division apparatus of the bacterium E. coli. Engineered
micro-fabricated and nano-fabricated environments will be used to physically
constrain cells and control their chemical environment. Techniques of
fluorescence and super-resolution microscopy, combined with quantitative image
analysis, will be used to study local and macro-domain level organization of
chromosomes, and the assembly of cell division proteins in a variety of
constrained cell shapes and chemical environments. These studies will advance
our understanding of the mechanisms that maintain cellular organization and
their underlying robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. In addition
to advancing design principles for nanofabrication, this project will provide
training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school students.
This project will also engage undergraduate students who aim to become teachers
of STEM disciplines in scientific research, and it will provide research
experiences for students from under-represented groups through the Tennessee
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Programs in
Cellular Dynamics and Function and the Physics of Living Systems