* 1252575
* CAREER:  Investigating Differentiated Instruction and Relationships between Rational Number Knowledge and Algebraic Reasoning in Middle School
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Amy Hackenberg, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 07/31/2020
* USD 667,111.00

Middle school mathematics classrooms are marked by increasing cognitive
diversity and students' persistent difficulties in learning algebra. Currently
middle school mathematics instruction in a single classroom is often not
differentiated for different thinkers, which can bore some students or overly
challenge others. One way schools often deal with different thinkers at the same
grade level is by tracking, which has also been shown to have deleterious
effects on students, both cognitively and affectively. In addition, students
continue to struggle to learn algebra, and increasing numbers of middle school
students are receiving algebra instruction. The proposed project initiates new
research and an integrated education plan to address these problems by
investigating (1) how to effectively differentiate instruction for middle school
students at different reasoning levels; and (2) how to foster middle school
students' algebraic reasoning and rational number knowledge in mutually
supportive ways. Educational goals of the project are to enhance the abilities
of prospective and practicing teachers to teach cognitively diverse students, to
improve doctoral students' understanding of relationships between students'
learning and teachers' practice, and to form a community of mathematics teachers
committed to on-going professional learning about how to differentiate
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research-based products are being
developed: two learning trajectories, materials for differentiating instruction
developed collaboratively with teachers, and a written assessment to evaluate
students' levels of reasoning. The first trajectory, elaborated for students at
each of three levels of reasoning, focuses on developing algebraic expressions
and solving basic equations that involve rational numbers; the second learning
trajectory, also elaborated for students at each of three levels of reasoning,
focuses on co-variational reasoning in linear contexts. In addition, the project
investigates how students' classroom experience is influenced by differentiated
instruction, which will allow for comparisons with research findings on student
experiences in tracked classrooms. Above all, the project enhances middle school
mathematics teachers' abilities to serve cognitively diverse students. This
aspect of the project has the potential to decrease opportunity gaps. Finally,
the project generates an understanding of the kinds of support needed to help
prospective and practicing teachers learn to differentiate
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning by (a)
integrating research into the teaching of middle school mathematics, (b)
fostering the learning of all students by tailoring instruction to their
cognitive needs, (c) partnering with practicing teachers to learn how to
implement this kind of instruction, (d) improving the training of prospective
mathematics teachers and graduate students in mathematics education, and (e)
generating a community of mathematics teachers who engage in on-going learning
to differentiate instruction. The project broadens participation by including
students from underrepresented groups, particularly those with learning
disabilities. Results from the project will be broadly disseminated via
conference presentations; articles in diverse media outlets; and a project
website that will make project products available, be a location for information
about the project for the press and the public, and be a tool to foster teacher-
to-teacher communication.