* 1252279
* EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop for Structural Geology and Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* J. Douglas Walker, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This project is supporting a two-day workshop that will be held identify the
possible interactions between the Structural Geology and Tectonics community
(SGTC) with the EarthCube effort. The workshop will assemble a group of about 40
Structural Geology and Tectonics researchers to define better the
cyberinfrastructure needs as well as the required interactions within the
community as well as with the EarthCube to take the next steps in creating a
more integrated digital framework. This effort includes: 1) establishing science
drivers and challenges of the SGTC; 2) identifying the impediments to using data
and tools both within and external to the SGTC; 3) listing existing and more
critically needed data, tools, and visualization to form a cyberinfrastructure
for the community; 4) creating several use cases that demonstrate how the
cyberinfrastructure will be used to address the science drivers or provide
critical connections for teaching and research; and 5) initiating conversation
with existing databases on how to interact constructively. A catalyzing issue of
the workshop concerns the nature of field data. Structural data is collected on
an extremely wide range of spatial (10-8 m to 104 m) and temporal scales, and
the collection requires observation, inference, and interpretation at most of
these scales. These data are critical to any tectonic modeling and inference.
This data at the core of Structural Geology and Tectonics and presents a
fundamental challenge to digital representation/integration that can be aided by
the interaction with the EarthCube effort.

This project is important for both the scientific and cyberinfrastructure
development of the geosciences. Future progress of the geosciences will be based
on the integration of rich and diverse datasets. This workshop will identify the
needs of one of the most important and data-rich as well as data complex areas
in geology. There will be a vast array of intellectually challenging tasks in
describing and integrating data across a spectrum of scales as well as
granularity.

The construction of a cyberinfrastructure for Structural Geology and Tectonics
data will make these data accessible to a much larger group of researchers. This
field describes and quantitatively documents the surface geology of the Earth.
That itself has impacts into individuals, groups, and organizations that study
the earth. In addition, the digital presentation of such data can be used by
private and governmental organizations across the local to global spectrum.
Lastly, the integration of Structural Geology and Tectonics data and models into
the EarthCube effort will be fundamental to the success of EarthCube.