* 1252399
* Investigating and Improving Synthesis Problem Solving Skills in Introductory Physics Via Analogical Reasoning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Richard Catrambone, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 943,013.00

Previous studies of problem solving in physics have primarily focused on
students and experts solving textbook-like exercises containing a single concept
that can be typically completed by simply searching for and manipulating in-
chapter equations. These tasks often habituate students to formula-based
algorithms and have limited impact on promoting expert-like heuristic problem
solving. This project proposes to investigate and improve student skills in
solving synthesis problems in introductory physics, that is: problems that
require a joint application of multiple physics concepts including those that
are taught in different chapters or at significantly different times in the
course. Differing from the traditional textbook exercises and closer to real-
world situations, these synthesis problems cannot be easily solved by using
formula-based ?plug-and-chug? approaches but rather require students to
recognize and be able to coordinate multiple key concepts in order to reach a
successful solution. Built on the well-established framework of analogical
reasoning, this project seeks to (1) identify and characterize students? and
experts? approaches to synthesis problems in physics, (2) evaluate and compare
various methods of analogical reasoning aimed at promoting student synthesis
problem solving skills, and (3) field test the most successful method in physics
classrooms.

This project directly targets undergraduate students in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) who are enrolled in college-level
introductory physics courses. The synthesis materials and analogical
interventions investigated in the project will reach thousands of STEM learners
across the nation to most effectively increase their problem solving skills. The
project outcomes, including research-validated curricular materials, will be
disseminated via publications, national and international presentations,
workshops and online resources. These results will not only help improve physics
education at the tertiary level but will also have bearing on our knowledge of
problem solving and STEM education in general.