* 1252003
* Pinpointing the Initiation of Modern Caribbean Reefs: Closing the Million Year Gap
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Donald McNeill, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 03/31/2016
* USD 288,077.00

Pinpointing the Initiation of Modern Caribbean Reefs: Closing the Million Year
Gap

James Klaus University of Miami

This project will fill a key temporal gap (1.8-0.4 Ma) in the
evolutionary/ecological transition to modern Caribbean reefs. Reefs in the
Pliocene are well documented, as are those from the later Pleistocene (0.4 Ma)
to Recent. What is missing, is a record that bridges this critical gap: the
final stage of a regional faunal extinction event. With this terminal
evolutionary event came a change in the way reefs build their framework, the way
corals are zoned, the rate of coral growth, and thus the way they respond to
high-frequency sea level fluctuations and other climatic changes. To address
this data gap we have identified a coral-rich section along the southern coast
of the Dominican Republic that records the missing transition from Sylophora
dominated reefs to Acropora dominated reefs in a series of step-like coastal
terraces. An integrated model of fringing reef development will be generated for
the early/middle Pleistocene that includes the controlling factors of climate
change, sea level, tectonics, antecedent topography, and the maximum growth rate
of dominant reef builders. A sequence stratigraphic model will be developed for
a seven core transect of the Pleistocene reef deposits on the southern coast of
the Dominican Republic. Age determinations will be based on strontium isotopes,
magnetostratigraphy, and radiometric dating. Once dated, these cores will be
used to calculate accretion and progradation, and reconstruct fringing reef
zonation and facies geometries both vertically and perpendicular to the coast.
These data will allow us to pinpoint the terminal stage of faunal turnover,
evaluate the ecological and environmental factors that gave rise to this
transition, and determine the impact on fringing reef development, including
changes in reef initiation, vertical accretion, progradation, and development of
backreef lagoons and foreslope reefs.

Results from this project will provide the missing stratigraphic and
environmental framework to evaluate the final stage of Plio-Pleistocene faunal
turnover, and the rise of modern Caribbean reefs. It addresses questions
including: (1) how did reef communities change during an episode of turnover and
biodiversity loss which shaped the development of modern Caribbean reef
ecosystems, (2) how did climate change and global high-amplitude sea level
changes influence this ecological transition, and (3) what impact did ecological
and environmental changes have on the fundamental shift in morphology to
fringing reef terraces. Results will contribute to conservation measures and
predictive models to determine how threatened coral reef ecosystems around the
world might respond to ecologic collapse, climate change and global sea level
rise. To promote international outreach, and broaden participation in the
project, a collaboration will be established with the Universidad Autónoma de
Santo Domingo (UASD), and the Dirección General de Minería. To facilitate future
access and use to the geoscience community, all taxonomic and
chronostratigraphic information will be added to the Neogene Marine Biota of
Tropical America webpage (NMITA).