* 1252486
* Modeling Ozone Mass-Independent Fractionation (MIF) in Gas Phase and on Surfaces
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Dmitri Babikov, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 305,139.00

This project will investigate the mass-independent fractionation (MIF) effect
that leads to enrichment of stratospheric ozone in heavy isotopes of oxygen (17O
and 18O). The theory for treating this ozone forming reaction will be further
developed using a mixed quantum/classical method to characterize the collisional
energy transfer without using reduced-dimension approximations. The use of
several atmospheric bath gases will be studied as quenchers for the reaction.
The MIF of oxygen in the ozone-forming reaction has been shown to disappear when
a very efficient molecular quencher, such as SF6, is used. The emphasis of the
project will be on moving from the analytic model to a master-equation treatment
of the kinetics. The project will also include the first-ever quantum dynamic
calculations for the formation of ozone on surfaces.

The mass-independent fractionation (MIF) of O3 has a significant impact on our
understanding of the ozone's chemistry, production, lifetime and loss in the
atmosphere, and the effect ozone has on global climate change. The advances made
in further elucidating the MIF of O3 will provide the key to understanding the
MIF for several other molecules, such as stratospheric CO2, N2O and CO. The
isotopic composition of atmospheric CO2 is often used to identify its sources
and further characterization of the MIF of CO2 will lead to an increased
understanding of the global carbon budget.