* 1252939
* EAGER:     Sensors for in vivo Localization and Quantification of Eukaryotic Small RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Caplan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,865.00

Intellectual Merit: The advent of green fluorescent protein (GFP) and other
genetically-encoded fluorescent tags has completely changed the way scientists
monitor proteins within living cells. Until recently, studies of RNA molecules
have lacked a similarly powerful set of tools to monitor the presence or
abundance of specific RNA transcripts. However, major advances in the
development of RNA "aptamers" (short oligonucleotides with binding properties)
that bind GFP-like chromophores have extended these detection techniques to mRNA
and even metabolites. The visualization of small RNAs, such as microRNAs and
short-interfering RNAs, presents unique challenges because appended fluorescent
tags either get removed during processing or disrupt the RNA function.
Consequently, current methods either indirectly monitor small RNAs in cells or
require disruptive fixed cell preparations, which prevent in vivo studies. This
project will develop a small RNA sensor that overcomes these limitations. As
with the protein-based GFP marker, the sensors developed in this project will be
genetically encoded and will be visible using well-established fluorescent
microscopy techniques. The sensor will fluoresce only when a small RNA is bound
and will have the ability to monitor relative and absolute levels of small RNAs.
The project will also optimize informatics-based approaches for the design of
these detection molecules. Thus the intellectual merit of the work is the
development of novel methods for the in vivo detection of small
RNAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Development of this tool has the
potential to transform the way small RNAs are investigated. Small RNAs are
important regulatory molecules in most eukaryotes, and plants have a
particularly abundant and complex set of pathways for the biogenesis of these
molecules. The functions of eukaryotic small RNAs are quite diverse, including
roles in development, stress responses, and epigenetic regulation, and thus they
are extremely important targets for molecular analysis. Although the sensor will
first be developed and deployed for studies in plants, it will be a powerful
tool for studying small RNAs in most eukaryotes, including animal systems.
Therefore, this work intends to provide both data and tools for insights into
the localization, abundance, movement, and even the function of small RNAs that
were previously unattainable. From an educational perspective, this project will
contribute to the professional development of a postdoctoral fellow, who will
gain experience in experimental, computational and genomics methods that are an
integral part of the research.