* 1252339
* Managing Small Groups to Meet the Social and Psychological Demands of Scientific and Engineering Practices in High School Science.
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Elizabeth McEneaney, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 862,895.00

This research project headed up by investigators from the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, analyzes, evaluates, and compares small group work on
inquiry-based tasks and engineering design tasks in high school science classes.
The research based recommendations for the reform of science education stress
the teaching and learning of scientific and engineering practices in order for
students to understand and experience how scientists and engineers work, and how
scientific knowledge is produced and engineering solutions are developed. Yet,
fundamental differences that have been noted in the professional practices of
scientists compared to engineers, so it follows that the nature of productive
group work in high school science should vary depending on whether the task
involves scientific inquiry or engineering design. The investigators look at the
cognitive, social, and affective resources individual bring to various problem
solving tasks.

Gauging what social, psychological and cognitive resources students need for
inquiry and engineering design activities will strengthen professional
development for science teachers about providing better scaffolding for group
work. Furthermore, results of this research may be used to create valid
diagnostic tools to evaluate students' varying strengths and weaknesses and to
use these profiles to assemble students in small groups that are optimal for
science learning. It should also help teachers to monitor on-going group
process, which will guide themas they decide how and when to intervene to
support groups in differentially structured inquiry-based and engineering design
tasks.