* 1252358
* EAGER: Dynamic Data Path Management for Asynchronous Vertical Storage Hierarchy
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Maciej Brodowicz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 248,130.00

Humankind's knowledge of the world and its ability to manipulate it for the
betterment of quality of life and understanding through science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) is increasingly dependent on the ability to
store, access, and manage extremely large persistent data sets representing
scientific and process measurements, results from science and engineering
simulations, and long-term knowledge. Supercomputers conventionally operate in
dual or separate modes: one to do the computations in their temporary
(ephemeral)-main memory-and the other to supervise the use of large persistent
data storage. As supercomputers get larger, perhaps to the scale of an Exaflops
by the end of this decade, the comparable scale and ease of use of mass storage
is severely challenged. This research will address the problems of efficiency
and scalability of data migration through the vertical memory hierarchy and will
unify the way both main memory data objects and persistent storage data are
named creating a single, easy to use programming. This will revolutionize data
intensive supercomputing and establish a new path towards future Exascale system
design and programming. This research is in collaboration with Clemson
University to provide a proof-of-concept system to evaluate the new
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The semantic and performance barriers between
computing in main memory and manipulation of mass storage for persistent data
have imposed significant limitations to performance and programmability. Because
of uncertainties of access latency times combined with overheads and the need to
exploit data access parallelism for high throughput, a new relationship between
ephemeral storage and persistent objects is needed to unify their association
and manage the asynchrony of operation while achieving high efficiency. This
research is deriving an innovative execution model and developing a proof-of-
concept experimental system to test and evaluate its underlying concepts for a
new generation of persistent mass storage at extreme scale. It will address the
challenges and provide the means for the unification of the semantics of
ephemeral and mass storage through a single abstraction of data manipulation and
the integration of meta-data and synchronization to manage asynchrony and
uncertainty of response time as well as logical conflicting accesses while
automatically hiding latency. The new model will support dynamic data path
management for the asynchronous vertical storage hierarchy, exploiting adaptive
runtime event-driven techniques for enhanced efficiency and scalability
including management of vertical transport of data, which demands an innovative
strategy of dynamic control of the entire data path.