* 1252810
* RCN: Relational Poverty Network
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Sarah Elwood, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This project will develop a research collaboration network whose members will
generate conceptual and methodological innovations to advance poverty research
and solutions. The Relational Poverty Network (RPN) will complement and extend
poverty research with a relational conceptualization of poverty, which theorizes
poverty as produced and addressed by economic, political, and cultural
relationships among social groups. Poverty researchers long have noted the
potential of relational poverty approaches as a basis for innovative and viable
new analytic tools, yet RPN researchers have identified significant conceptual
and methodological challenges to realizing this potential. Because relational
poverty research generally has been comprised of isolated, singular case
studies, "scaling up" relational poverty analysis for larger, cross-
disciplinary, and international comparisons introduces a series of fundamental
conceptual and measurement challenges. Relational approaches to poverty
introduce new objects of study, such as social relations or cultural attitudes
toward poverty that are difficult to identify within existing poverty data or to
compare across national contexts. Furthermore; building meaningful comparison
across case studies has been difficult in the absence of closely coordinated
research designs and methods. The RPN will address these challenges by: (1)
developing concepts that operationalize relational poverty in ways that can be
compared across international empirically grounded research; (2) building
descriptive metadata, including quantitative and qualitative sources, to support
comparative analysis across research cases as well as synthesis of research
findings from individual projects; (3) developing a common research design for
robust mixed-methods research and "many sites-to-many sites" comparisons; and
(4) catalyzing debate and discovery across mainstream and relational poverty
research scholars. The core group of 60 social scientists at 30 institutions
from which the RPN will grow is cross-disciplinary, including human geographers,
sociologists, historians, economists, anthropologists, and philosophers working
in the U.S., Argentina, South Africa, India, Canada, and Thailand. The RPN's
conceptual and methodological innovations will be realized through four annual
workshops conducted at U.S.-based poverty research centers. These workshops will
involve RPN participants as well as researchers and practitioners from the sites
where the workshops are held. RPN members will develop collaborative grant
proposals to carry out their scientific activities. They will co-author research
papers, and they will develop publically available educational materials for
teaching about relational poverty approaches in multiple disciplinary contexts.

The RPN will have a variety of intellectual and broad impacts. The comparative
relational poverty concepts, descriptive metadata, and in-common research design
developed by the network will expand the impact of relational approaches within
poverty research. The network will seek to attract a broad and diverse range of
mainstream and relational poverty researchers into a social science
infrastructure. Network members will build a range of other pathways to broaden
the scope and intellectual impact of the RPN, including public scholarship,
including public talks, articles in popular media, and online discussion forums.
They also will engage in a range of education activities, such as innovative
classroom activities, service-learning pedagogies, and graduate webinars. The
majority of network members will be teacher-scholars working at public
universities who will recruit a diverse range of students through regularly
taught classes for direct involvement in the network. The RPN will disseminate
research and educational resources broadly, both through its own website,
publications, and meetings as well as in coordination with seven U.S. poverty
centers and the Comparative Research on Poverty Program (CROP), a program of the
International Social Science Council (ISSC) at UNESCO.