* 1252854
* CAREER:Systems analysis of the cardiac hypertrophy signaling network
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Jeffrey Saucerman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2019
* USD 436,000.00

1252854 Saucerman

A python's heart grows by a remarkable 40% a mere 48 hours after feeding,
returning to normal size on a similar timescale. But in humans and other
mammals, exposure to pathological stress such as myocardial infarction (heart
attack) leads to a detrimental and irreversible form of heart growth that
ultimately leads to heart failure. Because postnatal cardiac myocytes generally
do not proliferate, heart growth is due to an enlargement of existing cells,
termed hypertrophy. The myocyte hypertrophy response is controlled by a complex
web of biochemical signaling pathways, triggered by a range of
neurotransmitters, hormones, cytokines and mechanical stimuli. While many
individual pieces of this network have been discovered, major advances are
required to achieve a quantitative understanding of how these molecular circuits
work and how they may be controlled therapeutically. Thus there is an urgent
need for new approaches, both theoretical and experimental, that allow such
integrative understanding. Yet systems biology approaches to date have been most
focused on more tractable model organisms and cell lines, with much less work
done on biochemical networks regulating the heart.

Here, new computational and experimental systems approaches will be developed to
understand how extracellular signals drive physiological and pathological
myocyte remodeling. Dr. Saucerman's lab has adapted techniques from image
processing to perform the first highthroughput microscopy of cardiac myocyte
morphology, identifying distinct forms of hypertrophy depending on the
stimulated receptor. In parallel, they have developed the first largescale
computational model of the hypertrophy signaling network, predicting that PI3K
and Ras are key network decision points. The research objective of this proposal
is to test the overall hypothesis that the balance of PI3K and Ras signaling
determines how diverse receptors induce distinct forms of cardiac myocyte
hypertrophy. This hypothesis will be tested by 1) experimentally measuring and
perturbing PI3K and Ras signaling to determine their distinct regulation of
myocyte size, shape and sarcomeric organization; 2) training a computational
model of hypertrophy signaling based on biochemical and morphological data; and
3) applying the model to predict and then experimentally validate signaling
mechanisms that mediate the distinct roles for PI3K and Ras in hypertrophy
signaling.

The training of individuals ranging from high school students through
postdoctoral researchers is highly integrated into this program. Specific
educational aims include: 1) mentoring of undergraduate students in graduate-
level research; and 2) outreach to high school students from underrepresented
populations, particularly in developing original computational models of cardiac
signaling networks. This training is aided by user-friendly network modeling
software and accompanying problem-based learning curricular materials.

Intellectual Merit: This research will integrate new computational and
experimental approaches to identify PI3K and Ras as network decision points for
myocyte size, shape, and sarcomeric organization. The educational program is
innovative in graduate-level research by undergraduates and in problem-based
learning of systems biology with high school students.

Broader Impact: This research is expected to identify new potential therapeutic
targets for cardiac hypertrophy. The educational program will provide mentoring
for underrepresented high school students and undergraduates, enhancing their
career development. Modeling software and curricular materials will make these
approaches accessible to a much larger community. Further impact will ultimately
be achieved by the scientific achievements and career successes of diverse
trainees.