* 1252079
* Cognitive Consequences of Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Gerald Clore, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2017
* USD 349,874.00

The proposed research investigates a new understanding of how feelings regulate
thinking. The proposed experiments vary people's mindsets and their moods to
assess a new explanation for several different textbook phenomena concerning
emotion and thought. The theory is that the moment-to-moment flashes of affect
that people regularly experience have the effect of tuning their thought
processes to help negotiate everyday cognitive tasks. This process occurs when
feelings signal the value of a person's current mindset for a given task. Affect
thus acts like a mental traffic cop; positive affect giving a green light and
negative affect a red light to one's currently active mindset.

Thirty years of research has assumed that specific affective states
automatically activate specific cognitive orientations. Thus, textbooks say that
happy moods increase big picture thinking and creativity, but also increase
stereotyping and false memories. In addition, they say that sad moods can
increase accuracy, systematic processing, and "depressive realism." In contrast,
a new view of these phenomena has very different implications for how people's
emotional reactions regulate thinking and problem solving. The proposed research
tests this new view by specifying conditions capable of both replicating and
reversing the predictions made by the standard view.

Broader impacts include the research training of graduate and undergraduate
students, who will participate in all aspects of the project from planning to
conducting the research and from analyzing the data to its publication. The
importance of this new view is that a large body of findings previously assumed
to reflect basic and general principles may actually be situationally specific
in nature. Social psychologists have learned previously that principles from
research on primarily male respondents are less general than first assumed.
Similarly, conclusions from primarily Western samples have led to culturally
specific, rather than thoroughly general, facts about human nature. In a related
way, the proposed view implies that the results of past research on emotional
influences on cognition reveal as much about the normative situations that were
studied as they do about how emotion actually influences thought. The proposed
principles promise a more generally applicable answer to questions about mind
and emotion.