* 1252040
* How national cues increase prejudice among intra-national racial groups: Testing behavioral implications, boundaries, and mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Melissa Ferguson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2017
* USD 272,828.00

How do the ideals and values associated with a nation influence its citizens? On
a daily basis, the ethos of a nation is invoked in public discourse concerning
current events, policies, scandals, and crises. People commonly express
allegiance to national values and ideas, even citing them as reasons to die for
their country. And yet, despite considerable speculation in the social sciences
on how national cues might influence the citizenry in both subtle and obvious
ways, there is surprisingly scarce empirical work revealing exactly how and when
that happens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research breaks new ground in
understanding the implicit and explicit influence of symbols of nationalism on
people's everyday attitudes, decisions, and behaviors. The researchers plan to
identify situations in which the implicit processing of cues to nationalism
increases, versus decreases, prejudice and bias toward people of racial and
ethnic outgroups. The studies focus on helping behavior as an ecologically valid
and important consequence of prejudice. The proposed studies use cutting-edge as
well as classical methods, in the lab and field, to test the implications this
research for helping people from similar versus different racial and ethnic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will produce a significant amount
of research activity that will involve undergraduates, graduate students, and
other faculty in a broadly collaborative effort. The researcher is also
developing a research lab website that will make available for download the
data, tasks, and measures used in the research, in order to increase
collaborative efforts and extensions. The website will also have a significant
public outreach component aimed at increasing the general public's knowledge of
cutting edge research on nationalism, prejudice, and helping behavior.