* 1252644
* CAREER: A Mining-Based Approach for Consistent and Timely Adaptation of Component-Based Software
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Sam Malek, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 265,546.00

Increasingly, software is expected to dynamically adapt its behavior in response
to changing conditions in the computation infrastructure as well as the
surrounding physical environment. Two important problems in dynamic adaptation
of software are (1) how to prevent failure of the software during adaptation,
and (2) how to reduce disruptions in the functionalities provisioned by the
software. This research will devise a novel technique for dealing with these
problems by automatically determining when is the best time for making changes
to a running software system. The principles emerging from this research will
provide the foundation for a new method of engineering dynamically adaptive
software. The results of the research will be incorporated into education, such
that tomorrow's software engineers are better equipped to tackle the challenges
of constructing adaptive software. The approach will be realized via a suite of
open source tools to pave the way for transitioning the research results to the
industry.

All prior techniques targeted at this research problem have assumed the
availability of detailed software component dependency models. This research
will develop a novel technique that solves this problem in settings where such
models are either not available, difficult to build, or outdated due to the
evolution of the software. The hypothesis guiding this research is that by
monitoring a software system?s execution history (e.g., message exchanges,
method invocations) for a sufficiently long period of time, it is possible to
mine an accurate model of interactions and dependencies among the system's
components. The research will demonstrate how models inferred in this way can be
used to (1) ensure changes in the running software do not create inconsistencies
that could jeopardize the system?s functionality, (2) control the level of
disruption incurred in system?s operations due to adaptation, and (3)
automatically adjust the models to changing dependencies among the potentially
evolving software components.