* 1252345
* CAREER: Glucan phosphatases: a key to designer starches and plant energy storage
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Matthew Gentry, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2019
* USD 950,657.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;As the major energy cache in plants and algae,
starch is a central component of human and animal food and a key constituent in
many manufacturing processes. Additionally, starch is both a first-generation
biofuel and is vital to future efforts focused on microalgal hydrogen and oil
production. Therefore, elucidation of pathways controlling starch metabolism is
needed in order to develop novel strategies that manipulate them and satisfy the
growing starch demand. A key pathway regulating starch metabolism - and one that
is required for starch degradation - is reversible phosphorylation of glucose
residues in starch outer glucans, rendering the granule surface accessible to
glucan hydrolyzing enzymes. This sequential cycle begins when two glucan
dikinases solubilize starch outer glucan chains by phosphorylating glucose
units. Starch phosphorylation allows amylases to bind the starch surface and
release the stored energy in the form of glucose and maltose; however, amylases
do not proceed past the phosphate groups. Two glucan phosphatases reset the
cycle by removing the phosphate groups and allowing processive glucan
hydrolysis. Plants lacking the glucan phosphatases exhibit excess amounts of
starch, impaired growth, starch with increased phosphorylation and accumulation
of starch breakdown intermediates. While progress has been made concerning the
biology of reversible starch phosphorylation little is known about the molecular
mechanisms regulating glucan phosphatase function. This project addresses
critical information gaps of this essential pathway by employing a variety of
biochemical and biophysical techniques. This research will define the function,
dynamics, structures, and regulation of glucan phosphatases as well as generate
and evaluate engineered glucan phosphatases. Completion of this work will define
the role of glucan phosphatases in starch modification and degradation,
providing the needed insights for biotechnological exploitation of these
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Increasing demand has
led to competition for starch among food, biofuels, and industrial
manufacturers. An additional concern is that starch processing utilizes
hazardous chemicals to modify it for industrial application. Therefore,
innovative strategies are needed to increase starch production and to modify
starch biophysical properties using less hazardous methods. This project
contains integrated and synergistic career goals that will impact the ability to
increase starch production and generate designer starches. This project involves
multidisciplinary training at several levels. 1) Graduate students will receive
national (Kentucky and California) and international (Switzerland) training in
laboratory skills, scientific ethics, protein purification, enzyme kinetics,
crystallography, DXMS methods, and in data analysis and presentation. In
addition, they will be mentored in career options. 2) Undergraduate students,
including NSF REU students and those from the Appalachia region, will be trained
in basic laboratory skills and in the techniques employed in the lab. They will
also receive mentoring in career options. 3) The PI will enhance formal
undergraduate courses by integrating research on starch metabolism into an upper
level undergraduate course. 4) The importance of basic research on the societal
and environmental issues of food production, biofuels, and global warming will
be presented to high school and undergraduate students, as well as the general
public, at state government events. In addition, results will be published in
peer-reviewed journals and presented at local, regional, national, and
international scientific interdisciplinary meetings.