* 1253849
* CAREER: Training the Next Generation of Evolutionary Ecologists: Experimental and Population Genomic Tests of Coevolution and Diversification in Yuccas and Yucca Moths
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Christopher Smith, Willamette University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 877,528.00

Why there are so many flowering plants is an evolutionary conundrum that has
puzzled biologists since Darwin's time. Although the group is evolutionarily
quite young, there are over 250,000 species of flowering plants. A long-standing
hypothesis suggests that reciprocal adaptation between plants and their
pollinators (a process known as coevolution) is responsible for the spectacular
number of species of flowering plants, but evidence supporting this idea is
circumstantial. This project tests this hypothesis by measuring coevolution
between yuccas and yucca moths. The yucca / yucca moth interaction is widely
referred to as a model system for studying coevolution, but no study has ever
conclusively demonstrated coevolution between them. This project will use
experimental manipulations of yuccas and yucca moths to determine whether the
plants and their pollinators are adapting to one another. Genomic technologies
will identify genetic factors associated with plant and pollinator features and
determine whether they are coevolving. Finally, genetic tools will be used to
determine whether coevolution was involved in the evolution of new species of
yuccas and yucca moths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides one of the
first direct tests of the hypothesis that coevolution promotes the evolution of
new species, and will significantly advance our understanding of how the
diversity of life originated. Integral to the research are three novel
educational initiatives: a citizen science program involving the general public
in field studies of coevolution, a summer research immersion course for
undergraduates, and a program to train a postdoctoral scientist in best
practices for integrating teaching and research.