* 1253893
* Smart Material Advances and Advanced Research Training (SMAART) Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* James Henderson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2013
* USD 17,773.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1253893 PI: Henderson, James ORG: Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Smart Material Advances and Advanced
Research Training (SMAART) Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
project provides support for four Hampton University workshop participants who
will be integrated into the research of the research program under way in the
Syracuse University Biomaterials Institute. These students will be under the
direct supervision of the PI and working together with experienced Syracuse
graduate students. They will learn to use image analysis techniques to
investigate collective (emergent) cell behaviors on shape-changing substrates
and to use live-cell fluorescence imaging techniques to investigate individual
cellular behaviors on these substrates. The participants will thus be introduced
to next-generation of shape-memory polymer substrates, including micropatterned
shape-memory substrates for the investigation of cell-polarity establishment, to
modulus changing shape-memory substrates for investigation of the temporal
aspects of cell response to substrate rigidity, and to expanding and contracting
substrates for cell sheet engineering. These hands on, cutting edge biomaterials
laboratory experiences will be supplemented through seminar style discussions of
the underlying cell biology and polymer science and an introduction to the
multiple options available to students who wish to pursue STEM careers in
industry, government, or academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The
scientific and technical broader impacts of the project will be contributions
toward the development of materials based on shape memory polymers that can be
used to direct the differentiation of stem and other precursor cells. Clearly
more important in this case are the educational and outreach broader impacts,
namely, the opportunities provided for students from an HBCU to participate in
research at the forefront of the tissue engineering field. An effective
collaboration has been established between the PI and Prof. Raymond Samuel of
Hampton University that will ensure appropriate selection of workshop
participants. Workshop participants will also be able to benefit from activities
of the recently funded Syracuse Biomaterials Institute REU Site.