* 1253314
* CAREER: Resource-adaptive distributed estimation for teams of micro aerial vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Anastasios Mourikis, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 02/29/2020
* USD 487,204.00

The proposed work focuses on developing resource-adaptive distributed estimation
algorithms for teams of micro aerial vehicles (MAVs). Among the several
challenges one faces when designing estimators for MAV teams, the most important
one is the stringent resource limitations of MAVs. While in any engineered
system the resources are inevitably finite, cost, power, and weight
considerations make the limitations particularly strict for teams of small MAVs.
In this work, we will develop a rigorous, optimization-based framework for the
design of estimation and inference algorithms, as well as for the design of the
MAV platforms themselves. Our approach will yield distributed estimators capable
of optimally allocating the sensing, processing, communication, and energy
resources of an MAV team. The methods to be developed will lead to efficient
design tools, and will permit a systematic study of the tradeoff curves between
MAV resource availability and estimation performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
algorithms and theoretical results that will result from this effort will
dramatically increase the capabilities of MAV teams, in domains ranging from
scientific exploration to search-and-rescue operations. In turn, these systems
will yield benefits that will directly impact our lives, from advancing our
state of scientific understanding to saving humans in disaster sites.
Additionally, the proposed research plan will create opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students from UC Riverside's diverse student body to
conduct meaningful research. Undergraduate students will be recruited to work on
new MAV designs, and it is anticipated that such an involvement will increase
the likelihood of them pursuing a graduate education. Moreover, as part of an
integrated outreach program, we will leverage the nature of the proposed
research (flying robots capture the imagination of young minds) to inspire and
recruit underrepresented minority students to science and engineering. These
efforts will aid in closing the educational attainment gap for underrepresented
groups.