* 1253538
* CAREER: Combinatorial Inference and Learning for Fusing Recognition and Perceptual Grouping
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Charless Fowlkes, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2019
* USD 507,903.00

When presented with a novel image, humans typically have little problem
providing a consistent interpretation of the scene in terms of contours,
surfaces, junctions, and the relations between them. This process of perceptual
organization is closely coupled with recognition of familiar shapes and
materials. Perceptual organization can aid recognition by reducing the
complexity of a cluttered scene to a small number of candidate surfaces while
recognition can help resolve ambiguities in grouping based on local image cues.
This project is developing a computational framework that fuses top-down
information provided by recognition with bottom-up perceptual organization in
order to automatically produce a coherent scene interpretation. This research
includes (1) identifying local image features that provide cues to grouping and
figure-ground, (2) developing libraries of composable detectors that capture the
appearance of objects, parts and their spatial relations, and (3) designing
models and efficient inference routines that explicitly reason about occlusion
and the binding of image regions and contours into object
shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated models of grouping and recognition have
direct significance to expand the computer vision capabilities of robotics and
assistive technologies that must operate in complex, cluttered environments. The
framework being developed also has applications in automating biological image
analysis where top-down shape information are useful in resolving noisy local
measurements. The computational tools developed by the project along with
dissemination and educational efforts are aimed at forming an interdisciplinary
bridge between biological imaging and cutting-edge computer vision research.