* 1253103
* CAREER:   The Function, Regulation, and Molecular Identity of Mechanosensitive Ion Channels in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Elizabeth Haswell, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,346,895.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT In land plants, many cellular and developmental processes
necessitate the perception of mechanical stimuli such as touch, gravity, or
osmotic pressure. One way in which mechanoperception is accomplished is through
the activation of mechanosensitive channels, which allow ions to pass across a
membrane in response to membrane stretch. This project aims to use the model
flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana to investigate the role played by
established mechanosensitive channels during the process of fertilization and to
determine how their activity is regulated. In addition, new plant
mechanosensitive channels will be identified for future functional and
comparative studies. This research will reveal the molecular mechanisms by which
plants sense and respond to mechanical stimuli, provide insight into the
evolution of mechanosensitive channels, and establish principles of
mechanobiology that apply to other systems.

BROADER IMPACTS An inquiry-based laboratory class in ion channel physiology and
two uniquely designed summer undergraduate research/outreach experiences will be
developed, giving undergraduates an authentic research experience while
contributing to the research goals of this project. Other activities will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups and enhance scientific
understanding through the established outreach efforts surrounding the St. Louis
Science Center's new ozone garden and Earth Day celebration. A running theme
through all these activities is training in effective science communication. In
addition, this research will benefit society by addressing the mechanisms by
which plant growth, development, fertility, health, and response to stress. The
research will have implications to address food security issues.