* 1253493
* CAREER:   Evolution of Locust Swarms and Phenotypic Plasticity in Grasshoppers
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Hojun Song, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* emilia martins
* 04/30/2015
* USD 489,725.00

Locusts are grasshoppers that can form enormous migrating swarms. They are major
pests of agriculture throughout the world, causing millions of dollars in
losses. In nature, locusts exist as one of two forms depending on local
population density. At low density, locusts are inconspicuously colored and
avoid each other, but at high density, they transform into conspicuously colored
individuals that are attracted to each other. When the high-density condition
persists, they eventually form swarms. This ability to change in response to
density is known as density-dependent phenotypic plasticity. However, it is
poorly understood how this phenomenon has evolved, why locusts swarm, and what
makes them different from typical grasshoppers. Therefore, the main goal of this
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to understand why some
grasshoppers respond to crowding by forming swarms and others do not. The
project aims to unravel the genetic basis of locust swarming using behavioral
experiments and cutting-edge molecular techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
core of this CAREER project is the seamless integration of research and
education from K-12 to undergraduate and graduate students. The partnership with
local public schools, enhanced by service-learning, will provide unique and
relevant science education opportunities for both elementary school and college-
level students. Specifically, the CAREER-enabled course development will fill a
much-needed void in providing authentic research experience to the biology
curriculum at the University of Central Florida. One primary goal of the broader
impact activities will be to broaden participation of underrepresented minority
students, particularly those who seek careers in science after transferring from
community colleges. Graduate students supported by this project will be exposed
to high-impact research with international and interdisciplinary opportunities.
The broad nature of this project will establish a strong and long-lasting
international network for future collaborations.