* 1253024
* CAREER: Predicting Timing Violations: A New Direction for Robust System Design
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2021
* Sanghamitra Roy, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2021
* USD 466,050.00

Timing violations, an artifact of rapid technology scaling, embody a central
reliability challenge in microprocessor design. A vast body of existing
techniques in the landscape of timing violations fall under two broad
categories: reactive and proactive. In both of these schemes, the lack of
sufficient time in identifying an upcoming timing violation limits the scope of
corrective techniques, incurring a large recovery overhead, or loss in fault
coverage, respectively. Using a cross-layer analysis combining information from
the application, architecture and circuit layers, this CAREER project
demonstrates that timing violations can be predicted several clock cycles early.
Early prediction of timing violations can offer a vast leverage in robust system
design, opening up a promising direction for future systems research. In this
paradigm, microprocessors can operate at a tighter frequency, where predictable
errors frequently occur and are tolerated with minimal performance loss. Such a
system design style can reshape physical design algorithms, boosting the energy
efficient frontiers for microprocessor components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the nascent area of cross-layer
design will enable circuit designers and system architects to increase
collaborative design, and develop affordable, energy efficient and reliable
computer systems. The rapid growth and evolution of integrated circuits creates
a huge demand of Computer Engineering skill sets for addressing upcoming
challenges. The CAREER project seeks to create a stream of future engineers
capable of tackling growing unreliability in integrated circuits through focused
knowledge dissemination. Undergraduates, women and minorities will be actively
sought for participation through the existing platforms at Utah State University
such as the Society of Women Engineers (SWE), Engineering State and Center for
Women and Gender (CWG) programs.