* 1253598
* CAREER: Accelerated simulation of nonlinear solids with applications to human anatomy modeling in interactive virtual environments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Eftychios Sifakis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 476,197.00

Digital models of human anatomy, already common elements of motion pictures and
computer games, are now increasingly being incorporated into diverse "serious"
applications such as medical diagnostics, surgical planning and vehicle design.
Both current and emerging applications demand improved photorealism, enhanced
biomechanical accuracy, better subject specificity and faster simulation
algorithms. As these demands often outpace the evolution of computer hardware,
new algorithms for biomechanical modeling and simulation are necessary to ensure
that upcoming computational platforms are utilized to the best of their
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to computational performance,
physics-based simulations of virtual materials in interactive applications have
demonstrated inferior performance in terms of cost per degree of freedom when
compared to large-scale simulations of similar phenomena in HPC settings. This
is partly attributable to the regularity and economy of scale associated with
large models, compared to the pronounced irregularity and heterogeneity at lower
resolutions. But it is also due to the fact that the commonly-used algorithms
and data structures for interactive virtual materials reflect design compromises
with respect to features, accuracy and parallelization potential. In this
project the PI will endeavor to show that it is possible to reinvent both
algorithms and data structures so as to achieve optimal computational efficiency
for nonlinear virtual materials even under the constraints of interactive
simulation, and also to achieve improvements of orders of magnitude in runtime,
resolution and accuracy. The work will leverage expertise from computer systems,
scientific computing, continuum mechanics and numerical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomechanical simulation has provided a great
opportunity for transformative advances in medical practice using virtual models
of the human body for disease prevention and treatment. These emerging
applications mandate an increased level of attention to the unique demands of
interactivity, resolution and anatomical accuracy for clinical uses of
biomechanical modeling and simulation. Algorithmic improvements that yield two
or three orders of magnitude have the potential to transform clinical training
or operation planning tasks from off-line processes to practical interactive
experiences. In addition to being a valuable opportunity to improve patient
care, the use of anatomical modeling as a testing ground for effective and
scalable simulation algorithms will have a lasting legacy that extends well
beyond the clinical field. The high degree of irregularity in shape and function
that is inherent in human tissues yields an excellent and challenging benchmark
for the validity of material models, the accuracy of discretization techniques
and the efficiency of numerical solvers. Considerations such as the
accommodation of topology change and facilitation of parallel processing make
simulating virtual nonlinear tissue models an excellent opportunity to refine
core computational physics and numerical analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Computer simulations have been
established as an educational tool in many fields (e.g., driving and flight
training), helping to improve the safety record of operators without risk of
physical harm. They present a great opportunity to affect the quality of patient
care, considering the fact that most surgical residents currently sharpen their
skills while operating on actual patients. Anatomical simulators could also
reduce the need for animal testing, and help with knowledge transfer across the
international clinical community, especially in developing countries. As part of
this project, the PI will develop new academic course offerings that will serve
to connect computer engineers, applied mathematicians, and clinical
practitioners.