* 1253292
* CAREER: Autotuning for multicore and manycore architectures: an enhanced feedback-driven approach
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2020
* Apan Qasem, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 01/31/2020
* USD 550,018.00

Achieving a high fraction of peak performance on complex architectures has been
a perennial challenge for application developers. The emergence of multicore
processors and accelerators has greatly exacerbated this problem. With an
increasing number of cores per socket, deep hierarchies of shared and
distributed caches, and exascale computing on the horizon, multicore platforms
pose unprecedented challenges for software development and application tuning.
This research confronts the challenge of multicore and manycore software
development by improving automatic performance tuning through improved feedback
diagnostics. Autotuning efficiency is achieved through enhanced knowledge of the
problem domain, program features and architectural characteristics. To this end,
we are developing a set of tools that allow specification, collection and
synthesis of tuning related information. This rich set of information is then
exploited through novel machine learning models to deliver scalable, portable
and sustainable performance on diverse architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
line with this research, we have established, SISTEM, a structured
interdisciplinary program for undergraduates that brings together faculty and
students from different STEM disciplines to explore cross-cutting research
problems in which computational thinking, modeling and simulation play a central
role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed as past of this research
will have a direct economic impact through saved energy and computation cycles
on high-end systems. The improved efficiency of applications will allow
researchers to execute large-scale simulations that will enable modeling of
complex phenomenon in a broad range of disciplines including medicine, high-
energy physics, climate modeling and nanotechnology.