* 1253837
* CAREER: Enabling License Compliance Analysis and Verification for Evolving Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Denys Poshyvanyk, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 478,010.00

This project proposes a novel unified model to help software developers license
software and (re)use components complying with legal requirements. The solution
will investigate novel combinations of information retrieval, internet-scale
source code search, repository mining, and static analysis approaches to detect
origins of software components. The research will also rely on a feedback-driven
hybrid blending of information retrieval and machine learning techniques for
identifying components' licenses with high accuracy. In addition, the proposed
model will unify these building blocks for license compliance analysis and
verification to reason about the given software, components, dependencies, and
licenses, as well as their trustworthiness, constraints, and existing or
potential legal compliance issues. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will lead to both theoretical foundations and practical solutions for the
comprehensive analysis of complex legal compliance concerns to enable lawful
software development and evolution. Among the broader impacts, the project will
develop educational course content, involve underrepresented student groups, and
produce software tools under open source licenses, collaborating with industry
to transfer technology and empirically evaluate proposed research, and
conducting K-12 outreach activities.