* 1253063
* CAREER: Model-based Energy Management for Sustainable Buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* David Irwin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2019
* USD 479,434.00

Modern society depends on a massive amount of, largely ?dirty,? energy to
sustain itself. Collectively, buildings consume more energy than the other broad
sectors of consumption. A significant barrier to improving building energy
efficiency is that fine-grained monitoring of electrical loads at large scales
remains impractical: it is expensive, invasive, and unreliable. Our hypothesis
is that a comprehensive repository of detailed models that describe how loads
use power provides a foundation for programmatically managing building energy
consumption. The project?s goal is to advance research and education using the
model-based paradigm to design automated load discovery, monitoring, and
scheduling techniques that are low in cost, highly transparent, and privacy
preserving. To achieve this goal, the project will bootstrap and seed an online
data repository to enable new techniques for modeling loads based on their
energy usage. Since many types of loads exist, our goal is to develop a library
of load modeling techniques. The project will then leverage these models to
automatically discover the set of loads a building operates, and monitor their
electricity usage using only aggregate electricity recorded by a building smart
meter. To benefit students, the project will develop new courses on building
energy management, and make the materials publicly available to benefit
educators. Importantly, the courses will enable students to gain hands-on
experience by ?programming? real buildings. This learning-by-doing approach is
highly effective---simply turning devices on and off via computer is eye-opening
---and will serve as a catalyst for including undergraduates in research.