* 1253987
* CAREER:  Rapid stem rust resistance responses in barley; non host resistance mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Robert Brueggeman, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2018
* USD 623,363.00

Understanding genetic resistance of crop plants against microbial pathogens is
important for world food security and sustainable agricultural practices. To
effectively deploy genetic resistance against important pathogens in crops we
must understand the mechanisms underlying the different layers of plant innate
immune systems. This project will investigate the stem rust race Ug99 resistance
mechanism in barley in order to characterize the underlying molecular pathways
and protein interactions mediating resistance against this highly virulent race
of stem rust, currently considered a threat to world food security. The
investigators will utilize genetic, molecular and biochemical approaches to
answer the question of what mechanisms are responsible for resistance and if
they have the characteristics of the more durable non-host type of resistance.
The function of the genes involved and the timing of the resistance response
indicate that the only known Ug99 resistance mechanism in barley, the rpg4/Rpg5
locus, is possibly a remnant of a multilayered non-host resistance mechanism.
Thus, the investigators hypothesize that barley is a recent host of wheat stem
rust and this pathosystem has not resulted from ancient co-evolution between the
pathogen and the host. The investigators expect to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms involved in the response and determine if it is an early non-host
type of resistance. This information will fill gaps in the limited knowledge of
plant innate immune systems and also be utilized to deploy more effective and
durable resistance in important cereal crops including wheat and barley. The
project will be utilized to recruit and train the next generation of molecular
plant pathologists with special emphasis on peoples underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics. The cutting edge research tools and
techniques used in the project and mentoring by the lead investigator will give
undergraduate and graduate students an excellent educational opportunity.