* 1253390
* CAREER: Adaptive Power Management for Supercapacitor-Operated Sustainable Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Ying Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 508,653.00

Long-life, maintenance-free, self-powered wireless sensor networks (WSNs) could
potentially benefit many applications using WSNs with nodes that do not have
access to continuous, conditioned power. However, the lifetime of self-powered
WSNs has been severely limited by the cycle life and a short life span of
rechargeable batteries (RBs), the current popular storage device for energy
harvesting wireless sensors. Alternatively, supercapacitors (SCs) have cycle
lives on the order of millions and a life span of 20 years or more. Recent
advances in SC technology may lead to a paradigm shift from a battery-based to a
SC-based design if the adaptive power management can be established to maintain
the sustainability of the WSNs, which will generate great interest from many
long-life applications.

This research project aims to establish the theoretical foundation and applied
framework of adaptive power management for supercapacitor-powered wireless
sensors, which enables the next generation of perpetual, sustainable operation
of environmentally-powered WSNs. This project consists of three main research
components: (1) investigate how supercapacitor device characteristics affect
power management policies and provide guidelines for SC-powered embedded
systems; (2) create practical and accurate SC models for supporting power
management research in energy harvesting WSNs; (3) design the SC-aware power
management framework that enables sustainable operation of WSNs and evaluate it
in laboratory testing and practical SC-based energy harvesting WSNs.

This project will significantly advance the understanding of the next-generation
SC-based energy harvesting WSNs, and lead to WSNs that can exist for decades on
weak ambient energy and provide services required by important applications. In
addition, the SC model and power management framework can also have impact on
other portable embedded electronics. The educational components of this project
include (1) providing research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, especially women and members of underrepresented groups; (2)
integrating knowledge of state-of-the-art research and recent technological
advances into the developed new curricula to provide multidisciplinary training,
and inspire interdisciplinary research ideas; (3) developing educational
activities in helping K-12 students from underrepresented groups and K-12
teachers from schools with high minority student population and low
socioeconomic status.