* 1253444
* CAREER: Role of Plant Myosin XI in Polarized Secretion and Actin Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Luis Vidali, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,126,375.00

Understanding the fundamental mechanisms that govern polarized plant cell growth
is an important unsolved problem in biology that is critical for future
development of plants with improved growth characteristics. Polarized plant cell
growth is a highly focused type of growth essential for land colonization,
sexual reproduction, and water and nutrient uptake. A central player in the
regulation of polarized cell growth is the actin cytoskeleton, an evolutionarily
conserved assembly of dynamic nano-polymers (actin filaments) and nano-motors
(myosins). The actin cytoskeleton is known to participate in the organization of
components inside the cell, including endomembranes and secretory vesicles
containing materials important for cell growth. The long-term goal of the
research is to understand how the actin cytoskeleton and endomembrane
compartments interact to generate polarized plant cell growth. Toward
accomplishing this goal, the objective of the project is to determine the role
of the motor myosin XI in the coordination between actin filaments,
endomembranes, and polarized secretion of growth materials. The central
hypothesis is that membrane compartments, such as secretory vesicles, function
as active centers of organization where actin polymerization and myosin XI-based
transport cooperate to produce polarized secretion. The following three specific
aims are designed to test the central hypothesis using the moss Physcomitrella
patens as a plant model system: 1) identify the membrane compartments associated
with myosin XI; 2) identify the receptors that anchor myosin XI to its membrane
cargo; and 3) determine how myosin XI, actin polymerization, and endomembranes
cooperate to regulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton during
polarized cell growth. The project will investigate a novel mechanism for
polarized secretion based on the cooperation of myosin XI and actin
polymerization using unique genetic tools developed to reduce overall myosin XI
activity or only its cargo binding activity. The research provides a viable
model for cell polarization driven by the concerted action of endomembrane
compartments, myosin XI, and a dynamic actin cytoskeleton.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. In addition to contributing to the basic
understanding of biology, the knowledge obtained from this project has the
potential to identify strategies to improve plant reproduction, plant fitness,
and plant growth. These improvements can impact agricultural science by
promoting the development of plants with characteristics necessary for a more
sustainable future. From an educational perspective, the project impacts the
rapidly advancing field of biology where there is an increasing need for
microscopy and imaging education and training. In order to integrate these
disciplines within the general biology curriculum, a new microscopy and imaging
course will be implemented. The goal of the laboratory and inquiry-based course
is to train students to apply microscopy in research both in class and as part
of independent research projects. The new course will have a modular format that
allows the use of some of its parts for outreach programs. The project also
provides opportunities for improving presentation and networking skills during
the postdoctoral experience through the continued development of a social
networking tool (LectureBank.org) for postdoctoral scholars with an emphasis on
underrepresented minority life scientists. The tool serves as a peer-to-peer
mentoring resource and provides a forum for sharing materials and experiences.