* 1253384
* CAREER: Next-Generation Ion Mobility-Mass-Spectrometry of Protein-ligand and Multiprotein Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2019
* Brandon Ruotolo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 10/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and co-fund from the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professor Brandon Ruotolo and his group
at the University of Michigan will develop a nano-electrospray ionization (nESI)
combined with ion mobility-mass spectrometry (IM-MS) technique as a key
analytical tool for ascertaining the global structural consequences of drug
molecule binding within multiprotein complexes. This unconventional approach
will start by removing the water surrounding native-state multiprotein/drug
complexes, it will then imbue these desolvated proteins with ionic charge, and
then subsequently sort these protein complex ions according to both their
size/shape and their mass in the gas phase. Developing nESI-IM-MS so that
detailed information on drug/protein interactions can be obtained requires 1) a
deeper physical understanding of how desolvated proteins can change their shape
and structure (e.g. through protein unfolding) when given excess thermal energy
in a vacuum and 2) the invention of robust protocols that use such internal
temperature-induced protein/drug complex unfolding as a means of rapidly
screening for new multiprotein inhibitors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of the proposed research primarily include the development
of the new analytical tools described above, combined with a deeper chemical-
physics type description of the protein unfolding processes operative in the
absence of bulk solvent. Given the general importance of multiprotein complexes
we expect that our work will be generally impactful, but we expect especially
high impact within both the IM-MS and protein structure communities. The broader
impacts of the proposed research include (a) the highly interdisciplinary
training of participating graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-
art IM-MS instrumentation, protein purification, protein-ligand screening,
unimolecular reaction dynamics, gas-phase kinetics, and protein
folding/structure. (b) The inclusion of students from historically
underrepresented groups, in part through an NSF-funded REU program. (c)
Developing an enhanced mass spectrometry curriculum at the University of
Michigan, including novel laboratory exercises and instrumentation designed for
undergraduate education, as well as a modular lecture course designed for
graduate students. (d) Outreach to high school students through the Michigan
Math and Science Scholars program at the University of Michigan.