* 1253119
* Access and Success:  Undergraduate Education for the Twenty-First Century: Conference - Crytal City, VA, November 9-10, 2012
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Patricia Turner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/2014
* USD 48,500.00

This project is a two-day conference designed and sponsored by the national
Reinvention Center (RC). Its title and focus is on "Access and Success:
Undergraduate Education in the 21st Century." The RC is an outgrowth of the
Boyer Commission Report that called for more attention to and improvement of
undergraduate education in the nation's largest research universities.
Currently, the RC comprises 67 dues-paying member institutions, each represented
by its Undergraduate Dean or Vice Provost. These educators constitute the
"Undergraduate Vice Provosts Network (UVP)," the intellectual core of the
Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 National Conference is focused on
undergraduate education in three broad areas identified by the RC membership as
critical issues facing undergraduate education at research campuses nationwide:
&lt;br/&gt;(i) accreditation, assessment and accountability; &lt;br/&gt;(ii)
increasing persistence to graduation in the STEM fields; and &lt;br/&gt;(iii)
administrative best practices for supporting undergraduate education in an era
of diminishing resources (time and money). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
is comprising four plenary sessions and 15 topical sessions on these themes.
These themes are broadly supporting of the new NSF program for Widening
Implementation and Demonstration of Evidence-based Reforms (WIDER).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 conference is connecting attendees with the
architects and implementers of highly visible efforts to improve useful STEM
endeavors, including the American Association of Universities (AAU) STEM
initiative, a five-year initiative that kicked off in the fall of 2011 to
improve the quality of undergraduate teaching and learning in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields at its member
institutions. It is also connecting participants to representatives from the
nation's six regional accrediting bodies. These accreditors profoundly impact
undergraduate education and have the potential to support national efforts to
improve the effectiveness of undergraduate STEM education.