* 1253881
* CAREER: Algorithmic and Software Foundations for Large-Scale Graph Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Kamesh Madduri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The proposed research aims at designing highly efficient and scalable algorithms
for large graph-based computations on modern data sets and emerging parallel
platforms. Graph abstractions and graph-theoretic computations play a critical
role in the analysis of data from experimental devices, medical data sets,
socially-generated data from the web and mobile devices, and scientific
simulation data. The proposal aims to provide a fundamental understanding of
parallel graph analytics, with the creation of novel algorithmic frameworks.
Motivated by current terascale applications in genomics, proteomics, and social
network analytics, the project will undertake the clean-slate design of four
algorithmic frameworks that capture broad classes of graph-based computations:
traversal-based static graph computations, dynamic graph analytics, subgraph
enumeration and pattern search computations, and multiscale and multilevel graph
computations. This research will lead to the design of new memory-efficient
graph representations and data structures, the creation of novel linear time
parallel algorithmic strategies based on data partitioning, and a deeper
understanding of architectural features that impact graph processing efficiency
and scalability. The expected outcome is to enable non-parallel computing
experts design graph analytics at orders-of-magnitude higher levels of
abstraction and performance than the current state-of-the-art.

The proposed educational activities, closely related to the research goals,
attempt to foster an environment of interdisciplinary computational research
within Penn State. New graduate classes on parallel graph analysis, parallel
algorithms for computational biology, and high-performance social data mining,
will facilitate student involvement in current research activities of this
project and its collaborators. The identification of new high-level data-centric
parallel algorithm and software design principles will be a key broader impacts
outcome. The project will actively collaborate with academic, industrial, and
government laboratory partners that rely on graph-based analytics, release the
algorithmic frameworks under open-source licenses, and train practitioners and
interdisciplinary teams through virtual workshops and tutorials.