* 1253942
* CAREER: Differentially-Private Machine Learning with Applications to Biomedical Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Kamalika Chaudhuri, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 490,625.00

Machine learning on large-scale patient medical records can lead to the
discovery of novel population-wide patterns enabling advances in genetics,
disease mechanisms, drug discovery, healthcare policy, and public health.
However, concerns over patient privacy prevent biomedical researchers from
running their algorithms on large volumes of patient data, creating a barrier to
important new discoveries through machine-learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to address this barrier by developing privacy-preserving
tools to query, cluster, classify and analyze medical databases. In particular,
the project aims to ensure differential privacy --- a formal mathematical notion
of privacy designed by cryptographers which has gained considerable attention in
the systems, algorithms, machine-learning and data-mining communities in recent
years. The primary challenge in applying differentially-private machine learning
tools to biomedical informatics is the lack of statistical efficiency, or the
large number of samples required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will overcome
this challenge by drawing on insights obtained from the PI's expertise to
develop differentially-private and highly statistically-efficient machine
learning tools for classification and clustering. The proposed research will
advance the state-of-the-art in privacy-preserving data analysis by combining
insights from differential privacy, statistics, machine learning, and database
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is closely tied to the
development of the undergraduate and graduate curricula at UCSD, feeding into
the PI's new undergraduate machine learning class, a new graduate learning
theory class, and updates to an algorithm design and analysis class. The
corresponding materials will be publicly disseminated through the PI's website.
The PI is strongly committed to increasing the participation of women and
minorities, and will engage in outreach activities to attract and retain women
in computer science.