* 1253154
* CAREER:   Linking cryospheric processes across scales to model non-linear albedo feedback
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2020
* Mark Flanner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 601,490.00

Earth?s cryosphere holds large capacity to alter planetary reflectance and
surface temperature through albedo feedback, partially explaining the high
sensitivity of Arctic climate. Albedo feedback, however, is actually composed of
multiple mechanisms operating on timescales ranging from hours to millennia,
both within snowpack and via altered cryospheric cover. This project aims to
fill crucial gaps in our understanding of: 1) how light-absorbing impurities
like black carbon (BC) influence albedo feedback via their effect on snow
metamorphism, and 2) sources of decadal to multi-decadal variability in albedo
feedback and explanation of why climate models universally underestimate
1979?2008 boreal albedo feedback (by ~2-fold) relative to remote sensing
observations. Motivation for goal (1) arises from radiative modeling and
observations showing that BC perturbs visible albedo more in coarser-grained
(aged) snow, which is also darker in the near-infrared spectrum, indicating that
BC triggers at least two positive albedo feedback mechanisms when it accelerates
snow metamorphism. The influence of impurity heating on metamorphism, however,
is uncertain. The PI will measure the evolution of snow effective grain size in
snowpacks generated with and without BC, using a new near-infrared optical
sensing device, to determine BC influence on metamorphism in one environment.
Goal (2) is motivated by the observed bias in model feedback and a preliminary
analysis showing large multi-decadal feedback variability in transient climate
simulations. To isolate contributions to albedo feedback and identify causes of
model-observation discrepancy and multi- decadal variability in feedback, he
will incorporate diagnostic cryosphere radiative forcing terms into the NCAR
Community Earth System Model (CESM) and conduct additional analyses with remote
sensing and climate model data. Expectation of a long-term decline in albedo
feedback associated with reduced cryospheric cover prompts the questions: Has
albedo feedback peaked? If not, when might it, and why? Attaining the project
objectives will enable modeling albedo feedback more consistently across scales,
quantifying climate and hydrological influences of anthropogenic aerosol
emissions more confidently, and providing a mechanistic explanation for the
timing of peak albedo feedback in a warming world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
will be tightly integrated with undergraduate and graduate education. Snow
impurity/metamorphism experiments and optical measurements will be part of a
weekend research experience designed for freshmen at the University of Michigan
Biological Station (UMBS). Students will gain exposure to winter field methods,
instrumentation, measurements of energy and trace gas fluxes at station towers,
and data interpretation. Student teams will deploy on Lake Douglas and other
terrain at UMBS to measure snow properties and characterize spatial variability
in grain size. This activity will be targeted toward early undergraduate
students to influence degree major choices and interest in science career paths.
Participating seniors may design, build, and apply field instruments for
engineering course credit. Graduate studies of cryosphere?climate interactions
will be incorporated into a course project in one of the PI?s courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental research resulting from this project will
enhance understanding of important climate feedback processes, how industrial
emissions influence these processes, and how they may impact water resources.
The integration of this research with educational activities will contribute to
the training of the next generation of geoscientists and engineers.