* 1253715
* CAREER: Leveraging Three-Dimensional Integration Technology for Highly Heterogeneous Systems-on-Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Emre Salman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 453,809.00

Heterogeneous three-dimensional (3D) integration is an emerging paradigm for
developing multifunctional systems at a lower cost. The dominant practice
targets primarily high performance applications with limited heterogeneity such
as logic-on-logic and memory-on-logic integration. On the contrary, this
proposal embodies a significantly different vision, in which the focus is on low
power highly heterogeneous 3D systems-on-chip (SoCs) with promising applications
to the life sciences, energy efficient mobile computing, and environmental
control. Despite the recent and growing efforts to develop hybrid 3D ICs, a
systematic design and analysis framework does not yet exist. This research fills
this need by addressing three interrelated issues of critical importance to this
framework: system-wide power, signal, and sensing integrity. Simultaneously
satisfying these three design objectives is a significant challenge in tightly
coupled 3D SoCs. By considering multiple planes as a single entity, novel
circuit- and physical-level design and analysis methodologies will be developed
to alleviate this fundamental challenge. The traditional understanding of signal
integrity will be extended to consider sensing integrity, an important issue in
heterogeneous 3D SoCs, where multiple sensors and sensing electronics are
coordinated. The proposed methodologies will be evaluated by developing and
fabricating a heterogeneous 3D test chip with application to bio-
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synergy between 3D integration
and heterogeneous SoCs provides a paradigm changing vision for integrated
electronics with substantial benefits to science, industry, and society at
large. At a time when the fundamental limits of traditional scaling are
approaching, this synergy brings new opportunities to a variety of applications
including More-than-Moore systems. The proposed research enhances the
feasibility of this cooperation by targeting critical circuit- and physical-
level issues. These research activities will be tightly integrated with
educational initiatives at the secondary, undergraduate, and graduate levels
with participation from minority and underrepresented groups. These efforts will
include both traditional activities (such as introducing new courses and
promoting undergraduate research) and novel methods that interact with recent
pedagogical practices. The PI will also continue to participate in the
departmental and local outreach activities such as an engineering summer camp
and a science fair, both targeting high school students within the greater New
York City area including Long Island. The intertwined objectives of this
proposal will guarantee power, signal, and sensing integrity in hybrid 3D SoCs,
while contributing toward the advancement of science and diversity in education.