* 1253179
* CAREER:  Predictive Modeling of Construction Injuries in Complex Environments - An Integrated Research, Teaching and Outreach Plan
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Matthew Hallowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program
award is to test the hypothesis that over half of the variability in
construction injury statistics can be explained by a few inherent and basic
attributes of construction environments. Predictor attributes will be identified
by studying measurable patterns in US construction injury reports and the
resulting dataset will be reduced to principal attributes using multivariate
statistics. Principal attributes will be related to the probability of injury
occurrence in mathematical models and the underlying hypothesis will be
validated by comparing the predictions of these models with actual project
outcomes. The teaching objectives are to incorporate new research knowledge into
experiential learning modules with videos, augmented reality, and building
information models and to implement an original pedagogical and andragogical
instruction strategy that involves collaborative multicultural industry-student
teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research results will enhance
understanding of the fundamental causes of construction injuries and allow for
accurate risk forecasts, directly addressing a critical societal concern that
affects approximately six percent of the US workforce. Robust and valid
predictive models will facilitate the integration safety risk analysis into
emerging visualization and simulation technologies. Such integration may
drastically improve proactive hazard recognition, prioritization, and control of
complex projects and allow safety to be objectively considered as a competing
criterion during design and planning. Educational and outreach activities will
involve the development of research-based software tools that will be shared
with industry stakeholders and students at high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels. The project places strong emphasis on outreach to the Hispanic
community through recruitment of Hispanic research assistants and involvement of
Hispanic industry leaders who will serve as student mentors and agents for
research dissemination.