* 1253385
* CAREER: Hydrazone-Based Switches - Simple Systems for Sophisticated Functions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Ivan Aprahamian, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2019
* USD 650,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Ivan Aprahamian of Dartmouth College
develops easy to make, modular and tunable hydrazone-based switches, and studies
ways to integrate them into polymers and liquid crystals. This proposal offers a
new strategy for the development of adaptive functional materials (such as
chemically activated actuators, sensors and molecular machines) by using
synthetically straightforward building blocks. It is expected that this approach
will facilitate the structure-property analysis of the systems, which will
enable the rapid production of i) molecular machines for nanotechnology
applications, ii) stimuli-responsive polymers that can convert chemical energy
into mechanical motion, and iii) pH sensitive liquid crystals that can be used
as sensors for environmental pollutants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research entail i) using the ACS SEED project and other
endeavors to retain students of different levels (high school, undergraduate and
graduate students) in the sciences, ii) piloting and assessing classroom
technologies that can augment the learning experience of students, and iii)
developing hands-on self-assembly demonstrations to educate the general public
about important concepts related to supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology.