* 1253488
* CAREER: Multi-robot cooperative tasking through local coordination design
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Hai Lin, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of the proposal is to study cooperative tasking among teams of
robots under uncertain environments. The research has four main objectives: - To
develop a formal theory of multi-robot cooperative tasking to guarantee given
global specifications through explicitly designing local coordination. This
study will address key issues such as control architectures, formal
representations of tasks, task decomposition, decomposability, and modular
tasking. Multidisciplinary approaches combining hybrid systems, supervisory
control, and automata theory will be utilized. - To further extend the theory to
handle faults and uncertainty. This study will investigate the fault tolerant
cooperative tasking from the perspectives of both passive fault tolerance and
active fault tolerant control. The key issues, such as fault detection,
characterization of tolerable fault patterns and dynamic reconfiguration, will
be addressed from the hybrid and discrete event system theory point of view. -
To implement and demonstrate the design methods on real robotic systems. This
empirical study will be conducted on a multi-robot testbed consisting of both
autonomous unmanned ground and aerial vehicles. Prototype applications, such as
a coordinated pollution detection and containment scenario, will be implemented
to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches. - To use effective
pedagogy in teaching so as to promote learning and foster young talents in
engineering.

Intellectual Merits: The proposed research addresses a fundamental question
essential for advancements in swarming robotics, namely how to design local
coordination among robots so as to achieve certain desired collective behaviors.
This project seeks to develop and demonstrate a formal design theory for multi-
robot cooperative tasking based on a variety of models and approaches from
disciplines like control, computer sciences and robotics. The proposed theory
will guarantee a given global performance from a team of swarming robots through
designing their local coordination rules and control laws. Thus, the proposed
method is of a top-down and correct-by-design nature. It therefore complements
well the prevailing bottom-up design practices in swarming robotics, where the
local interactions are usually predefined heuristically with inspirations from
natural social behaviors.

Broader Impacts: The project has potential to provide a new perspective in
tackling the complexity of large-scale distributed dynamical systems, such as
sensor actuator networks, power grids and transportation systems. The study will
help to advance our understanding of the relationship between emergent behaviors
from a complex engineered system and local interactions among its distributed
dynamical components. This understanding is critical to building more reliable
and efficient future engineered systems. In particular, the theoretical and
practical studies in this project may help swarming robotics to see more real
applications, such as coordinated environment monitoring, emergency response,
and law enforcement. Furthermore, undergraduate and graduate students will be
engaged to support the project's testbed and algorithm developments.