* 1253347
* CAREER: Synthesis of Compositionally Complex Oxides for Energy Conversion and Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Bart Bartlett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2018
* USD 594,553.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This research supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program will generate new solid state materials that will
advance the basic chemistry of solar energy conversion and electrical energy
storage. In solar energy conversion, the focus is on synthesizing complex
(mixed-metal) compositions of transition-metal tungstates in specific
morphologies that will maximize light absorption and charge-carrier collection
to photocatalyze water oxidation. The synthesis methods for metal tungstates
that will be developed include electrochemical deposition, sol-gel processing
from colloidal suspensions, hydrothermal synthesis, and spray pyrolysis from
aqueous precursors. Potential-pH (Pourbaix) diagrams from aqueous inorganic
reaction chemistry guide the choice of synthesis precursors and reaction
conditions to generate the desired compositions. Then, with new compounds in
hand, the propensity to carry out photocatalysis will be probed by standard
photoelectrochemical methods. In electrical energy storage, these synthesis
methods will be applied for creating high specific power nanomaterials with high
specific energy material for lithium-ion storage. Reactions can be combined in
sequential steps to give mixed-metal spinel-structured materials for stable Li-
ion electrodes. With these compounds, battery performance will be tested by
standard electrochemical methods. Then, coatings that enhance carrier separation
in photocatalysts and the stability of the battery materials can be added by
pyrolysis (during synthesis) or by photochemical deposition (in a post-synthesis
modification step).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Solid-
state materials are at the forefront of renewable energy science. This grant
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program directly addresses
challenges in solar energy conversion to generate chemical fuels from sunlight
and electrical energy storage to have energy available at any time of day. These
problems will continue dominate national science and technology discussions for
the foreseeable future. Because this science is applied to big problems in
energy, there is a pressing need to include young scientists to secure a strong
and diverse talent pool for the future. Accordingly, this program has a strong
educational outreach initiative in collaboration with the highly successful
Young Scientist Program (YSP) at the Washington University School of Medicine.
YSP brings high-school juniors, preferably from groups historically under-
represented in the chemical sciences, into the laboratory for ten weeks during
the summer and begin working with a team of researchers. Important for securing
long-term impact, the relationship between the high school student, a graduate
mentor, a graduate tutor, and the PI will commence during the spring term prior
to starting laboratory research, and it will continue through the college
admissions process. A second goal of this outreach is to share research findings
and laboratory experiences with students' peers using internet social
networking.