* 1253876
* CAREER: DNA-templated Assembly of Nanoscale Circuit Interconnects
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Rebecca Schulman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2017
* USD 435,050.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant is to
develop a novel, robust method of assembling interconnects between nanoscale
device terminals. Nanoscale circuits could allow for faster computers, devices
to manipulate light at the nanoscale and exquisitely sensitive molecular
detection systems. However, a major current obstacle to the further development
of these devices is the difficulty of manufacturing them. In particular, while
it is possible to build an increasing number of individual nanoscale devices,
assembling and properly placing interconnects (wires) that provide inputs to and
channel outputs from these devices remains a major challenge. The project's
process, point-to-point interconnect assembly, uses chemical markers attached to
device terminals to direct the assembly of an interconnecting filament. The
chemical markers and filaments will be constructed from synthetic DNA, which can
be used as a template for the assembly of a variety of functional interconnects.
The DNA-based interconnect process will be characterized dynamically and yield
will be optimized for assembly of interconnects between actual nanoscale device
terminals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated with a program
for education and outreach focused on biologically inspired methods for
nanoscale fabrication. Undergraduate and graduate level courses will be
developed in which students will learn fundamental programming and statistical
analysis skills that can be applied across fields. A graduate courses will help
engineering students understand biological information processing with the goal
of developing biologically inspired fabrication methods. Finally, high school
students will participate in research projects in the laboratory and lectures on
self-assembly and biologically inspired fabrication will be presented to middle
and high school students from Baltimore who participate in robotics
competitions.