* 1253188
* CAREER: Linking behavioral development to neural plasticity in the medial amygdala
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Bradley Cooke, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2015
* USD 260,000.00

Puberty is a phase of life marked by dramatic behavioral change. During puberty,
the reproductive axis matures causing gonadal steroid levels to rise well beyond
what is normally seen in adulthood. Because of the profound emotional,
cognitive, and social changes that occur during puberty, gonadal hormones must
profoundly affect brain connectivity and function. What that impact is, however,
is largely unknown. In this project, behavioral observation, electrophysiology,
and neuropharmacology in rats will be used to identify the neural mechanisms
that underlie the pubertal emergence of a discrete behavioral disposition: The
attraction to the odors of the opposite sex. It is expected that testosterone
will cause a specific excitatory synaptic connection within a brain region
termed the amygdala to undergo long-term potentiation, i.e., an increase in
synaptic efficacy. The potential impact of this work will be to identify the
causal mechanisms that underlie the emergence of a discrete behavior, which has
never before been accomplished in mammals or during puberty. The Data Management
Plan involves the use of an electronic laboratory notebook, managed by
LabArchives LLC, which permits the permanent off-site storage of all records,
regardless of their format. Upon publication of the results, all data produced
in conjunction with this project will be available to the public. To maximize
the broader impacts of this work, teaching will be integrated with research by
developing a course on Developmental Behavioral Neuroscience, comparing the
efficacy of two teaching methods, and submitting our findings to a science
education journal. Finally, the PIs will participate in the NET/Work program,
which is a 2-year paid internship for talented undergraduates that enable them
to gain hands-on research experience in University laboratories. Being the most
racially diverse institution in Georgia's university system, NET/Work taps
talented minority students and provides an entrée for them into Neuroscience.