* 1253809
* CAREER:Discovery and characterization of inositol polyphosphates as mediators of protein pyrophosphorylation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Adam Resnick, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 525,000.00

Intellectual Merit Nearly every aspect of cell biology depends on small molecule
messengers that function to communicate and integrate information about the
cellular environment, growth conditions, and available nutrients; and also relay
information between neighboring cells. This project aims to discover and define
the second messenger roles of inositol pyrophosphates, a novel and ubiquitous,
yet poorly characterized class of high-energy molecules. To date, every
eukaryotic organism examined has been found to contain inositol pyrophosphates,
from unicellular organisms, to plants, to man. Why cells expend energy
synthesizing these molecules or what precise mechanistic roles they have in
biology has remained largely unexplored. Previously, inositol pyrophosphates
have been implicated in diverse cellular processes ranging from the maintenance
of DNA integrity to regulating available cellular energy pools. Using newly
developed methodologies that overcome challenges that have stymied this young
and underdeveloped research field, this project seeks to define the wide-
reaching biological roles and unique signaling capacity of the inositol
pyrophosphates. More specifically, these high energy molecules have been shown
to be capable of modifying cellular proteins by transferring an energetic
phosphate to protein substrates, an event that generates a novel modification
termed protein pyrophosphorylation. Through new experimental modalities hundreds
of proteins that span the breadth of eukaryotic organisms have been found to be
pyrophosphorylated. This project will begin the process of defining the roles of
protein pyrophosphorylation by focusing on, and examining how inositol
pyrophosphates affect the function of these proteins. The project's ultimate
endpoints are (1) the description of a new and expansive signaling system and
(2) the construction of an open experimental framework for its investigation in
diverse biological contexts.

Broader Impacts The educational activities associated with the project
purposefully juxtapose and reinforce basic, fundamental research activities
alongside established translational research curricula in a context that spans
all levels of education. They specifically focus on the training of students in
traditional physician-scientist preparatory programs in order to provide
fundamental, basic research opportunities and experiences, as well as support an
authentic understanding of the critical and necessary roles of basic research.
The educational programs will provide research opportunities to students as part
of a diverse environment and focus in particular on outreach and basic research
training of high school, undergraduate, and medical school students with
programmatic efforts directed at the inclusion of under-represented minorities
and women.