* 1253918
* CAREER: Harnessing Interference Structure in Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2020
* Bobak Nazer, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2020
* USD 496,102.00

Wireless networks are the fabric of the mobile Internet. High-speed, ubiquitous
wireless access is increasingly an enabling technology for important
applications ranging from communication to commerce, medicine, and education. It
is thus critical to create a pathway for sustainable wireless network growth in
terms of the number of users and their data rates. A major challenge facing this
effort is interference: since the wireless channel is a shared medium,
simultaneous transmissions interfere with one another. This phenomenon is
conventionally viewed as harmful by theorists and practitioners alike, and
modern wireless protocols are designed to avoid interference. Within this
paradigm, the wireless channel is a fixed resource with a finite capacity,
meaning that as more users join a network, the maximum data rate per user
plummets. However, interfering signals are not just additional noise; rather,
they represent data from other users and possess considerable structure which
can be exploited.

This research pursues a novel approach to multi-user communication based on
harnessing the algebraic structure of interference. The key insight is that it
is possible for a receiver to first decode linear combinations of all
transmitted codewords and only afterwards solve for its desired codeword in the
digital domain. In many important network scenarios, this powerful technique
yields significantly higher data rates compared to conventional approaches. This
project leverages this technique to uncover the fundamental capacity limits of
canonical wireless networks subject to interference as well as establish
architectural principles for coding strategies that can efficiently approach
these limits. It draws upon modern tools from combinatorial optimization to
solve the resource allocation problems that emerge when this technique is
applied to complex wireless networks, such as distributed multiple antenna
systems. More broadly, this research lays the foundation for an algebraic
network information theory to tackle challenging problems in decentralized
information processing, compression, and decoding. This project incorporates
several outreach efforts including interactive presentations on cellular
communication for high school students, tutorials, and workshop organization.