* 1253331
* CAREER: Verifying Threaded Software Using Resource Bounds -- An Approach Towards Dependable Concurrency
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Thomas Wahl, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 515,495.00

Software development is facing a paradigm shift towards ubiquitous concurrent
programming, giving rise to software that is among the most complex technical
artifacts ever created by humans. Concurrent programming presents several risks
and dangers for programmers who are overwhelmed by puzzling and irreproducible
concurrent program behavior, and by new types of bugs that elude traditional
quality assurance techniques. If this situation is not addressed, we are
drifting into an era of widespread unreliable software, with consequences
ranging from collapsed programmer productivity, to catastrophic failures in
mission-critical systems.

This project will take steps against a concurrent software crisis, by producing
verification technology that assists non-specialist programmers in detecting
concurrency errors, or demonstrating their absence. The proposed technology will
confront the concurrency explosion problem that verification methods often
suffer from. The project's goal is a framework under which the analysis of
programs with unbounded concurrency resources (such as threads of execution) can
be soundly reduced to an analysis under a small constant resource bound, making
the use of state space explorers practical. As a result, the project will
largely eliminate the impact of unspecified computational resources as the major
cause of complexity in analyzing concurrent programs. By developing tools for
detecting otherwise undetectable misbehavior and vulnerabilities in concurrent
programs, the project will contribute its part to averting a looming software
quality crisis.