* 1253779
* CAREER:    Glaciers and Glaciology: How Nature, Field Research, and Societal Forces Shape the Earth Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Mark Carey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 459,452.00

This project will examine the early development and subsequent evolution of the
five main aspects of glaciology: ice dynamics; ice-ocean interactions; landforms
and glacial geology; ice as archive of climatic records; and ice as natural
resource (water). Specific case studies will be analyzed to illuminate the ways
in which science, nature, and society intersect. The resultant book will address
(1) the formation of glaciology and theories of ice dynamics; (2) the role of
the International Ice Patrol (1913-present) in iceberg analysis and ocean-
glacier interactions; (3) the establishment of theories about catastrophic
glacial lake megafloods; (4) the Cold War context for ice coring and
climatology; and (5) glacier retreat and hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has broad impacts because hundreds of millions of people worldwide live
near glaciers, depend on glacier runoff for their water, reside in zones
subjected to ongoing glacier hazards, inhabit coastal areas that could be
flooded by melting ice sheets, and vacation in glaciated landscapes that hold
particular cultural value such as national parks. The US Intelligence Community
recognizes that the effects of glacier retreat potentially threaten US national
security, and thus generating new knowledge about glaciers and glaciology
contributes to policy and social well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
results will be disseminated in conference papers, guest lectures, and the
posting of data and bibliographical materials on an online database and digital
library. The project also proposes five educational activities that will produce
broader impacts for students, the university, and the general public: (1)
creation of a Science and Society Group, the foundational step to establishing a
Center for the Study of Science and Society at the University of Oregon; (2)
development of an "Inside-Out Prison Exchange Program" science and society
curriculum to teach undergraduates alongside prison inmates in the unique
penitentiary environment; (3) construction of a new Honors College course on the
history of the earth sciences; (4) employment and training of undergraduate
students in specific research projects; and (5) mentoring of a postdoctoral
fellow.