* 1253709
* CAREER: New Systems and Tools for Residential Sustainability Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Shwetak Patel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2020
* USD 499,540.00

Energy and resource monitoring for sustainability has garnered significant
attention as an emerging global challenge. Residential energy and water
consumption is one of the largest and least understood areas of consumption and
is responsible for 28% of US energy consumption and 56% of US drinking water
consumption. Strategies for addressing our energy and water crisis clearly
require a multifaceted approach that transcends technology. However, for
developing a more complete understanding of energy consumption in the home,
computing technology plays a critical role in the collection, analysis, and
presentation of data to answer important sustainability questions by the
scientific community. Past work has demonstrated sustained energy savings of
10-15% in the home with the appropriate feedback of appliance-level usage data,
but required complex sensor installations. A great challenge still remains in
practically deploying sensing technologies to gather this relevant data at a
large scale. Current sensing methods remain in their infancy and are limited to
small, isolated deployments, and many existing sensing approaches tend to be
deemed obtrusive and difficult to install. In addition, no comprehensive public
dataset on energy and water use and raw sensor data exists for researchers to
build and compare new analytic tools and methods, thus limiting the ability to
participate in this kind of work to a small number of groups who have access to
this proprietary information through their own small deployments. The goal of
this multi-year research project is to democratize sensing for sustainability by
developing a complete electricity and water sensing and analytics platform for
homes. Intellectual Merit: This research will make progress on two grand
challenges posed by the scientific community: 1) accelerated deployment of
ubiquitous computing technology for improving quality of life and 2) the
reduction of residential energy and water consumption. This work involves novel
approaches to sensing electricity and water use in the home using a small number
of sensors. This includes the first full exploration of practical water sensing
and analytic techniques that provide highly granular information on water use
and combining electricity and water sensor streams for improved classification.
This research focuses on the design, development, and evaluation (both hardware
and software) of new, easy-to-install, and cost-effective sensing solutions. The
insights and artifacts resulting from this research have merit in other
applications beyond sustainability, such as elder care, in-home rehabilitation,
and chronic disease management. Broader Impact: The platform proposed in this
research has direct implications for the growing focus on the energy and
sustainability by both the federal and local governments. The potential ease of
deployment for the proposed technology will make this a desirable technology for
environmental researchers and ultimately homeowners who currently have little
insight into their actual energy and water use. The comprehensive energy and
water dataset collected with this research will serve as an enabler for others
in this space to create their own analytic approaches. More generally, this data
will enable scientists, engineers, and industry to answer foundational questions
regarding energy and water. The potential for the broad impact of this research
coupled with the inherent interdisciplinary nature of ubiquitous computing
integrates with an education plan designed to excite high school students and
undergraduates to pursue careers in computing and engineering in general. They
will learn about interdisciplinary research opportunities and engage in
activities by participating in the primary investigator?s research lab around
?sustainable thinking.? New graduate-level courses will be designed to educate
young researchers about relevant research topics in ubiquitous computing and
learn new advanced prototyping techniques necessary for building real-world
applications. New K-12 learning activities and projects will also be developed
around sustainability.