* 1253650
* CAREER:   Causes and consequences of evolvability in natural and lab-evolved bacterial populations
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Timothy Cooper, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2019
* USD 967,431.00

Long-term success will often require the ability to adapt to changing
conditions. In biological populations the capacity to do this, termed
evolvability, can play a crucial role in determining evolutionary winners and
losers. Nevertheless, systematic study of evolvability is difficult. Its
underlying mechanisms, how it can be selected, and how it influences
evolutionary outcomes, remain poorly understood. This project will address these
questions using lab-evolved and natural isolates of a model bacterium,
Escherichia coli. The ability to follow population evolution in real time, and
to compete a population's past (stored as a frozen, but revivable sample)
against its future will be used to directly examine the effect and consequences
of differences in evolvability. Sequencing of bacterial genomes will allow the
genetic basis of observed differences to be determined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings of experiments that are explicitly designed to
examine evolvability will represent a significant basic contribution to the
field of evolutionary biology, not least in contributing to a goal of being able
to make general predictions about evolutionary responses. An understanding of
the genetic and physiological basis of evolvability will be relevant to fields
such as vaccine and antibiotic design (where evolvability is something to be
countered) and biotechnology (where evolvability will often be something to be
exploited). The project will make significant and novel contributions to
training of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers.