* 1253733
* CAREER: Adaptively Boosting Resilience Efficiency in the Face of Frequent, Clustered, and Diverse Faults
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Chengmo Yang, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2019
* USD 481,541.00

While technology advances allow researchers to produce chips with higher
performance and lower power consumption, our ability to deliver such
computational power is challenged by the increasing susceptibility of silicon
devices to faults. It is expected that in future computer systems, faults will
occur in a continuous manner, across all levels from hardware to application.
The fault behavior is furthermore expected to be more diverse and unpredictable.
Of critical concern will be not only permanent and transient faults, but also
intermittent faults that occur frequently and irregularly over nanosecond to
second time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These predicted high fault rates and
diverse fault behaviors mandate a transformation in fault resilience approaches.
When faults occur in a continuous manner, both fault detection and recovery must
be performed in a much finer-grained manner, and recovery becomes as critical as
detection. Moreover, since fault duration varies significantly, cost-effective
solutions capable of uniformly detecting all types of faults, identifying the
fault type, and then adaptively recovering the execution are
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these reliability challenges, the
proposed project will incorporate fine-grained adaptivity into the system, and
couple statically extracted application information with runtime optimizations
to guide adaptation decisions. The proposed research includes: (1) adaptive
detection and checkpointing, capable of adjusting detection and checkpointing
granularity to match system reliability levels; (2) adaptive recovery, capable
of performing re-execution in a way that minimizes the chance of another fault
occurring; and (3) adaptive resource management, capable of monitoring
application and hardware reliability levels and quickly adapting scheduling
decisions.