* 1253231
* CAREER: Metal-Semiconductor Hybrid Core-Shell Heteronanostructures with Geometrically Tunable Optical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Hui Wang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 615,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award co-sponsored by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry (SSMC) and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
programs aims to develop quantitative understanding of the geometry-dependent
optical characteristics of metal-semiconductor core-shell hybrid
heteronanostructures both at the ensemble and single-nanoparticle levels. The
proposed research will be carried out following a 3M (Make, Measure, Model)
strategy that involves combined experimental and theoretical efforts. Robust wet
chemistry approaches will be developed through which a whole set of important
geometrical and compositional parameters of the metal-semiconductor core-shell
nanoparticles can be precisely fine-controlled. The tight control over the
particle geometries will allow one to systematically and selectively fine-tune
the synergistic light absorption and scattering properties of the particles over
a broad spectral range across the visible and near-infrared regions. Detailed,
quantitative understanding of the correlation between particle geometry and
optical properties will be developed through combined spectroscopy and electron
microscopy measurements and further enhanced by theoretical calculations using
Mie scattering theory and Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) simulations.
Taking the advantage of the particles? geometrical and optical tunability, the
PI's group will further explore new ways to utilize engineered hybrid
nanoparticles for the optimization of molecular sensing and characterization
platforms based on surface-enhanced Raman and fluorescence spectroscopies.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Metal-semiconductor hybrid heteronanostructures have
emerged as a new class of multifunctional sub-wavelength optical components with
synergistically reinforced optical features, enhanced optical tunability, and
even new optical characteristics that are otherwise inaccessible in any of the
isolated components or their physical mixture counterparts. This CAREER grant
aims to develop quantitative understanding of the relationship between the
particle geometry and optical characteristics of metal-semiconductor hybrid
heteronanostructures. The knowledge gained through the proposed research will
greatly enhance our capabilities to selectively implement desired optical
properties into hybrid nanoparticle-based materials and devices for widespread
technological applications in materials and life sciences. With this award, the
PI will be able to develop a highly interdisciplinary and collaborative
nanoscience research and education program that involves broad participation of
postdoctoral fellows, graduate, undergraduate, and high school students with
diverse backgrounds. The postdocs and students in the PI's group will receive
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary training on cutting-edge research at the
interface of physical chemistry and materials science. The PI will build
undergraduate research partnerships and organize summer research workshops among
University of South Carolina and Primarily Undergraduate Institutions to promote
research and education on chemistry and materials science and help increase the
enrollment and retention rate, especially those of female and academically
underrepresented minorities, in the Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) majors in the State of South Carolina. For course
development, the PI will develop new lab modules to incorporate cutting-edge
nanoscience research into the undergraduate and graduate courses. Outreach
activities will be developed to educate teenagers from local middle schools and
high schools about nanoscience and nanotechnology through scientific demos at
annual South Carolina Science and Engineering Fair and summer research
mentorships for high school students and teachers.