* 1253306
* CAREER: Self-Assembly of Fusion Proteins to Form Biofunctional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Bradley Olsen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 05/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1253306 PI: Olsen, Bradley ORG:
MIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Self-Assembly of Fusion Proteins to Form
Biofunctional Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Enzyme-
functionalized polymeric materials have attracted increasing attention for
applications in biomedical materials, sensing, biocatalysis, energy conversion,
and chemical agent detoxification, where controlling the nanostructure of the
functional proteins can enable advances in material performance. Block copolymer
self-assembly is an elegant solution to control protein structure on the 5-50 nm
length scale, and the folded shapes and specific interactions of the protein
blocks lead to rich new phase behavior. This proposal will investigate the
potential of fusion proteins to direct the self-assembly of globular proteins in
a manner analogous to diblock copolymers. The use of fusion proteins will enable
the easy preparation of site-specific conjugates, using genetic engineering to
control molecular structure. The thermodynamics of globular-coil protein blends
will be explored to understand how the sequence of a coillike protein affects
its miscibility with globular proteins, allowing a set of proteins with
potential for directing self-assembly to be identified. Fusion proteins will
then be cloned from target globular proteins and promising coil protein
sequences in order to produce protein block copolymer molecules capable of self-
assembly. Processing methods to produce nanostructured gels and plastics from
aqueous casting will be developed, and the resulting self-assembled materials
will be characterized to identify the type of nanostructures formed.
Spectroscopic methods and activity assays will be used to assess protein fold
and function within the nanomaterials. Comparison to coarse-grained theories for
protein/polymer solutions and protein-polymer conjugate self-assembly will
enable the universal thermodynamics of self-assembly for globular-coil protein
fusions to be elucidated. The complex challenges of understanding how protein
fold and specific interactions affect nanostructuring in soft materials is an
emerging obstacle in materials science that must be addressed to further advance
knowledge and application of bio-based materials. These fundamental studies of
globular protein-coil protein fusion self-assembly will provide both a new
method for material preparation and an understanding of the materials science
and thermodynamics of these complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: This proposal will expand the application of protein-based materials by
enabling control over self-assembled nanostructure formation using fusion
proteins prepared by relatively easy and inexpensive synthesis and purification
methods. A diverse team of graduate and undergraduate researchers will perform
research on this project, providing valuable training experiences to engineers
at several educational levels. This research focus on biologically-based
materials will be integrated with efforts to develop novel methods that will
impact both undergraduate and high school teaching. A new pedagogy will be
developed for teaching the introductory Chemical Engineering course, integrating
the study of materials research and product development that reflects the modern
scope of the profession. The undergraduate level educational objectives of this
proposal transform the teaching of the universally accepted introductory
chemical engineering course, impacting education in this discipline worldwide.
In collaboration with local high school teachers, teaching materials for a unit
on sustainable polymers and biomaterials and demonstrations of polymer materials
will also be developed to translate excitement about this research area to
secondary school students. A high school pedagogy that integrates sustainable
polymer materials research to teach core requirements of state and national
science education standards will provide an easily adopted forum for the broad
dissemination of this research.