* 1253930
* CAREER: Safety and security for next-generation world-scale real-time medical systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Eugene Vasserman, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne Wetzel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 582,826.00

Interoperable, reconfigurable systems of medical devices are the future of
medical technology. They will improve care outcomes by catching common mistakes,
reduce clinician cognitive workload by suppressing false alarms, and streamline
and simplify continued care, especially when patients move between different
medical facilities. As the penetration of "smart" networked medical technology
increases, we will see increased problems with cybersecurity of such systems.
This project is building the theoretical foundations and software prototypes to
enable safe and secure real-time medical coordination in the presence of not
only random faults, but actively malicious actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medical
and cyber-physical systems rely on real-time feedback and control, where
microseconds could mean the difference between correct functionality and a
fault, and ultimately, in medical systems, life and death. Since it is not
possible to count on technology functioning flawlessly, especially with
intelligent active attackers who may have access to medical devices or the
network through which they communicate, this project seeks to develop
requirements and best practices for "optimistic real-time" safety-critical
systems, with built-in fallback to safe states if timing or performance
guarantees cannot be met. The software and communication protocols will allow
for global-scale medical systems, with real-time care independent of the
location of the clinician or the patient, minimizing the chance of malfunction
as a result of natural faults or tampering. The status of the system will be
communicated to users without requiring specialty knowledge of security or
communication protocols.