* 1253843
* CAREER: Cell Size and Cell Cycle Control in the Presence of Fluctuations in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Suckjoon Jun, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,145,408.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; An exquisite, quantitative relationship between
growth and cell cycle exists in bacteria. Strikingly, the onset of DNA
replication is assumed to coincide with achievement of a specific cell mass
(critical mass), a phenomenon that is independent of growth rate. This was one
of the most important quantitative ideas in the field of bacterial physiology
during the 1950s and the 1960s, and it still serves as the foundation for our
current understanding of cell cycle control. Surprisingly, however, we do not
yet understand how the molecular-level regulation controls the global
relationship between growth and cell cycle. To this end, this project will
employ state-of-the-art microscopy to visualize replication and cell division
machinery in living cells, allowing us to precisely measure cell growth, DNA
replication and cell division timing. In particular, the project will study how
the cell responds to physiological perturbations at the single-cell level.
Single-cell approach is important, because we can acquire critical molecular-
level information related to intracellular fluctuations that is inevitably lost
in population-level studies. Importantly, this project will employ two
evolutionarily divergent model organisms, Escherichia coli and Bacillus
subtilis, permitting us to determine which aspects of cell cycle regulation are
likely to be broadly conserved. In doing so, this project will provide a
definitive answer to the fundamental question of whether or not cells grow to a
critical cell mass to initiate a specific cell-cycle event.&lt;br/&gt; The
strength of this research lies in its ability to bridge the gap between
experiment and theory. In addition to the experimental component described
above, the theory component involves quantitative modeling of the acquired data
to make experimentally testable predictions. The outcome of the research will
have implications for our fundamental understanding of the growth of all
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; Quantitative biology is
more than adding numbers to what biologists already know. The power of the
approach is to bring quantitative rigor from physical sciences to identify and
solve important and interesting problems in biology. As part of the new
initiative of quantitative biology at the University of California at San Diego,
the project aims to spread the culture of quantitative approaches to biology
from K12 to graduate level education in the San Diego area. This integrative
project places great emphasis on the importance of interdisciplinary research
experiences at the undergraduate level. To inspire not only the students and
educators but also the general public, an annual summer interdisciplinary
research bootcamp will be offered for undergraduate students, and possibly
senior high-school students, in the San Diego area. Students from under-
represented minority groups will be particularly encouraged to participate, and
a Hispanic Serving Institution (San Diego State University) will collaborate in
the project. A former instructor from the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Courses
joins the project to design and co-teach the bootcamp modules that incorporate
molecular biology, quantitative microscopy, microfluidics, and image analysis.
The overall goal is to design exemplary undergraduate research modules and
integrate them into standard undergraduate research curricula in quantitative
biology at UCSD, SDSU, and other universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award
is cofounded by the programs in Cellular Dynamics and Function and the Physics
of Living Systems.