* 1253890
* CAREER: Optoelectronic neural scaffolds: materials platform for investigation and control of neuronal activity and development
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Polina Anikeeva, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

1253890 Anikeeva

Intellectual Merit

This CAREER proposal aims to bridge the gap between advanced optoelectronic
materials design and invasive and outdated devices used to treat neurological
disorders. By developing flexible, biocompatible polymer-based optoelectronic
scaffolds (OPTELS) a strategy for incorporating individual optically sensitive
neurons into neural recording and stimulation devices will be created. These
trapped neurons will be investigated as relays of optical stimulation or
inhibition to intact neural networks, which will potentially enable future
clinical applications of optogenetics, a powerful optical neural stimulation
tool, without genetic modification of the patient. Specifically the project will
be focused on the following objectives: (1) Developing fiber-inspired
fabrication methods for hollow-core polymer-based OPTELS and employing them to
isolate key materials parameters (surface geometry, charge, flexibility)
contributing to survival and growth of electronically active neurons; (2) Using
OPTELS to investigate and control neuronal growth with the goal of axonal
guidance along the OPTELS core. The proposed study will explore chemical,
optoelectronic and mechanical stimuli and employ OPTELS ability to record and
stimulate neural activity to determine factors contributing to axonal growth;
(3) Employing neurons trapped in OPTELS cores as relay devices of optical neural
interrogation. Genetic modification will be applied to the neurons trapped
within the OPTELS cores to enable expression of light-sensitive ion channels -
opsins. The controlled formation of synapses between these relay neurons and the
outside networks will be applied to the investigation of optogenetic
interrogation of the network without directly genetically modifying it.

Broader Impact

The proposed project will explore materials interfaces between optoelectronic
devices and neural tissues providing a pathway towards intimate physiological
neuroprosthetic devices for treatment of debilitating neurological conditions
such as Parkinson's disease or spinal cord injury. The educational and outreach
components of the project are designed to enhance materials engineering and
optoelectronics education at MIT and at inner city community colleges through
classroom training and hands-on laboratory internships. Specifically the
outreach program aims to increase awareness about the impact of engineering in
medicine among community college students and teachers through the seminar
series "Medical Electronics and Optics: Life-saving Engineering", and 10-week
research and education summer internships in the PIs laboratory. In addition new
lecture material and device-design based assignments will be developed for the
core undergraduate course on optical and electronic materials and a graduate
photonics course will be adapted to senior undergraduates with the goal of
advancing optoelectronics knowledge among the students. The educational
materials will be made available to worldwide community of learners through an
open MIT web-based resource.