* 1253085
* CAREER: Structure-property-processing Relations for Aggregation-resistant Graphene
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Micah Green, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to test the broad hypothesis that graphene may be rendered aggregation-
resistant by simultaneous exfoliation and non-covalent functionalization. This
would facilitate use in a range of promising bulk material applications, and
this would substantially improve upon existing graphene production techniques,
which suffer from a range of problems (small-scale, compromising properties via
defect generation, aggregation). This project will address these critical
challenges through a number of research thrusts. These include (1) combining
bulk intercalation techniques with stabilizer solutions, (2) the post-processing
of dispersed pristine graphene to induce novel, aggregation-resistant
morphologies, and (3) investigation of processing effects on graphene
performance in conductive, low density composites and monoliths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will yield
techniques that are orders-of-magnitude more effective than prior methods in
processing stabilized graphene. The proposed project also provides insight into
how the processing technique (exfoliation, stabilization, spray drying)
determines the structure (chemical functionality, surface coverage, morphology)
and hence the properties (aggregation resistance, gas barrier, electrical
percolation, composite enhancement). The development of scalable processing for
pristine graphene is relevant to a wide range of multifunctional industrial
materials including aerospace structural composites, sensors, supercapacitors,
and flame-retardant textiles. The multifaceted educational plan includes (1)
graduate, undergraduate, and high school student mentorship, (2) a new program
designed to encourage engineers to pursue graduate studies, and (3) an expansion
of the PI?s successful ?Science and Science Fiction? outreach course that aims
to increase STEM interest at local high schools.