* 1253758
* CAREER: Control and Sensing Strategies for Robotic Falcons to Prevent Airport Bird Strikes
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Soon-Jo Chung, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 04/30/2017
* USD 435,355.00

The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the bio-inspired approaches to
novel control strategies, vision-based sensing solutions, and strategies for
cooperative pursuit and herding that will be gleaned from the literature and
observations of the behavior of birds. This study will result in both
fundamental scientific knowledge and a practical application revolving around
the development of highly maneuverable unmanned aerial vehicles based on
flapping-wing robots. The intelligence of birds manifests itself in the evasive
talents of flocks of birds and this proposal attempts to recreate that
intelligence through the challenge of applying a bird-like robot to the problem
of preventing aircraft/bird collisions near airports. According to surveys by
the International Bird Strike Committee, none of the existing systems to prevent
bird strikes on airfields are adequate. The reasons include habituation by birds
to these systems; movement of birds to other parts of the area, or scattering of
them all over the airfield; and the tendency of birds to come back when a threat
has gone. The only proven lasting way of removing birds is by using live birds
of prey, but real birds are too difficult to control and train. An alternative
is to study and extract the behaviors and dynamics of real birds in order to
develop and deploy a robotic lookalike. The objective of this proposal,
motivated by the problem of keeping airfields clear of disruptive avian flocks,
is to develop control and sensing strategies for bird-like flapping robots that
can be deployed in swarms to fend off "antagonists." This work will build upon
the PI's previous work on the control of flapping-wing aircraft using limit-
cycle-based central pattern generators (CPGs), and on the dynamics and control
of flexible, articulated-wing aircraft.

Broader Impacts: Society as a whole stands to benefit immensely from robotic
birds that can effectively prevent bird strikes, which cause airplane crashes
and millions of dollars annually in damage. Furthermore, because of their high
aerodynamic efficiency in forward flight, articulated-winged flapping aerial
robots equipped with sensors could have tremendous value by being able to
inspect hazardous areas. For the field of robotics, the proposed transformative
research will make far-reaching contributions, advancing the state of the art in
aerial robotics, cooperative control theory, and control of flexible robot
structures. Additionally, this project's education and outreach activities will
help introduce a new generation of young people, including those from
underrepresented populations, to the excitement of science and engineering
careers. Multiple avenues of educational outreach will be pursued, taking
advantage of the powerful appeal of the topics of robotics and bio-inspired
flight.