* 1253228
* CAREER: Predicting granular flows: Amorphous continuum modeling with a length-scale
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Kenneth Kamrin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

1253228 PI: Kamrin

The lack of a predictive, general model for dense granular flow is an obstacle
in engineering applications and an expensive problem in industry. For well-
developed flows, certain rheological approaches have been put forward, however
these break down in regions of less rapid motion, where a markedly different
behavior is observed that has resisted theoretical treatment for years. To
produce a general granular flow model that combines the fast and slow regimes,
together with appropriate plasticity relations for transient effects, would
constitute a major step forward in the field and a lucrative tool in engineering
design and geophysics. Inspired by recent successes in the study of emulsion
flow, this project will investigate a nonlocal constitutive approach, whose
direct inclusion of a particle length-scale may provide the missing piece. With
sophisticated and customized finite-element tools, preliminary tests indicate
that this strategy leads to quantitatively accurate well-developed flow
predictions in multiple flow geometries, including one family of geometries
whose flow fields have never previously been described by a continuum model.
Certain additional tests will be performed to clarify potential limitations of
the model. To move beyond well-developed behavior and broaden the model,
research will be conducted to merge the technique within a critical-state
framework to capture transient dilation/strengthening/softening effects. Another
aim is to build an improved theory for the nonlocal mechanism, and in so doing
improve the interpretation of boundary conditions and thin-body effects. Once
dry flows are understood in this way, enhanced finite-element tools shall be
taken advantage of yet again to model fluid-saturated grains. The similar
foundations of this model and related approaches used for emulsions draw
important connections between granular matter and other amorphous materials. The
flow-induces-flow mechanism and its ability to reproduce flow and stress fields
so accurately suggests a microscopic picture that could solve many open
questions in particulate flow problems. The theoretical investigation will help
clarify this basic mechanism to improve generalization to other matter. The
finite-element tools developed to implement the nonlocal granular flow model
also open the door to modeling multiple coupled effects in particulate systems
--- fluid permeability as mentioned, but conceivably a combination of other
effects like electric-field interactions, diffusing species effects, and heat
conduction.

Owing to the many fundamental applications of granular flow in industry,
science, and engineering, the approach we propose together with its demonstrated
accuracy will provide a key tool for predicting flows in general circumstances.
The work to be carried out also involves a significant and integrated
educational component. The PI has conducted several innovations in online
education at MIT and proposes a number of ways to improve residential and public
education using online tools. Presentations will also be made in the MIT
Minority Introduction to Science and Engineering program, a six-week summer
program encouraging talented minority students to pursue degrees in technical
fields. Moreover, the PI will involve undergraduates in the research process and
integrate research problems into his teaching. Broader impact within the
scientific community will be made through continued organization of the New
England Workshop on the Mechanics of Materials and Structures, and the APS mini-
symposium Continuum Descriptions of Discrete Materials.