* 1253577
* CAREER: Enhanced Power Generation in a Nanoscale-Gap Thermophotovoltaic Device due to Radiative Heat Transfer Exceeding the Blackbody Limit
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Mathieu Francoeur, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2019
* USD 413,281.00

CBET 1253577&lt;br/&gt;Mathieu Francoeur, University of Utah
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 58% of the energy consumed annually in the
US is lost to heat. Direct thermal-to-electrical energy conversion via
thermophotovoltaic power generators can contribute significantly to recycling
this large amount of waste heat in various systems such as combustion chambers,
photovoltaic cells and personal computers. Conventional thermophotovoltaic
systems are limited by the blackbody spectrum. By separating the heat source and
the cells converting heat into electricity by a nanosize gap, radiation heat
transfer exceeds the blackbody predictions by a few orders of magnitude due to
energy transport by evanescent waves. Enhanced energy transfer by evanescent
wave tunneling can thus lead to a significant increase of thermophotovoltaic
power generation. This research will demonstrate experimentally that power
generation in a nanoscale-gap thermophotovoltaic (nano-TPV) device can be
enhanced by a factor of 20 to 30 compared to conventional thermophotovoltaic
systems. This will be accomplished by measuring radiative heat flux and nano-TPV
electrical power output and conversion efficiency in a device involving planar
surfaces separated by a gap as small as 20 nm. The nanosize gap will be
maintained via spring-like spacers. The application of an electrostatic force
between the surfaces combined with the knowledge of the spring constant of the
spacers will allow precise control and measurement of the gap thickness. This
research will provide for the first time well-controlled radiative flux
measurements between planar surfaces separated by a nanosize gap. This will
allow the verification of the d-2 and d-3 near-field thermal radiation regimes,
where d is the gap thickness, predicted respectively for optically thick and
thin materials supporting resonant surface waves. The research will provide the
first quantitative experimental nano-TPV performance analysis at nanosize gaps.
The spectral effects will be considered by testing various materials for the
radiator, such as indium tin oxide supporting surface plasmon-polaritons in the
near infrared band. Nano-TPV performances will be systematically quantified as a
function of the gap thickness and the temperatures of the radiator and the
cells, and will be compared against predictions based on a coupled near-field
thermal radiation, charge and heat transport model. The impacts of heat
dissipation within the cells due to lattice and free carrier absorption,
thermalization and non-radiative recombination of electron-hole pairs will also
be analyzed in great detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance
fundamental knowledge in near-field thermal radiation by measuring fluxes
between surfaces spaced by sub-wavelength gaps and in evanescent wave-based
energy conversion by experimentally analyzing nano-TPV performances. The
research is an important step toward the establishment of miniature waste heat
recovery devices that could be used in personal computers and systems harvesting
heat from the human body. The project will also promote training and learning
through the involvement of high school, undergraduate and graduate students in
the activities. Fundamentals of near-field thermal radiation and its application
to power generation will be disseminated via the development of a new elective
course at the University of Utah dedicated to both undergraduate and graduate
students, where the class content will be made freely available to the general
public. K-12 outreach will be performed via the Utah Science Olympiad.
Departmental scholarships and research fellowships will be offered to high
school students participating in this event. Direct thermal-to-electrical energy
conversion will be promoted via the conception of an interactive, portable demo-
kit that will be presented at the Utah Science Olympiad and in high schools.
These activities will assist the efforts of the College of Engineering in
recruiting high quality students in science and engineering programs.